S/PV.8072

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8072nd meeting

Wednesday, 18 October 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre/ Mrs. Gueguen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-33281 (E)
*1733281*

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Namibia,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
Her Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Her Excellency
Mrs. Anayansi Rodríguez Camejo, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
2/54

18/10/2017

Mr. Jenča: Today’s briefing is taking place as
important developments unfold to end the more than
10-year Palestinian divide and return Gaza to the full
control of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.
Last month, when Hamas dissolved the administrative
committee — a parallel institution to run governmental
affairs in Gaza — it agreed that the Palestinian
Government of National Consensus should assume its
responsibilities in the Strip. President Abbas welcomed
this crucial step, promising on 20 September at the
General Assembly (see A/72/PV.8) that the Government
would soon visit Gaza. The Secretary-General, the
Middle East Quartet and several Member States
expressed their firm support and encouraged the parties
to build on the commendable efforts of Egypt to seize
this positive momentum towards Palestinian unity.
On 2 October, Prime Minister Hamdallah travelled
to Gaza with a delegation of some 150 officials,
including ministers, key security agencies and heads
of the energy and water authorities. On the following
day, the Government held its first meeting in Gaza
since 2014.
The United Nations has worked with the Palestinian
leadership and the region in support of this process.
Special Coordinator Mladenov has travelled repeatedly
between Ramallah, Gaza and the region in recent
weeks to support the reconciliation effort and alleviate
the humanitarian crisis. He also led a United Nations
delegation during the Government visit and engaged
with the Prime Minister, as well as with all Palestinian
political factions and civil society, to ensure their support
for the implementation of the understandings reached
between Fatah and Hamas in Cairo on 17 September.
These understandings included a three-step process to
advance Palestinian unity: the return of responsibilities
in Gaza to the legitimate Palestinian Authority;
subsequent bilateral talks between Fatah and Hamas in
Cairo, including on public-sector employees, security
and control of the border crossings; and consultations
with all Palestinian factions.
On 12 October, with Egyptian mediation, Fatah
and Hamas signed an agreement that enables the
Palestinian Government to resume its responsibilities
in Gaza. According to its provisions, by 1 November
the Palestinian Authority should take control of the
crossings of Gaza. Separately, a joint committee
will be formed to resolve the issue of public-sector
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

employees that should complete its work no later than
1 February 2018.
A statement released by Egypt further highlighted
that the Government should assume its full
responsibilities in the management of the Gaza Strip by
1 December 2017. It was further announced that Egypt
had called for a meeting of all Palestinian factions in
Cairo on 21 November. The agreement does not contain
any provisions related to elections, the formation of a
national unity Government or the disarming of Hamas.
The Secretary-General has spoken to President
Abbas and welcomed the signing of this intra-Palestinian
agreement. Its timely implementation and concrete
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian crisis will be
critical to effectively empowering the Palestinian
Government in Gaza. Its implementation should also
facilitate the lifting of the closures, while addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The agreement is an important step towards
achieving the goal of Palestinian unity under a single,
democratic Palestinian National Authority on the basis
of the platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the Quartet principles and the rule of law. The United
Nations will continue working with the Palestinian
leadership and the region in support of this process,
which is critical to reaching a negotiated two-State
solution and sustainable peace.
I would like to take a moment to discuss the acute
severity of Gaza’s humanitarian crisis and continuing
human rights abuses.
In an urgent call to action, during his August visit
to the region, the Secretary-General called it one of the
most dramatic humanitarian crises he had ever.seen.
Since then, conditions have only worsened. For the sixth
consecutive month, the 2 million people living in Gaza
have received electricity for a mere four to six hours per
day. The lack of energy has had a devastating impact
on all aspects of their lives. It continues to disrupt
essential public services, including health care, the
water supply and sanitation systems. The equivalent of
over 40 Olympic-size swimming pools of virtually raw
sewage continues to flow daily into the Mediterranean
Sea, leaving the whole shoreline contaminated. Gaza is
an unfolding environmental disaster that has no regard
for borders.
The quality of health care inside the Strip is
deteriorating at an alarming rate. Access to medical care

S/PV. 8072

outside Gaza has also become increasingly difficult.
As the Government returns to Gaza, it is critical that
urgent measures be taken to reverse these trends.
Meanwhile in other worrying developments, on
26 September Hamas sentenced three men to death
by hanging on the charge of murder, accessory to
murder and burglary. There are serious doubts as to
whether their trials and detention conditions in Gaza
meet international standards. As in previous cases,
if these executions were to be carried out, it would
be in violation of Palestinian law, which requires the
approval of the President. I urge Hamas not to carry
out such executions, and I once again call on President
Abbas to establish a moratorium on the implementation
of the death penalty.
Turning to the broader situation on the ground,
over the past month violence has remained at low
levels compared to the rest of the region. Four Israelis
were killed by a Palestinian attacker, who himself was
shot, at the entrance of the Har Adar settlement on
26 September. It is deplorable that Hamas and others
once again chose to glorify this attack. The United
Nations urges all to condemn violence and stand up
to terror.
On 4 October, the body of an Israeli man from the
settlement of Elkana was found in the Israeli-Arab village
of Kafr Qasim, with signs of having been subjected to
extreme violence. Israeli authorities investigating the
death arrested two Palestinians from the West Bank
town of Qabatiya in relation to the incident. During the
reporting period, in total 80 Palestinians were injured
by Israeli security forces, and five Israelis injured by
Palestinians. On 8 October, a rocket fired from Gaza
towards Israel landed inside the Strip. No injuries or
damage were reported. In response, the Israel Defense
Forces shelled a Hamas post in central Gaza Strip, with
no injuries reported.
Turning to the question of settlements, the Israeli
High Planning Committee met on 17 and 18 October
to advance plans for more than 2,000 housing units in
Area C of the occupied West Bank. That includes in
the new settlement of Amihai and a new neighbourhood
in Kochav Yaacov, both designated for settlers evicted
from illegal outposts by court orders. Separately, a
tender was issued for 296 units in Beit El, and building
permits for 31 units were conditionally approved
in Hebron. Reportedly, the Hebron municipality is
expected to appeal that decision, which would delay

17-332813/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the implementation of the building permits. Work
began this week to prepare for the construction of
infrastructure in Givat Hamatos, a settlement that, if
built, would further disconnect East Jerusalem from
the rest of the West Bank.
I remain concerned about proposed legislation
that, if adopted, would expand Jerusalem’s municipal
jurisdiction by incorporating several West Bank
settlements. The United Nations reiterates that all
settlement activities are illegal under international law
and are an impediment to peace.
The year 2017 has seen a significant decrease in
demolitions in Area C, as compared to the previous year.
Against that background, approximately 13 residential,
livelihood and public structures in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem were demolished in the previous month.
That brings the total number of demolished structures
for the year to over 350. Meanwhile, the number of
demolitions in East Jerusalem is quickly approaching
2016 levels, which were the highest since 2000.
I am particularly disturbed by reported Israeli plans
to evict specific communities, including Bedouin in
Khan Al-Ahmar, adjacent to the E-1 area, and in Susiya,
in the south Hebron hills. Nearly all structures in Khan
Al-Ahmar now have demolition orders. Many of the
structures are donor-funded, including a school that
serves 170 children. I urge Israel to cease the practice
of demolitions, which has led to the displacement of
thousands of people.
Turning to Lebanon, the situation has remained
generally quiet in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and along
the Blue Line. On the occasion of Lebanese Armed
Forces (LAF) Commander Aoun’s visit to UNIFIL,
on 22 September, the LAF formally announced the
deployment of the Fifth Rapid Intervention Regiment
to the UNIFIL area of operations, thereby fulfilling its
earlier commitment to expand the LAF presence south
of the Litani River. The regiment has since deployed,
and the coordination of activities between UNIFIL
and the regiment has commenced. On 19 September,
Head of Mission Force Commander Beary chaired a
tripartite meeting during which the parties discussed
the UNIFIL mandate extension under resolution 2373
(2017), violations of resolution 1701 (2006), Blue Line
marking and ongoing liaison and coordination matters.
On the Golan, the ceasefire between the State
of Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic has been
4/54

18/10/2017

maintained, albeit in a volatile environment attributable
to the ongoing conflict in Syria. Both sides have stated
their continued commitment to the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement and support for the full return of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force to the
area of separation, conditions permitting.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
despite the overall negative trajectory that has
characterized the Palestinian-Israeli conflict for far too
long, there are reasons for cautious optimism. During
the previous month, thousands of Israeli and Palestinian
women united in a two-week march for peace that
included participants of all ages and backgrounds. The
yearning for peace among both peoples remains strong.
Such grass-roots initiatives by civil society are critical
to building the foundation for peace, and they must
be supported.
A key piece of the peace puzzle is to bring Gaza
back under the control of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority. The lack of Palestinian unity was identified
in the July 2016 report (S/2016/595, annex) of the Middle
East Quartet as one of the main obstacles to achieving a
two-State solution. Current Palestinian efforts to return
the Government to Gaza must be encouraged; they must
be supported; and they must be successful. The parties
have taken a crucial first step in that process. They have
demonstrated a willingness to engage positively and in
good faith. Yet overcoming their deeply entrenched
differences will not be easy. It will take time, and there
will be many hurdles to overcome along the way.
Success carries with it enormous opportunity, just
as failure carries with it great risks. Palestinians need
to decide which path they will take. The international
community must ensure that they are given every
opportunity and support to reach a positive outcome.
We must ensure that work can move forward on ending
the occupation and establishing a viable, sovereign
Palestinian State that lives in peace and security
with Israel.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Jenča
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and on France’s able guidance
and leadership of the Council this month. I also thank
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8072

Mr. Jaroslav Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing and updates to
the Council.

dire humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions and
empowering the Palestinian Government to carry out
its duties there.

We meet at a moment of significant and rapidly
evolving dynamics, as we are witnessing important
steps being taken for healing the painful Palestinian
political division and achieving genuine reconciliation
and national unity in Palestine. Here in the Chamber,
we reaffirm our abiding gratitude to Egypt, a member
of the Security Council and a fraternal Arab country,
for the efforts exerted to help bring about the agreement
signed in Cairo on 12 October by the leaderships of
Fatah and Hamas, to support its implementation to
restore a unified, legitimate Palestinian Authority to the
Gaza Strip, based on past agreements and the Palestine
Liberation Organization’s political platform, and to
ensure the effective functioning of the Palestinian
National Consensus Government in Gaza in all aspects,
including Government institutions and at all crossings.

Palestine is doing its part. Internally, regionally
and internationally, we are upholding our obligations
and implementing our responsibilities in line with
international law, including humanitarian law and
human rights law, in full respect for our adherence to
the core international legal instruments, and in line
with the relevant United Nations resolutions. We are
doing this to the extent of our capacity and in spite
of the enormous constraints, obstacles, hardships
and setbacks imposed on us by Israel’s occupation of
Palestinian lands, including East Jerusalem, for more
than 50 years, since 1967. That includes our active
efforts to implement the Security Council’s resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), a landmark that
holds the keys to a peaceful, just solution. In word and
deed, we are complying with its provisions and the
Council’s clear demands. I would now like to make the
following points.

The reunification of our people, land and political
system is among our highest national priorities. We
are fully aware of its centrality to the achievement
of our national aspirations for independence and
the realization of our people’s inalienable rights and
justice. We are therefore undertaking the necessary
steps, with due responsibility, in response to the calls
of our people, first and foremost, as well as the regional
and global calls for unity.
The international community’s endorsement
of those important developments and offers of
cooperation are vital for ensuring their success. Of
course, that should include efforts aimed at achieving
the speedy lifting of the illegal and inhumane Israeli
blockade that has been imposed on the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip for more than a decade. It
should also include meaningful steps to expedite the
reconstruction and recovery urgently needed to reverse
Gaza’s de-development and restore humanity and hope
to our people there, especially our young people, for
whom hope and opportunity are in such short supply
these days. We therefore welcome all statements in
support of Palestinian reconciliation, as well as Egypt’s
role in that regard, including the Quartet envoys’
press statement of 28 September and the statements
and efforts of the United Nations Special Coordinator
and the Secretary-General himself, as well as those
of the United Nations system as a whole, along with
other regional and international partners, in support of
the current efforts, with a view to alleviating Gaza’s

First, as President Mahmoud Abbas reaffirmed
yet again when he addressed the General Assembly on
22 September (see A/72/PV.8), despite the great odds,
we remain committed to a two-State solution, based
on the pre-1967 borders, and to securing it based on
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.
Second, we will continue to rely and insist on using
peaceful, political, legal means to bring an end to Israel’s
occupation of our land and oppression of our people,
and to finally realize the Palestinian people’s rights
and national aspirations. That includes the right to live
in freedom, dignity and prosperity in an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
along with a just solution for the Palestine refugees.
Third, we continue to call for an end to all Israeli
settlement activities in occupied Palestine, in line
with resolution 2334 (2016) and all the relevant legal
provisions. Our approach, which is consistent with the
international consensus and appeals regarding the issue,
is adamant that only an end to Israel’s colonization of
our land and reversal of its illegal actions can salvage a
two-State solution based on the 1967 lines and advance
the cause of peace and security.
Fourth, therefore, we continue to appeal to all
States to take practical measures to back up their

17-332815/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

calls for a complete and immediate end to Israel’s
settlement campaign and their commitment to a twoState solution, including on the issue of distinction,
as called for in paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016).
Israel has been the occupying Power — but not in any
way the sovereign Power — in the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, since 1967, and should be
treated as such.
Fifth, since Israel has persisted with its flagrant
violations, as documented to date in the SecretaryGeneral’s three reports on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), it is essential that States,
organizations and the Council itself take such measures
in order to ensure accountability and rescue the
remaining small potential likelihood of achieving a
two-State solution. An attitude of continued contempt
on the part of the occupying Power must not be cost-free.
Sixth, we are committed to a non-violent approach
and have abided by that commitment for years, as has
been evident in our continued political and diplomatic
engagement in the quest for a just solution, our
documented efforts on the security front, our calls for
an end to provocations, incitement and inflammatory
rhetoric and our clear rejection of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
Seventh, we recognized the State of Israel on a
basis of the 1967 borders more than two decades ago,
despite the Israeli Government’s refusal to this day to
recognize the State of Palestine, or even at a minimum
to recognize the Palestinian people’s right to selfdetermination and independence.
Eighth, in spite of Israel’s intransigence and illegal
behaviour, we have continued to engage in good faith
with all regional and international initiatives for peace,
even in exceedingly difficult circumstances. Looking
back just over the past year, we have welcomed and
cooperated with efforts by the League of Arab States,
France, Egypt, Russia, China and the United States.
We will continue to do so based on our commitment
to a just, lasting, comprehensive solution, and we
have repeatedly affirmed our readiness to resume
negotiations, based on the long-standing terms of
reference, in order to achieve that solution.
We must all ask why there has been no progress
in implementing resolution 2334 (2016). What are
the continuing negative trends on the ground that are
destroying the possibility of a two-State solution? Why
has a political horizon not been established and why
6/54

18/10/2017

have negotiations on all final status issues not been
revived? It is not because this conflict is insoluble or
intractable, as some Israeli officials would like us to
believe. The Security Council has repeatedly, clearly
and authoritatively outlined the solution’s fundamental
parameters. The answer is clear. It is because of
the contempt of Israel, the occupying Power, for
international law and the Council’s resolutions. The
Council is therefore paralysed. We do what is required
of us, while the Council does nothing to implement its
resolutions. And we wonder when it will act to do its
part in this equation.
Despite the clarity of the Council’s demands, Israel
persists with its torment and collective punishment of our
people, its arrests and imprisonments, its colonization
of our land — where settlement activities have been
advancing at four times the rate of last year alone and the
thefts of land and demolitions of Palestinian homes and
properties have continued unabated, forcibly displacing
thousands — and its obstruction of all peace efforts.
It does all of this unapologetically, systematically
and shamelessly. It is astounding that a State can openly
and proudly declare its intention to continue violating
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
and committing war crimes, and boast about such
violations, thereby making a mockery of the Security
Council, the rule of law and the international system
as a whole. That is all being done blatantly by the same
State, Israel, which has the audacity to present itself as
a candidate for membership of the Council.
As we hear arrogant Israeli statements deriding
resolution 2334 (2016) and the non-stop, reckless
advancement of settlement and annexation plans
in occupied Palestine, especially in and around
East Jerusalem and A1-Khalil, further entrenching
the occupation, we cannot help but question the
international community’s role in fostering and
allowing such impunity. Without question, the lack of
accountability for such defiance and violations is at the
core of that ongoing injustice.
As we witness the continuing inflammatory
rhetoric with regard to East Jerusalem and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, fuelling religious sensitivities, and
escalating provocations, incitement and racism against
the Palestinian people and leadership by the Israeli
Government, fomenting even deeper hatred, violence
and terror by the Israeli occupying forces and extremist
settlers against our civilians, in grave breach of
international law and against all standards of decency
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and morality, we cannot help but ask, when will enough
be enough?
When the Israeli Prime Minister himself states that
“[t]here was not and will not be a better Government
for settlement than our Government”; and that “[w]e are
here to stay forever; there will be no more uprooting
of settlements”; when the Agriculture Minister boasts
that “[t]here is not and will never be two States between
Jordan and the sea”; when the Knesset Member of the
Jewish Home Party states that “[t]he goal is to erase the
paradigm of Palestinian statehood, both on the ground
and as a concept”; when Minister Lieberman states:
“I do not know what a settlement freeze is; take
the data and go over it. Only this year we approved
8,500 settlement housing units in the first half.
What freeze are you talking about? Look at
the facts”;
when a Likud Knesset member calls Palestinians
“vile human animals” — I repeat, “vile human
animals” — and threatens that
“[i]f it were up to me, I would have entered the
terrorist’s home last night, take him and his family
and execute them all. Yes, just like that, with
no shame”,
then the Council must know that they not only say what
they mean, but they do exactly what they say.
In words and deeds, the Israeli Prime Minister
and his governing coalition are opposed to peace,
dismissive of international law, and work day and night
to entrench the occupation and make the two-State
solution impossible, thereby destroying the contiguity
and viability of the Palestinian State and the chances for
peace. Why does the international community continue
to give Israel the benefit of the doubt when Israel
repeatedly proves its ill intentions? The international
community looks the other way, instead of facing
the issue head-on and declaring to Israel that enough
is enough. Why does the international community
allow the Israeli Prime Minister and his Cabinet to
claim there is no partner for peace, deny Palestinian
rights and attempt to undermine or vilify Palestinian
reconciliation, including by making hypocritical
demands of Palestinian factions?
It is high time for the Security Council to stand
against such ridicule of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations banning
the acquisition of territory by force. The Council must

S/PV. 8072

stand firmly behind its resolutions and demand full
respect and implementation, without exception. Israel,
which has so methodically and deliberately trampled
on the Council’s calls and decisions, cannot remain
exempt from the law. It must be compelled to comply or
face the pressure and accountability that is triggered by
non-compliance in all other situations. The Palestinian
Government is upholding its obligations, including in
respect of the Council’s resolutions.
In the absence of Israel’s respect, the Security
Council and all States must step up their efforts to
uphold their duties and obligations. No peace initiative
will succeed otherwise. A people’s freedom and
independence are dependent on that, as are justice
and peaceful coexistence. As many have said in the
Chamber, the question of Palestine remains a litmus
test of the rule of law and the credibility and authority
of the Security Council. We continue to hope, and
believe, that the time has arrived for genuine collective
action to rise to the test, to make a peaceful, just and
lasting solution possible and, ultimately, sooner rather
than later, make it a reality.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Members of the Security
Council meet in this forum and make statements.
On most days they give speeches. But, today, we
demand action.
Today we will make the case and prove that, beyond
a reasonable doubt, there is no greater threat to peace
and security than the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Iran has threatened the world for 38 years, and it
continues to threaten the world. Iran and its proxies
butcher innocent people. Iran violates human rights
and seeks to wipe Israel, a fellow State Member of
the United Nations, off the face of the Earth. When
terror strikes, a trail of bloody footprints can very
often be traced back to Iran. From Bangkok to Burgas;
from Buenos Aires to Beirut, and all the way back to
Tehran, there is no refuge from Iran’s deadly deeds.
Iran threatens the entire international community. It is
therefore the duty of the members of the Council, on
behalf of the international community, to serve as the
judge and jury. Today, the Council must bear witness to
the dark realities for which Iran is responsible. It is the
Council that must decide the fate of Iran as we uncover
its horrific abuses.

17-332817/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On behalf of the State of Israel, I hereby indict the
Islamic Republic of Iran on the following charges: first,
sponsoring and endorsing worldwide terror; secondly,
violating human rights; thirdly, vilifying Jews and
promoting anti-Semitism; and fourthly; seeking to
destroy a State Member of the United Nations — the
State of Israel.
As I stand before the Council to indict the Iranian
regime, I stand with the people of Iran, and with good
people around the world, who are peace-loving and
freedom-seeking. Former United States Secretary of
State, Henry Kissinger once observed that Iran cannot
decide if it is a State or a cause. It is clear that Iran
is a cause, and its cause is terror — sponsoring and
endorsing terrorism all over the world. The Iranian
Revolutionary Guard claims to export revolution to the
world. What that really means is that it funds terrorism
all over the world. We applaud President Trump
for imposing tougher sanctions against the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps.
In Syria, Iran has armed Bashar Al-Assad — the butcher
of Damascus. Iran’s support has allowed Al-Assad to
pursue chemical weapons, Iran has provided thousands
of fighters from its proxy Hizbullah to support the
Al-Assad regime. Iran shows no signs of leaving Syria.
Without Iranian support, the Al-Assad regime would
have failed in its evil mission to murder its own people.
The Iranian Ayatollahs sponsor Hizbullah’s war chest,
Hamas’ budget of bloodshed and Islamic Jihad’s terror
funds. Thanks to Iran, Hizbbullah has increased its
weapons arsenal to include more than 100,000 rockets
and missiles. Those weapons are stockpiled deliberately
in hospitals and schools throughout the villages of
southern Lebanon.
Hamas has built a terror-attack tunnel directly
underneath an elementary school of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. Just last month, Yahya Sinwar, the leader of
Hamas in Gaza, described Hamas’ relations with Iran
as “fantastic”. He confirmed that Iran is “the largest
backer financially and militarily” of Hamas, and just a
few weeks prior to that, Sinwar told a group of young
people in Gaza that today Hamas could launch the same
number of rockets that it launched during the entire
2014 conflict in less than one hour. Those are not just
empty words. Hamas is already preparing for the next
war against Israel.
8/54

18/10/2017

Those ties cannot be ignored. Iran is waging war
against Israel. Hamas and Hizbullah are simply doing
the dirty work. The blood money speaks for itself.
Hamas, Hizbullah and Islamic Jihad are internationally
recognized terrorist organizations. Iran is their puppet
master. It does not matter whether they are Sunni or
Shiite. Their cause is death. They love death as we love
life. One may ask: Does Iran limit its terror empire to
one region? The answer is no. Whether the explosions
in Bangkok, the suicide bombing against American
marines in Beirut, the attacks on Jewish and Israeli
sites in Buenos Aires or the suicide bus bombing in
Burgas, Iranian terror strikes throughout the world.
The evidence presented is conclusive and beyond all
reasonable doubt. Iran is guilty of sponsoring and
endorsing worldwide terror.
Allow me to make special mention of the people of
Iran. They refuse to have their spirits crushed by their
oppressive rulers, and they deeply desire to see the
day when they will be free from tyranny. With that, I
state the second charge. I accuse Iran of horrific human
rights violations against its own people. I shall now
present the evidence.
In Iran today, if you commit adultery, you will be
stoned to death. In today’s Iran — 2017 — if you are gay,
lesbian or bisexual, you will be hanged from a crane. In
Iran, if you are a girl as young as nine-years-old, you
can be married off to a grown man. In Iran today, if you
are a journalist and you criticize the regime, you will be
arrested with no right to trial. And in Iran today, if you
are sent to prison, you will be tortured. This is a regime
that is living in the dark ages. Those violations of human
rights cannot be taken lightly. Based on the evidence
shown, Iran is guilty of violating human rights.
Iran’s hatred for innocent persons is not limited to
the confines of its borders, which brings me to the third
charge. It is the leading advocate for the world’s oldest
form of racism — anti-Semitism. Ayatollah Khamenei,
the Supreme Leader of Iran, is a Holocaust denier. He
insults the memories of the 6 million Jews slaughtered
by the Nazi regime. He claims that the Holocaust was
“not real”. He posts Holocaust denial videos online on
Holocaust Remembrance Day. On two occasions in
2015 and 2016, his regime sponsored a competition in
Tehran for the best Holocaust-denial cartoon. The total
prize money amounted to $50,000. Iran’s sentiment
could not be clearer, but it does not end there.
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

A few weeks ago, Seyyed Abdolrahim Mousavi,
Commander-in-Chief of Iran’s armed forces, declared,
“We will destroy the Zionist entity at lightning speed”.
He said Iran would “turn Haifa and Tel Aviv into dust”.
It was a clear call for the destruction of the Jewish State.
Israel shares no border with Iran. We have never had a
territorial dispute. Iran simply hates Israel because it is
the world’s only Jewish State. That is nothing else other
than repackaged anti-Semitism. Therefore, concerning
the third charge of militant anti-Semitism, Iran is, once
again, guilty.
Iran has made it clear that it seeks to harm other
nations and innocent people. It continues to pose a
major threat to world peace and security by pursuing
advanced military capabilities. It has not been shy
about its ultimate goal: to wipe Israel off the map. It is
that threat that forms the fourth and final charge — the
assault on one United Nations Member State by another.
Iran plans to do that through deadly measures. It seeks
to destroy Israel by any means necessary. The Iranian
regime has tried to obtain nuclear capabilities for years.
Today, the regime’s intentions are no different than
before. Iran’s mission is not one of deterrence. It is one
of destruction.

S/PV. 8072

I hereby repeat the charges: first, sponsoring and
endorsing worldwide terror; secondly, the extensive
violation of human rights; thirdly, vilifying Jews and
promoting anti-Semitism; and fourthly, seeking to
destroy a United Nations Member State — the State
of Israel. Concerning those charges, justice must be
served. The Islamic Republic of Iran must be found
guilty on all accounts. The Security Council now faces
a choice. It can confront the Iranian terror empire by
vigorously implementing its own resolutions, or it can
stand idly by as Iran’s reign of terror penetrates entire
continents. Adopting and enforcing resolutions can
save innocent lives. It is the Council’s responsibility to
implement them. Council members do not need to do
that for Israel’s sake.
We will defend our citizens, our values and our way
of life, with all the necessary force and the full power of
our convictions. If we are attacked by Iran, the regime
will face no fiercer enemy than Israel. It is the innocent
people around the world who need the Council’s help,
and we expect it to act. We must defend the lives of good
people everywhere. We must defeat racism once and for
all. And we must finally put an end to the Iranian threat
to peace and security.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) — the nuclear agreement — did not eliminate
the threat of nuclear destruction. At its best, if Iran
does not cheat with regard to the provisions of the
agreement, the pact just delays the nuclear programme.
It allows Iran’s extremist regime to resume that
dangerous pursuit in just a few short years. The nuclear
deal gives Iran the benefit of the doubt. It places trust in
Iran to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). It allows the IAEA to monitor only the
locations that Iran has declared to be nuclear sites. It is
the Iranians who decide which sites are designated as
nuclear and which are not. It is a game in which Iran
makes the rules, picks the players and wins every time.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.

Iran’s nuclear ambitions are not confined to within
the bounds of the JCPOA. Take ballistic missiles, for
instance. Iran launches illegal ballistic missiles capable
of carrying nuclear warheads. That is a direct violation
of resolution 2231 (2015). I challenge Security Council
members to explain how the testing of ballistic missiles
intended to carry nuclear warheads is non-nuclear.
Therefore, concerning the fourth and final charge of
attempting to destroy a fellow United Nations Member
State, Iran is guilty, as well.

Every six months, the Secretary-General delivers
a report on the implementation of resolution to 2231
(2015), which the Council unanimously adopted. The
report has always noted the International Atomic Energy
Agency’s findings that Iran is implementing the nuclear
deal, but then it goes on. It lists the regimes multiple
flagrant violations on the resolution’s non-nuclearrelated provisions. Every six months, the Security
Council is presented with a laundry list of bad news,
but somehow manages to hear only the good news.

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Our goal
in discussing the Middle East is to work on peace,
security and human rights for the region. We cannot
talk about stability in the Middle East without talking
about Iran. That is because nearly every threat to peace
and security in the Middle East is connected to Iran’s
outlawed behaviour. For the international community’s
engagement with Iran, this is a time of clarity and
opportunity. The United States has now embarked on
a course that attempts to address all aspects of Iran’s
destructive conduct, not just one aspect. It is critical
that the international community do the same.

17-332819/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Some countries, to their credit, have called out
Iran for its maligned behaviour, but as a Council we
have adopted a dangerously short-sighted approach.
Judging Iran by the narrow confines of the nuclear
deal misses the true nature of the threat. Iran must be
judged in totality of its aggressive, destabilizing and
unlawful behaviour. To do otherwise would be foolish.
Such clarity brings opportunity. It gives the Council the
chance to defend its integrity. It gives us the chance to
work together as a community of nations to uphold the
provisions of the resolutions we have all worked so hard
to adopt.
The Security Council has repeatedly adopted
resolutions aimed at addressing Iranian support for
terrorism and regional conflicts, but Iran has repeatedly
thumbed its nose at such efforts; worse yet is that the
regime continues to play the Council. Iran hides behind
its assertion of technical compliance with the nuclear
deal, while it brazenly violates the other limits on its
behaviour. We have allowed them to get away with
it. That must stop. The list of the Iranian regime’s
violations of Security Council resolutions is too long to
repeat here, so I will confine myself to the highlights.
Resolution 2231 (2015) bans the transfer of
conventional weapons from Iran. Yet today we see Iran
identified as a source of weapons in conflicts across
the region, from Yemen to Syria and Lebanon. The
United States, France, Australia, Ukraine and others
have intercepted Iranian shipments of rocket-propelled
grenade launchers, machine guns and anti-tank
missiles, among other weapons, that are bound for
Yemen. The Iranian regime has been a key source of
arms in strategic military support to the Houthi rebels,
both directly through its military and indirectly through
its Hizbullah proxy forces. Not only is that a violation
of resolution to 2231 (2015), it also violates resolution
to 2216 (2015), which imposes an arms embargo on
the Houthi rebels. Iran has repeatedly and brazenly
violated not one, but two, Security Council resolutions
on Yemen. Yet few on the Council have said anything
at all.
Resolution 2231 (2015) also bans travel outside Iran
by senior Iranian officials, including Major General
Soleimani. And yet the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/515) lists multiple press photos and reports of
the General travelking to Syria and Iraq. There are even
pictures on social media of him visiting Russia. That
is an open and direct violation of resolution to 2231
(2015). And yet where is the outrage of the Council?
10/54

18/10/2017

There is more, plenty more. In resolutions 1701
(2006) and 1559 (2004), the Council unanimously
called on Hizbullah to disarm. Nonetheless, Hizbullah
is building an arsenal of war in Lebanon, with weapons
supplied by Iran. Again, none of that is going on in
secret. The leader of Hizbullah talks openly about the
support Iran provides. He has repeatedly boasted that
sanctions cannot hurt Hizbullah because
“everything it eats and drinks, its weapons and
rockets, come from the Islamic Republic of Iran”.
Those are only the Iranian regime’s activities on
which the Security Council has taken a clear position.
What about Iran’s support of arms, financing and
training of fighters for the bloody Al-Assad regime
in Syria? There are also the consistent Iranian threats
to freedom of navigation in the Persian Gulf. There
are also the Iranian regime’s cyberattacks against the
United States, Israel and other United Nations States
Members. Then there is Iran’s imprisoning of foreign
journalists and tourists on made-up charges. Some
Americans, like Bob Levinson, have not been heard
from in over a decade.
Unfortunately, we are not done yet. The Iranian
regime abuses its own people. It imprisons or murders
members of the political opposition. It persecutes
Christians and other religious minorities. It denies
the freedom of speech. It executes gays and lesbians.
There is one more thing. The list of Iran’s dangerous
and destructive behaviour that I just outlined does not
even include the regime’s most threatening act — its
repeated ballistic missile launches, including the launch
in the summer of an intercontinental ballistic missile.
That should be a clarion call to everyone in the United
Nations. When a rogue regime starts down the path
of ballistic missiles, it tells us that we will soon have
another North Korea on our hands. If it is wrong for
North Korea to do that, why does that same mentality
not apply to Iran?
With our decision to take a comprehensive
approach to confronting the Iranian regime, the United
States will not turn a blind eye to such violations. We
have made it clear that the regime cannot have it both
ways. It cannot consistently violate international law
and still be considered a fit and trusted member of the
international community. The Council now has the
opportunity to change its policy towards the Iranian
regime. I sincerely hope it will take this chance to
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

defend not only the resolutions, but also peace, security
and human rights in Iran.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): First, I would like to thank
Mr. Miroslav Jenča for the useful briefing this morning.
I would also like to thank the observer of Palestine and
the representative of Israel for their participation and
contributions here today.
Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later today by the observer of the European
Union, including with regard to the Iran nuclear deal.
Recent months have been extremely busy for the
Security Council. However, despite the proliferation of
new and re-emerging crises, we must also maintain our
commitment to resolving one of the longest-standing
conflicts on our agenda: we must continue to seek an
end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by reviving the
peace process. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
by the United States to achieve a return to meaningful
negotiations, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and prior agreements.
That is the only path towards realizing a two-State
solution, ending the occupation and resolving all
final-status issues.
A unified Palestinian leadership is critical for
a return to meaningful negotiations. We therefore
commend the efforts in recent weeks to further
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We welcome the
agreement signed by Fatah and Hamas in Cairo on
12 October, as well as Egypt’s crucial engagement in
that regard. This is an important step in enabling the
full return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. We
encourage all parties to seize this opportunity and to
fully implement agreed provisions in order to reunite
Gaza and the West Bank.
The people of Gaza have lived in intolerable
conditions for far too long. The population continues
to suffer from the impact of only having electricity for
a couple of hours per day and a lack of access to basic
services, including water and sanitation, as we have
just heard this morning. The return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza should swiftly lead to actions that
improve the grave humanitarian situation.
In addition, an immediate end to the Israeli policy of
closure and a full opening of the crossings, in line with
resolution 1860 (2009), are needed, while addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns. We also underline
the need for unimpeded humanitarian access, as well as

S/PV. 8072

access for all international donors, to Gaza. My country
is the sixth biggest donor to Palestine, including Gaza,
in order to support the Strip’s growth and stability, both
within the European Union framework and through our
own development cooperation, with between $40 and
$50 million per year.
Last month, we heard from Special Coordinator
Mladenov that “Israel’s illegal settlement activities
have continued at a high rate — a consistent pattern
over the course of this year” (S/PV.8054, p. 2). More
than 10,000 settlement units have been announced
so far this year, which is more than twice as many as
during the whole of 2016. We reiterate that settlements
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and
are contrary to numerous Security Council resolutions,
including 2334 (2016).
The Israeli Government announced yesterday,
and even today, decisions to advance thousands of
settlement units, including in East Jerusalem and Area
C, deep inside the occupied West Bank. The fact that
two days ago — for the first time in 15 years — the
Israeli authorities issued permits for 31 new settlement
units in the Palestinian city of Hebron is of particular
concern. This represents a new, deeply worrying trend
in a place where tensions are already running high.
Settlements are resulting in the gradual
fragmentation of the West Bank and have a negative
impact on Palestinians’ enjoyment of human rights,
including freedom of movement, thereby severely
impeding the right to education, health, work and
family life. Our position and that of the European
Union remains clear. We strongly oppose Israel’s illegal
settlement policy. Settlements dangerously threaten the
viability of the two-State solution and destroy hopes for
peace. This is why we condemn these Israeli decisions
and we urge the Israeli Government to reverse them.
In the context of achieving a two-State solution, we
would like to recall that resolution 2334 (2016)
“Calls upon all States ... to distinguish, in their
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State
of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967”
(resolution 2334 (2016), para. 5).
In line with this, the European Union has a policy
regarding settlement products. Furthermore, all
agreements between the State of Israel and the European
Union must explicitly indicate their inapplicability to
the occupied territories. This policy does not constitute

17-3328111/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a boycott of Israel. We hope that the United Nations
will be able to report on developments regarding this in
the next reporting period related to the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).
Next month marks the seventieth anniversary
of the adoption of General Assembly resolution 181
(II), which recognized the two-State solution. The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has lasted far too long.
Countless Palestinians and Israelis have lost their lives.
Fortunately, fatalities on both sides are at lower levels
so far this year; however, a few weeks ago an attack
in a settlement in the occupied West Bank led to three
Israeli fatalities. Sweden unequivocally condemns this
attack and all other acts of violence.
The international community must do everything
in its power to realize the two-State solution. The
peoples of Israel and Palestine deserve no less.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav Jenča, for his clear
briefing on the major challenges that continue to arise
in the Middle East.
One of these aforementioned challenges is the
ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict — a question as old
as our Organization — which has endured on the agenda
of the Council along with all its familiar, disturbing
consequences. Indeed, on the ground negative trends
continue to fuel violence and radicalization and move us
ever further from the two-State solution, which in our
view remains the only viable option. Senegal takes this
opportunity to reiterate its condolences to the families
of the victims of the recent violence and to reiterate
its firm condemnation of violence and terrorism,
regardless of its perpetrators or their motives.
My delegation welcomes the signing of the
reconciliation agreement between Fatah and Hamas,
facilitated by Egypt’s laudable efforts. We hope that
the will of the Palestinian political actors to reunite
will be reflected in the formation of a national
unity Government and the holding of long-awaited
municipal elections.
Yet beyond the political aspect, we wish to see
a lasting solution to the considerable humanitarian
and socioeconomic challenges facing the Gaza
Strip, including the lack of electricity and water and
12/54

18/10/2017

limitations in the public health and reconstruction
sectors, which severely impact an estimated 2 million
people, half of whom are children. In this connection,
my delegation reiterates its support for efforts to ensure
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East enjoys access to
sufficient and predictable resources. In this regard, we
welcome the contributions of more than $60 million
pledged at the meeting held by the Organization
for Islamic Cooperation on 21 September on the
sidelines of the seventy-second general debate of the
General Assembly.
We reiterate our support for the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by certain countries, including Egypt, the
Russian Federation and the United States, to revive the
peace process, which has been at a standstill since 2014,
on the basis of existing platforms, notably the Arab
Peace Initiative. My delegation therefore continues to
appeal to the international community — particularly
the Security Council, the Quartet and countries of
the region — to ensure that, like the Israeli people,
which enjoys a democratic and prosperous State, the
Palestinian people are able to achieve their legitimate
aspirations to a sovereign and viable State on the basis
of internationally recognized and guaranteed borders.
With regard to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, my delegation is of the view that two priorities
should guide the action of the international community.
The first is the fight against terrorism, in particular
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the former Jabhat al-Nusrah, based on a comprehensive
strategy that takes due account of the imperative to
protect populations and civilian infrastructure, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The second priority is the search for a negotiated
political solution under United Nations auspices. We
therefore appeal to all parties — the Government, the
opposition and civil society — to engage in good faith
in the Geneva talks under the auspices of the Special
Envoy with a view to finding a definitive solution to
the conflict on the basis of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
Before concluding, I refer to the conflict in Yemen
in order to reaffirm Senegal’s conviction that only a
negotiated political solution between the parties — while
respecting the legitimacy of the Yemeni Government
and taking into account the Gulf Cooperation Council
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, as well
as the resolutions of the Security Council — will bring
peace and stability to a country experiencing one of the
worst humanitarian disasters of our time.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča for his informative briefing.
The agenda for today’s meeting is “The situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”,
or at least that is what it says on the paper in front of
me. However, the statements of some delegations so far
make me question that. Perhaps they mixed up their
agenda items and thought that today we were discussing
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). We too are ready to address that
issue, and we will not be the only ones who will have
questions for some delegations about how they are
implementing the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
But some delegations’ failure to even mention the
word “Palestine” is alarming and distressing, because
quite apart from the fact that we are not seeing any
progress with regard to a Palestinian-Israeli settlement,
the absence of even a reference to it hardly fills us
with optimism.
Meanwhile, however, we would like to emphasize
that the turbulent events and new challenges and
threats in the Middle East and North Africa should
not overshadow the importance of resolving the
Palestine issue, which is fundamental to the longterm normalization of the situation in the region. The
continued impasse in the efforts to reach a settlement
is extremely worrying. The current status quo is
incapable of being sustained or lasting. In the absence
of a peace process and a political horizon, the region
is building up an increasingly explosive potential that
could detonate at any moment.
The parties to the conflict are continually resorting
to unilateral steps that hinder the efforts to relaunch
the Palestinian-Israeli negotiation process. That
applies to Israel’s settlement activity, the provocative
rhetoric on both sides, the outbreaks of violence and
the difficult humanitarian situation, especially in the
Gaza Strip. Against that background, we hear more
and more often that the prospects for achieving a twoState solution to the Palestinian question are receding
with each passing day. What is the alternative, if a
one-State option, at least going on the statements of
the parties themselves, is not in the interests of either

S/PV. 8072

the Israelis or the Palestinians? We believe firmly that
there is no alternative to a settlement reached through
direct negotiations leading to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel.
Russia has consistently emphasized its commitment
to achieving a just and comprehensive settlement in
the Middle East based firmly on international law,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative. In our view, it is essential to
step up international efforts to try to find ways out of
the current impasse in the Middle East peace process.
We are working on it both bilaterally and through the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators, and we
support the active involvement of regional stakeholders.
We believe that resuming direct Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations on a universally recognized international
legal basis is crucial, and we are therefore not
withdrawing our proposal to hold a summit in Russia
between the leaders of Palestine and Israel.
We note that there have been some positive
developments in intra-Palestinian affairs. The
agreements reached between Fatah and Hamas, in
which Egypt played an active role, should significantly
improve the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip.
We hope they will be followed by other steps aimed
at ensuring genuine national unity for Palestinians
through the Palestine Liberation Organization’s
political platform, and that such a development will
have a positive influence on the situation in the Middle
East. We helped to facilitate the process, and we will
continue helping to overcome Palestine’s internal
split through our contacts across the entire spectrum
of its political actors. We greatly appreciate the Arab
Republic of Egypt’s energetic efforts in that regard.
The Middle East remains in a situation of systemic
crisis on many levels. The approaching victory over the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Syria and Iraq
does not mean that the threat of terrorism is about to be
eliminated. Terrorists have spread all over the region
and organized sleeper cells all over the world. We
will need the united efforts of the entire international
community and a truly broad counter-terrorism front if
we are to combat this global threat effectively. There
is work still to be done, and we will have to combine
our regional and international efforts as never before. It
is particularly worrying that extremists are exploiting
ethnic and religious factors to incite discord and
replenish their ranks, and have dealt a serious blow to

17-3328113/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Christians and other religious and ethnic minorities
who have lived in the region for centuries.
The current situation in the Middle East and North
Africa shows the importance of developing coordinated
approaches to resolving the acute crises in the region.
We must reject the notion of external interference
and the persistent attempts to impose ready-made
solutions from outside. Conflicts can be resolved
only through political means on the basis of a broad
national dialogue, while respecting the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of every State in
the Middle East, without exception, an approach that
requires us to take into account and fully respect the
traditions, national particularities and aspirations of
the countries in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to go back to where
I started and draw the Council’s attention to the fact
that the attempts to dismantle the architecture of the
agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme have
evoked negative reactions throughout the Middle East
and beyond. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
has been a significant contribution to normalizing the
situation in relation to Iran and has given the efforts to
stabilize the situation in the region extra impetus. The
JCPOA continues to be an important basis for promoting
confidence-building measures, and the commitments
undertaken under the agreement, which was endorsed
in resolution 2231 (2016), should be complied with by
all the parties to it.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia supports the statements
to be delivered later on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Committee for the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Bolivia thanks Assistant Secretary-General Jenča
for his briefing.
I am somewhat startled as I begin my statement
today, because in the past few years not only have we
seen that the direction that these meetings have taken
has turned them into a sterile routine, we are now
seeing something that goes much further than that — an
attempt to silence and render invisible the Palestinian
issue, one of the most important subjects not just for the
Council but for the entire Organization.
Bolivia was pleased that, on 12 October, the parties
reached an agreement in Cairo making a settlement
of the intra-Palestinian conflict possible. It will not
14/54

18/10/2017

only enable the Palestinian Authority to resume its
full functions in the Gaza Strip as of 1 November, it is
also a genuine expression of Palestinian unity. In that
regard, we would particularly like to thank Egypt for its
efforts on this and other issues in the region.
Bolivia also welcomes the statement made on
16 October by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator of the Secretary-General for the Middle
East Peace Process, in which he stated that, after the
meeting held with the Palestinian Prime Minister,
Mr. Rami Hamdallah, the legitimate presence of the
Palestinian Authority would be strengthened with a
view to partially alleviating the painful humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip. We join in supporting the
contents of the statement to the effect that the agreement
is an important step towards the achievement of the
objective of Palestinian unity, with a Government
with a single democratically and legitimately elected
Palestinian Authority.
Despite this progress, we must recall that the
inhumane blockade that Israel is inflicting upon the
Palestinian people in Gaza persists. We wish to recall
to the occupying Power that, since the adoption of
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, the State
of Israel is in violation of the fundamental principles
of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, given
that, to date, it has not withdrawn its armed forces
from occupied Palestinian territories. Its belligerent
practices against the population living in these
territories impinges on their right to live in peace
within secure and recognized borders, free from threat
or acts of force.
Similarly, the 11 July report compiled by the United
Nations country team in the occupied Palestinian
territory shows the existence of a series of extremely
harsh Israeli measures imposed in the Gaza Strip that
have negative humanitarian consequences and continue
to affect access to basic services such as drinking
water for human consumption and the operation of
health centres and hospitals, with a negative impact
on the health of the Palestinian population, especially
children. For this reason, Israel must bring an
immediate and complete halt to the illegal blockade it
is imposing in the Gaza Strip. It should immediately
proceed to a continuous and unconditional opening
of border-crossing points, in order to make it possible
for humanitarian assistance, trade goods and people to
enter and leave the Strip.
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the same way, we categorically condemn Israel’s
expansionist drive stemming from its intention to
continue planning and building new settlements in
occupied Palestinian territories, an extreme move that
was reported in the press release dated 10 October,
published by the Office of the Prime Minister of Israel,
concerning the construction of 3,736 new settlement
units throughout occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, in clear violation of
resolution 2334 (2016). We stress that such statements
or actions represent openly belligerent acts against the
Organization, undermining any possibility of achieving
a fair and lasting peace in the region and increasing
the state of anxiety in which both the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples live.
As a pacifist country, Bolivia believes that the
only option for guaranteeing a fair and lasting peace
in the conflict between Israel and Palestine is the
path of dialogue, with clear expressions of political
will to achieve the two-State solution, especially by
the Government of Israel. We therefore reaffirm the
importance of giving continuity to actions provided
for in the 1991 Madrid Conference, the Oslo Accords
of 1993, which recognize the existence of Israel and
ultimately the creation of a Palestinian State and its
right to live in peace and security, the Arab Peace
Initiative proposed by the Arab League in 2002, and
the road map of the Quartet of 2003 — all within the
framework of multilateralism. Bolivia reaffirms its
support for the self-determination of the Palestinian
people and their right to have a free, sovereign and
independent State, with the pre-1967 international
borders and East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly.
Finally, we wish to express our expectation that
the Secretary-General’s next quarterly report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) will appear
in a written format, making it possible for us to prepare
our statements on the basis of the report and to see the
progress of the implementation of the resolution in
detail. We believe that presenting report in writing in
advance will keep the situation in Palestine from being
invisible and silenced.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): This will be the last time
Japan will make a statement in an open debate on the
Middle East during its two-year term as a member of
the Security Council.

S/PV. 8072

Unfortunately, the Security Council has made little
progress in the Middle East peace process or pressing
regional issues in the Middle East region, including
Syria and Yemen. Japan has consistently stressed the
importance of the peaceful resolution of conflicts, the
need to fully implement Security Council resolutions
and other international commitments, and the need to
generate confidence in a region where mutual distrust
is prevalent. Japan has continued its sustained efforts,
focusing on the importance of humanitarian assistance
and social resilience.
On the Middle East peace process, Japan continues
to support a two-State solution based on the 1967
lines with mutually agreed swaps, which will achieve
peaceful coexistence between a viable Palestinian
State and Israel, with secure and recognized borders.
Japan emphasizes that this should be reached through
negotiations based on relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Quartet road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
An important step has been taken to mend the
division between the West Bank and Gaza. Japan
appreciates Egypt’s efforts, in particular, and welcomes
the move towards the Palestinian Authority assuming
its responsibilities in Gaza. We hope that the agreement
between Fatah and Hamas will be implemented in a
timely manner. Japan believes that achieving effective
governance by the Palestinian Authority in Gaza is
essential for preventing conflict and making progress
in the peace process.
At the same time, the reunification of Gaza and
the West Bank should first and foremost alleviate the
humanitarian crisis that affects every facet of life in
Gaza. Last month, during the high-level week at the
General Assembly, Foreign Minister Kono announced
$20 million in additional aid to Gaza and the West
Bank, including food aid and the development of a
sewage network. To assist Palestine’s development
efforts, Japan is seeking to upgrade the Corridor
for Peace and Prosperity initiative, contributing to
capacity-building at border facilities and facilitating
the distribution of goods. The economic development
of Palestine provides an important basis upon which a
viable Palestinian State and Israel can coexist in peace
and prosperity.
Japan’s assistance will not only promote the
resilience of Palestine’s communities and improve

17-3328115/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/10/2017

economic conditions, but it will also promote
confidence-building among the relevant parties. We
are convinced that these measures will contribute
to creating an environment conducive to a twoState solution.

discredit the important achievements of the Council
over the years or the role it can play in the days ahead.
Japan, together with other members of the Council
and the international community, will remain actively
engaged on the challenges facing the Middle East.

Unfortunately, the two-State solution continues
to be undermined by the issues of settlements and
violence, often leading to a chain of negative reactions.
Settlement activities are in violation of international
law and physically erode the possibility of a twoState solution. They must be fully frozen. Violence
is fundamentally incompatible with the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and leads to bitter exchanges
of rhetoric and response. It is heartbreaking to think
of people on the ground directly facing this situation.
Mindful of resolution 2334 (2016), Japan would like to
reiterate that issues of violence and settlements must be
addressed to reverse the negative trend undermining a
two-State solution.

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the French
presidency for convening this quarterly open debate.

The implementation of multilateral agreements
and Security Council resolutions is equally important
to issues pertaining to Iran. Japan supports the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which
contributes to the international non-proliferation
regime and regional stability. The International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which verifies and
monitors the implementation of commitment under this
agreement, issued a statement last week that nuclearrelated commitments undertaken by Iran under the
JCPOA were being implemented. The statement also
noted that the IAEA had had access to all locations it
needed to visit thus far. Such words are encouraging.
At the same time, the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), which endorses the JCPOA, is an important
responsibility of all Member States. Japan believes
that ballistic missile launches by Iran are inconsistent
with the resolution. The June report (S/2017/515) of
the Secretary-General on resolution 2231 (2015) calls
upon Iran to refrain from launching ballistic missiles,
which escalates regional tensions. In addition, the same
report informs us that some individuals subject to
travel ban are reportedly present in countries outside of
Iran. Japan emphasizes the need for the comprehensive
implementation of both nuclear-related and non-nuclear
aspects of the resolution.
I began today’s statement by noting that the
Security Council has made little progress on Middle
East issues during Japan’s current term. This is not to
16/54

The Middle East is undergoing a rapid and
fundamental transformation that is accompanied by
a wide array of tragic events in Syria, Yemen, Libya,
Palestine and other hotspots. The Middle East peace
process is the alpha and omega of the current situation
in the region, as well as the marker of the limitations
and weaknesses of the existing regional security
system. That is why any efforts aimed at restoring
regional stability should take the Palestinian issue in
all its aspects into account. Indeed, the presence of the
representatives of Israel and Palestine at this table proves
that the Palestinian question remains fundamental.
We join others in welcoming the decision of the
Hamas leadership to dissolve the Gaza administrative
committee, and we commend the effective mediation of
all parties, first and foremost Egypt, aimed at advancing
the process of inter-Palestinian reconciliation. We urge
the parties to make the best use of the momentum
created in Cairo and take further steps to fully to
reunite Gaza and the West Bank under the legitimate
Palestinian Authority. This must be done without delay
considering, inter alia, the dire humanitarian situation
in Gaza. Given that not much time has passed since
we witnessed the escalation in the Temple Mount/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, we should not allow unilateral
actions and inflammatory statements to push the
situation to the edge.
On the ongoing stalemate in the peace process, one
cannot help but underscore that the continued expansion
of settlement activities does not contribute to the easing
tensions and runs contrary to our expectations. Ukraine
reiterates its position that the Israeli-Palestinian
peace settlement lies within the framework of the
unconditional fulfilment by the parties of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including land for peace, the Quartet road map, the
agreements previously reached by the parties, and
the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. Both Israel and the
Palestinians should refrain from taking any action that
could undermine the prospects for a peaceful settlement.
The statements of both Mohammad Abbas (A/72/PV.8)
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8072

and Benjamin Netanyahu (A/72/PV.3) we heard in the
General Assembly last month left the impression that
both sides are still oceans apart.

their unwillingness to sit at the negotiating table are
unacceptable. The further fragmentation of the Yemeni
political landscape is a cause of growing concern.

Syria remains one of the hotbeds poisoning
the region with the seeds of geopolitical rivalry and
sectarian hatred. We take note of the agreements reached
in Astana on 15 September, in particular on the Idlib
de-escalation zone. If the idea works, then a durable
nationwide ceasefire could be within reach, giving a
chance for a full-fledged political process to emerge.
Ukraine welcomes the serious progress achieved in the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in
Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor.

Tensions are high in other parts of the Middle
East as well. There is a long and difficult path ahead
to restore the long-awaited stability to the region,
including through the efforts of the Security Council.
In order to succeed, the Council has to stand united,
and our hopes for that are still high.

The conventional defeat of Da’esh must herald
a new opening and new hope for the Syrian people.
However, the absence of tangible breakthroughs on
the political and humanitarian tracks is a clear sign
that so far, military logic prevails over the diplomatic
approach. One the whole, the entire international
community should avoid at any cost falling into the
trap of short-term solutions on Syria. Such ad hoc fixes
seem to deliver temporary relief, only to set the stage
for a deeper crisis in the long term.
The fact that no root causes of the conflict have been
addressed so far essentially means more opportunity for
Da’esh and Al-Qaeda to capitalize on the grievances of
the disaffected population. We continue to believe that
there should be a longer-term blueprint for Syria — one
firmly based on a commitment to a negotiated political
settlement and the clear understanding of what will
come next.
Ukraine is deeply concerned with the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen. Millions
there are facing the threefold threat of food shortages,
cholera and violence. The rainy season and lack of
clean water resources are set to further aggravate the
cholera epidemic. The International Committee of the
Red Cross estimate that cholera cases could reach a
million by the end of the year is simply devastating.
On the security track, Ukrainian is disappointed by
the latest series of statements and provocative actions
by the Houthi leadership. The threat to attack Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates with ballistic
missiles is a clear disregard of international efforts to
resolve the conflict.
Only lasting peace will allow us to reduce the
sufferings of the Yemeni people. That is why the
continuing absence of dialogue between parties and

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
align myself in full with the statement that the observer
of the European Union will deliver later.
I wish to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
Jenča for his comprehensive briefing.
After three years of internal divisions that have
taken a toll on Palestinian unity, the most recent
talks between the Palestinian parties seem to mark an
important step towards resolving the all of Palestine
under a single, democratic and legitimate Authority.
Italy notes with interest the meetings that took place in
Cairo last week. We encourage both Palestinian parties
to work together in good faith in order to achieve the
long-needed reconciliation. At the same time, any
agreement will need to respect Israel’s right to exist and
its legitimate security concerns. I commend Egypt for
its mediation efforts, since all steps towards Palestinian
reconciliation are essential to pave the way to the
resumption of the Middle East peace process.
It is now high time that the living conditions of
the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip receive long-overdue
attention. We call on the Palestinian Authority to
ease the economic measures that apply to Gaza as the
discussions between the Palestinian factions proceed.
Consistent with our established position on the
Middle East peace process, including with regard to
the 1967 lines and to East Jerusalem, as set out in the
relevant conclusions of the Council of the European
Union, Italy continues to support all efforts aimed
at restoring a political horizon, such as the round of
talks headed by the United States Administration with
both parties. In this regard, we reiterate our conviction
that any viable plan must be aligned with the two-State
solution, which is the only achievable one.
In the midst of all of the diplomatic efforts being
made by the main partners and regional allies, it is
important that all parties abstain from any provocation
or initiative that might hinder the peace process. Italy

17-3328117/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

therefore reiterates its concern over the intensified
expansion of settlements in the West Bank, reinforced
by recent announcements and decisions by the Israeli
Government that also affect the city of Hebron. As a
genuine and close friend of Israel, we believe that those
decisions run counter to the two-State prospect and
undermine the chance of ensuring a future of peace and
security for the parties, as also reaffirmed by resolution
2334 (2016).
On the Palestinian side, we expect a clear
condemnation of all acts of violence, such as the one that
took place in Har Adar in September. In recent days a
great deal has been said about UNESCO in connection
with the discussion that we are having today. However,
we have also received good news from UNESCO. We
appreciate, for instance, the adoption by consensus of
the Palestinian resolution in UNESCO a few days ago on
the events of last year, and we encourage further efforts
in this regard to work for consensus in good faith.
In August, the Council approved the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) for one more year. Despite the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2373 (2017), during
the negotiations diverging views emerged on how
the peacekeeping mission should pursue its goal. As
a member of the Security Council and as UNIFIL’s
largest troop contributor, together with Indonesia,
Italy not only affirms its support for UNIFIL but also
calls on all international partners to acknowledge and
respect the differences between the specific tasks and
prerogatives of the Lebanese authorities and those of
its peacekeepers.
The recent deployment in the south of the Lebanese
rapid-intervention regiment is evidence of the
commitment of the Lebanese institutions to their own
responsibilities. Italy will cooperate with the Secretariat
and all relevant countries in the implementation of
resolution 2373 (2017) while ensuring that improving
the effectiveness of UNIFIL does not translate into
any change in the mission’s mandate. It also goes
without saying that an expanded UNIFIL operation
will require the mission’s budget to be maintained at
the current level.
Furthermore, the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF),
whose role in the national context is irreplaceable, will
also be able to cooperate more closely with UNIFIL
if they continue to receive the necessary support from
the international community. We therefore call on all
18/54

18/10/2017

partners to renew their commitment to assisting and
strengthening the LAF in every possible way. My
country is willing to host an international meeting to
advocate for broader donor support.
In conclusion, I would like to turn to the joint fight
against terrorism. In Iraq, important accomplishments
have been recorded. But freeing an area from the
control of terrorists is only as meaningful as the degree
of effort that we put into stabilizing the Iraqi territory.
To that end, both the international community and the
United Nations system will need to focus primarily on
humanitarian assistance and restoration of essential
services, so as to create conditions that will allow for
the free, safe and voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons. In the medium and long term, a
responsible approach to sustainable development will
be at the core of any strategy for reconciliation, along
with the inclusion of all sectors of society, so as to
prevent the resurgence of terrorism.
Finally, in Syria, the fall of Raqqa city, where until
recently the so-called Islamic State staged euphoric
parades, is also a welcome symbol of the collapsing
fortunes of Da’esh.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing. I thank also Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, who
is absent from today’s meeting, for his ongoing efforts
in favour of the peace process in the Middle East and of
its terms of reference. I thank him also for his continued
efforts to contain the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip, and for his consistent
encouragement of all Palestinian reconciliation efforts.
Over the past 70 years, the international community
has agreed that the two-State solution is the best and
most equitable solution to the Palestinian question.
However, the prospects for the implementation of such
a solution on the ground are dwindling by the day, and
Palestinian territories are being subjected to waves of
illegal settlement activity. I believe, therefore, that we
must rise up together to address these setbacks, which
threaten the life, safety and security of Palestinians and
Israelis alike.
The faltering two-State solution has created many
challenges for the Palestinian people, and frustration
has been rampant among Palestinians and Palestinian
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8072

factions, affecting their lives and their relations,
especially given that it has been 23 years since the
signing of the Oslo Accords, which called for the
establishment of a Palestinian State within five years.

so. The resolutions of the United Nations have never
imposed a solution on any party. They have, rather,
set a framework for a final settlement, based on direct
negotiations between the two parties.

However, despite these challenges, Egypt recently
succeeded in relaunching Palestinian reconciliation
efforts. The legitimate Palestinian Government has
returned to the Gaza Strip for the first time since 2007.
This is clear recognition of the unity of all Palestinians,
whether in the West Bank or in the Gaza Strip, under
a single leadership that represents them and speaks on
their behalf, a leadership that recognizes the State of
Israel and is committed to negotiations and peaceful
efforts as a way towards the two-State solution, despite
all the challenges and despite the Israeli incursions
into the territory of the future Palestinian State,
including Jerusalem.

In closing, I would like to reiterate our commitment
to working together with Palestinians and Israelis and
with all influential international Powers to reach a just
settlement to the Palestinian question.

As we work together with our Palestinian brothers
to seize the opportunity to reunify Palestinian
territories under a legitimate leadership, I call on the
international community, especially influential States,
to seize this historic opportunity and to salvage the
two-State solution through a comprehensive political
vision that eschews piecemeal, temporary or palliative
solutions, which have proved unsuccessful. I call on
them to recognize the risks and consequences resulting
from the failure of such a solution for the two peoples
and the region as a whole.
In addition, in line with the call for peace and
coexistence made by the President of Egypt in the
General Assembly (see A/72/PV.5), I call on Palestinians
and Israelis to realize that their two peoples will
continue to live on that sacred land and that neither will
go away. They must choose to either live and coexist
based on equal rights and obligations or to succumb to
one-upmanships and extreme positions that might serve
certain parties one day, but would force the two peoples
to suffer the dire consequences of illogic, incitement
and hatred.
A settlement is not impossible, as some like
to say. The resolutions of the United Nations since
1948, especially those of the Security Council, have
established detailed parameters for a settlement based on
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Those resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which
is considered a historic Initiative, endorsed by the
Council in resolution 2334 (2016), prove that we can
solve all issues only if there is a serious intention to do

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jenča
and, through him, Special Coordinator Mladenov for
all of their work.
From the outset, I would like to make clear, as
we approach the centenary of the Balfour Declaration
next month, that the United Kingdom understands
and respects the sensitivities many have about the
Declaration and the events that have taken place in the
region since 1917. The United Kingdom is proud to have
played a role in helping to make a Jewish homeland a
reality, and we continue to support the principle of such
a homeland and the modern State of Israel.
Just as we fully support the modern State of
Israel as a Jewish homeland, we also fully support the
objective of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State.
The occupation is a continued impediment to securing
the political rights of the non-Jewish communities in
Palestine. Let us remember that there are two halves
to the Declaration — the second half of which has not
been fulfilled. There is therefore unfinished business.
With the approaching centenary, we believe that it
is important to look forward, not backward — forward
towards establishing security and justice for both
Israelis and Palestinians through a lasting peace. We
believe that the way to achieve that lasting peace is
through a negotiated two-State solution that leads to
a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and
sovereign Palestinian State, based on 1967 borders with
agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital
of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic
settlement for refugees.
We continue to watch developments on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation closely. Our longstanding policy on reconciliation is that we support
the Palestinian people in realizing self-determination
through an independent, sovereign and unified
Palestinian State encompassing the West Bank
and Gaza.

17-3328119/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We continue to closely monitor the situation in Gaza
and we welcome Egyptian efforts on this important
issue. We also join the Secretary-General in welcoming
the Palestinian Authority’s return to Gaza on 2 October
and the agreement to allow the Palestinian Authority to
resume administrative control. That is an important and
positive step towards the full restoration of Palestinian
Authority control and effective governance in Gaza.
We encourage those involved in the talks to engage
in good faith so as to allow the Palestinian Authority
to fully resume its Government functions and ensure
compliance with the Quartet principles. Our policy on
Hamas remains clear — Hamas must renounce violence,
recognize Israel and accept previous agreements. We
expect now to see credible movement towards those
conditions, which remain the benchmark against which
its intentions should be judged. We call on those in the
region with influence over Hamas to encourage it to
take these steps.
In support of the two-State solution, we must
continue to press the parties on the need to refrain
from actions that make peace efforts more difficult.
We are clear that the repellent phenomena of terrorism
and incitement pose a grave threat to the two-State
solution and must end. We strongly condemn the use
of racist, hateful and anti-Semitic language. It is right
that we continue to urge against any type of action
and language that makes it more difficult to achieve a
culture of peaceful coexistence.
Settlement construction is a significant barrier
to achieving the negotiated agreement we seek and
seriously threatens the physical viability of the twoState solution. We have witnessed an unacceptable
acceleration of settlements activity throughout 2017,
both in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. To date,
Israel has advanced plans over 13,000 settlement
units — the highest number since 1992. Reports also
indicate that a significant number of units may be
advanced this week, and new settlement construction
permits were approved in Hebron for the first time in
15 years. We condemn each of those illegal acts in the
strongest terms.
Moving briefly to Iran, as we have heard, President
Trump has taken the decision not to recertify Iran’s
compliance with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) to Congress. The United Kingdom stands
committed to the JCPOA and its full implementation
by all sides. We believe that preserving the JCPOA is
20/54

18/10/2017

in our shared national security interest. The nuclear
deal was the culmination of 13 years of diplomacy, and
was a major step towards ensuring that Iran’s nuclear
programme is not diverted for military purposes. The
JCPOA was unanimously endorsed by the Council in
resolution 2231 (2015).
The International Atomic Energy Agency has
repeatedly confirmed Iran’s compliance with the
JCPOA through its long-term verification and
monitoring programme. Therefore, we encourage
careful consideration of the implications to the security
of the United States and its allies before taking any steps
that might undermine the JCPOA, such as reimposing
sanctions on Iran that were lifted under the agreement.
As we work to preserve the JCPOA, we share
concerns about Iran’s ballistic missile programme
and regional activities that also affect our security
interests. We stand ready to take further appropriate
measures to address these issues in close cooperation
with the United States and all relevant partners. We
also look to Iran to engage in constructive dialogue to
stop destabilizing actions and work towards negotiated
solutions. We believe that approach entails the best path
to regional security.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
in the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
We are meeting today only a few days after
the signing of the intra-Palestinian agreement, an
encouraging development that we believe may be able
to promote Palestinian unity and reconciliation. We
appreciate Egypt’s role in facilitating the signing of
the agreement and are grateful for its noble efforts.
We hope that the agreement’s timely and effective
implementation will be instrumental in enabling
the Palestinian Authority to return to Gaza and help
to improve the livelihoods of Palestinians there by
addressing the humanitarian situation, which continues
to be a source of major concern. In that regard, we take
note of the discussions between the Secretary-General
and the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process with the Palestinian leadership. There can be
no question that the continued support and engagement
of the international community, particularly the United
Nations, will be crucial to the agreement’s success.
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As Mr. Jenča said, the implementation of the Cairo
agreement will also be critical to the efforts to find a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
We take note of the high-level engagements made
recently to facilitate a resumption of direct negotiations
between the two parties. Needless to say, there are
serious difficulties to be tackled in order to facilitate a
credible political process aimed at a two-State solution,
which is the only viable option for ending the longstanding Israeli-Palestinian dispute, and also the only
viable way to ensure that security and justice for all
can become a reality. But that is not impossible if the
necessary political will is there. The same well-known
obstacles to ending the impasse and achieving peace
persist, with no movement forward to speak of, in a
situation that is hardly conducive to sustainable peace
and security for both countries. In the meantime, the
quest for justice keeps being postponed, with all that
that implies. Without genuine efforts to remove those
obstacles, there can be no meaningful progress towards
realizing a two-State solution.
We are also meeting at a time when the fight against
terrorism in the region is making progress, with Da’esh
losing a lot of ground in both Syria and Iraq. That has
come at an enormous price, and everything should
be done to preserve the recent gains that have been
made, which is why it is important for the international
community to remain focused on fighting terrorism in
the region and to coordinate its efforts so as to further
consolidate the gains and achieve lasting stability.
What is becoming increasingly self-evident is the
degree to which the various challenges that we face in
the Middle East, while seeming self-contained, are in
fact interrelated, thereby demanding a peacemaking
approach that is sensitive to their complexity so that
security and justice for all can be assured. The Security
Council must play an important role in all of that or
recognize its failure to discharge its responsibilities.

S/PV. 8072

Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the landfor-peace formula and the Quartet road map. We echo
other delegations in emphasizing the importance of
ending Israel’s illegal settlement activities, which are
clearly not helping to bring peace to the region and are
violations of international law. We also believe that
violence is counterproductive and will lead only to
further confrontations between the parties.
We underscore the importance of achieving
intra-Palestinian unity, and in that regard welcome the
results of last week’s talks in Cairo and acknowledge
Egypt’s commendable efforts as a bridge-builder. We
hope that the Palestinian reconciliation agreement will
contribute to the resumption and further advancement
of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.
On the humanitarian and economic fronts,
Kazakhstan is particularly concerned about the grave
situation in Palestine. The checkpoints imposed on Gaza
only aggravate the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation and diminish the prospects for peace. It will
be important to ensure that all the necessary measures
are taken to improve Palestinians’ economic situation,
as outlined by the Secretary-General during his recent
visit to Israel, Jordan and the Gaza Strip. We believe
that such steps will make a major contribution to the
security of both sides and create a platform conducive
to peace negotiations. We therefore call for economic
concessions to the Palestinians to be finalized in order
to ease daily living conditions in the territory of the
Palestinian Authority.

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his comprehensive update.

We welcome the progress made by the Government
of Lebanon with its new electoral law, enacted by
Parliament on 16 June, and hope the changes will
ensure the holding of the free and fair parliamentary
elections planned for May 2018. The Lebanese Armed
Forces continue to serve their people with commitment,
and their success against the threat of terrorism is well
recognized. They and the country’s security apparatus
should be actively supported both technically and
financially, including under the umbrella of the
International Support Group for Lebanon.

Kazakhstan’s position on the Middle East peace
process remains clear and unchanged. We support
negotiations aimed at a two-State solution and urge for
their resumption, as soon as possible and preferably in
a bilateral format without preconditions. The ultimate
goal should be the restoration and promotion of the
peace process, in accordance with the relevant Security

Concerning Libya, Kazakhstan welcomes the
United Nations action plan for resuming an inclusive
political process facilitated and led by the United
Nations, which was presented by Special Representative
Salamé at a high-level event on Libya on 20 September.
We are of the view that the Libyan Political Agreement
remains the only viable framework to end the political

17-3328121/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

crisis, and that all international efforts to bring about an
inclusive political dialogue among Libyans should be
consolidated under the leadership of the United Nations.
On Yemen, we are deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and cholera
epidemic in the country. Last week in this Chamber
(see S/PV.8066) we heard about the horrific numbers
of the humanitarian crisis, which is an entirely manmade one. If we are to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe
and large-scale famine, effective strategies must be
established, including a cessation of hostilities and a
ceasefire, unhindered humanitarian access and the
launch of a sustainable political agreement.
Lastly, Kazakhstan hopes that the efforts of
the sponsors of the peace process, together with
international and regional organizations and all the
parties to the negotiations, can lead to a lasting and just
peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing.
The Palestinian question has been lingering for
many years and is the crux of the crisis in the Middle
East and one of the underlying causes of the problems
in the region. Palestine and Israel are neighbours that
share the same fate. Accelerating a political settlement
of the Palestinian question through dialogue and
consultation is in the fundamental interests of both
the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples and will help to
bring about durable peace and stability in the region.
The Palestinian-Israeli situation is currently very
fragile. The conflict around the issue of settlements
is still acute, and the humanitarian situation in Gaza
is grave. The Palestinian people are demanding to
see their historical wrongs corrected and to be able
to exercise their inalienable national rights. The
international community should ramp up its sense of
urgency and agitate for a political settlement of the
Palestinian question.
First, it should resolutely push for a two-State
solution, which is the foundation for any political
settlement process. Such a solution best fits the regional
realities, is most widely recognized internationally and
has been called for in General Assembly resolutions.
The parties concerned should work diligently to resume
the peace talks and seek a speedy, just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Palestinian issue, based on
22/54

18/10/2017

the relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle
of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Secondly, we should adhere to the concept of
common, integrated, cooperative and sustainable
security and eliminate all the negative factors impeding
the resumption of peace talks between Israel and
Palestine. In that regard, China calls for the effective
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The parties
concerned should translate their words into action and
demonstrate their full willingness to engage in peace
talks, build mutual trust and cease all actions that
undermine the possibility of a two-State solution. It
will be essential to halt all settlement activities in the
occupied territory and put an end to the closure of Gaza.
Measures to improve the livelihood of the Palestinian
people and to prevent violence against innocent
civilians should be bolstered as soon as possible.
Thirdly, we should further coordinate the efforts
of the international community and foster synergy for
peace. China supports all efforts aimed at promoting
peace between Palestine and Israel. The international
community has been increasing its focus on the
question of Palestine for some time now, and the
parties concerned have, from different perspectives, at
different levels and with different emphases, promoted
the resumption of peace talks by actively engaging in
various diplomatic activities.
Progress has recently has been made with
intra-Palestine reconciliation, which should help to
promote unity within Palestine, the resumption of
peace talks, Palestine’s achievement of independent
statehood and peaceful coexistence between Palestine
and Israel. China appreciates Egypt’s efforts to promote
such reconciliation. We hope that the international
community will build on the progress made and further
strengthen its coordination in order to take steps to
promote peace through joint engagement as soon
as possible.
China is a staunch supporter of the Palestinian
people’s just cause and an active mediator for peace
between Israel and Palestine. We firmly support the
concept of a two-State solution and the establishment
of a Palestinian State with full sovereignty and
independence, on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. China will use President
Xi Jinping’s four-point proposal as its general guide for
settling the Palestinian question and will work with the
other parties involved for its political settlement.
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

China continues to believe that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iran nuclear
question has helped to defuse the Iranian nuclear crisis
and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons as its cornerstone. It is an important result for
international security, governance and multilateralism
and a good example of the effectiveness of addressing
difficult issues through diplomatic and political means.
We hope the parties concerned will work together
to maintain and safeguard the Plan of Action as a
historic achievement, and that they will honour their
respective obligations under the agreement, ensure
its comprehensive execution and implementation and
settle their differences appropriately through dialogue
and consultation in a concerted effort to preserve peace
and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, and I thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, for his detailed briefing.
When we are at the end of the list of speakers, I
always find that a previous speaker has used some idea
or expression that I wanted to use. In this case, my
dear colleague the Ambassador of Japan started with
the exact opening sentence that I wanted. This is the
last time that Uruguay, as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council, will take the floor on this topic.
We plan to return to the Council for the period 20342035, 17 years from now. We hope that by that time,
when we return to the Security Council, we will see
a peaceful and democratic Middle East whose peoples
are living together and cooperating in solidarity,
regardless of their pasts and their religions, united in
enjoying a decent life in which their human rights are
fully exercised and prioritized.
Until then, however, we have to live with a reality
that shows no prospects whatever for improvement.
On the contrary, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has
continued, month after month, as the most significant
conflict affecting the region. However, in recent years,
in addition to that long-unresolved dispute, armed
conflicts and humanitarian crises of enormous impact
in Syria, Iraq and Yemen have emerged and have
totally destabilized the region, with unavoidable global
consequences. Perhaps one day the Council will have
the political will to prevent such catastrophes more

S/PV. 8072

effectively and tackle their root causes. As that is not yet
possible, we have to play our part by attempting to stop
these crises as quickly as possible and design effective
processes for providing humanitarian assistance and
political solutions to them.
The Council’s history with regard to the Middle
East has not exactly been a series of success stories.
Indeed, it has encountered serious difficulties thanks
to multiple factors that include non-compliance with
Council resolutions by the Governments of the region
and the other groups they are dealing with, as well as
ongoing violations of international law, in terms both
of international humanitarian law and the human rights
of the populations involved, who have already suffered
too much. However, that should not lead us to throw up
our hands in despair but rather to redouble our efforts
to achieve our objectives.
Just one day after our most recent meeting on the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict (see S/PV.8011), terrorism
claimed the lives of three Israeli victims who fell at
the hands of a Palestinian attacker. As we have done
on previous occasions, we firmly condemn that attack.
Violence will never lead to peace; it will only make
it more difficult to achieve a two-State solution. It is
worrying that the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, confirmed at the beginning of
the month that he will continue to pay the families of
terrorists. Once again, we reiterate our condemnation
of incitement to violence and its glorification.
We also categorically reject the Israeli leadership’s
explicit support for the settlement policy, which
continues to move full steam ahead, despite the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) and the persistent
remonstrations of Mr. Mladenov and the international
community. We emphasize the full legitimacy of
resolution 242 (1967) and the principle that seizing
land by force is unacceptable. We emphasize that the
settlements are illegal under international law and
constitute a serious obstacle to peace and a two-State
solution. The settlement policy is also supported by
constant demolitions of Palestinian housing in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. Such actions clearly
do not contribute to defusing tensions. There are other
necessary gestures and measures that we have not seen
so far.
As it has done since the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), in 1947, Uruguay
reaffirms its unfailing support for the right of Israel

17-3328123/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Palestine to live in peace, within secure and
recognized borders, in a atmosphere of restored
cooperation free from any threat or act damaging to
peace. We also reiterate our support for a solution based
on the existence of two independent States, which we
firmly believe is the only option that will enable Israel
and Palestine to peacefully coexist. In that regard,
Uruguay once again points out that it is essential that
direct negotiations between the two parties be resumed.
If that is to be done, the current trends on the ground
must be reversed, or it will be extremely difficult for
the Palestinians to consolidate the territory of their
State. We regret the fact that no progress has been made
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), almost
10 months after its adoption.
We thank and commend the Arab Republic of Egypt
for its efforts leading to the signing on 12 October of
a reconciliation agreement between the Palestinian
groups Hamas and Fatah, which is an important step
towards achieving Palestinian unity. In that context,
we commend the return of the Palestinian Authority’s
control over the Gaza Strip after a decade of absence.
Palestine’s reunification under a single, legitimate
and democratic Government is essential to addressing
the aspirations of its people and enabling it to
substantially improve living conditions in Gaza, whose
worrying situation could deteriorate into a serious
humanitarian crisis at any moment. For the agreement
to be successfully implemented, its measures should be
supported by agreements on security, the disarming of
Hamas and the renunciation of policies of violence and
the destruction of Israel as declared objectives.
I would like to briefly mention the conflict in Syria.
While the Astana peace process has led to a decrease
in violence in some areas of the country, September
was one of the most deadly months of the year in terms
of victims, with more than 3,000 deaths. We are still
witnessing sieges, starvation, indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, the use of chemical weapons, terrorist attacks
and gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
We are very pleased with the recent progress in the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and other terrorist organizations. However, we reiterate
that only a Syrian-led political transition process,
mediated by the United Nations in accordance with the
road map outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), will make
it possible to end this horrible war.
24/54

18/10/2017

We should take a moment to discuss the situation
in Yemen. The armed conflict and paralysed peace
process continue to cause the Yemeni people great
suffering. The violence must end immediately. Both
parties to the conflict should return to the negotiating
table without further delay and resume dialogue under
the auspices of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, without preconditions and in good
faith. They must agree to end the armed conflict.
It is also vital for countries that have influence over
the parties concerned to collaborate in the quest for a
peaceful solution to the conflict. The devastating war
has left the world’s poorest Arab country on the brink
of humanitarian collapse and famine, and enduring a
cholera epidemic that is wreaking additional havoc.
Yemen’s people are desperately seeking the help of the
international community. Who will restore the lives of
these thousands of children, men and women, young and
old, or heal the damage caused by such a bloodthirsty
conflict? We reiterate that those responsible for the
abhorrent atrocities committed in Yemen — both those
who pull the trigger and those providing logistical
assistance — must sooner or later be brought to justice.
With regard to Iraq and the possible destabilizing
effects of the recent referendum on independence
in Kurdistan, we emphasize that Iraq’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity are paramount. The
progress made in the fight against terrorism must be
consolidated. We cannot permit those achievements
to be jeopardized by the possibility of sectarianism
dividing the country once again. Iraq must move
forward on its path to peace and stability.
Lastly, let me briefly mention of the situation in
Lebanon. In August, the Council renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon with
the primary goal of strengthening its role and enabling
it to have a more proactive and visible presence on
the ground in order to detect possible threats to peace
and stability along the Blue Line and in the south of
Lebanon. In the coming year it will be essential to count
on an ongoing assessment of the mission’s capabilities
and weaknesses so that it can identify ways to fulfil
its mandate more effectively and avoid any incidents in
such a sensitive area.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of France.
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to begin by thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his very
informative briefing. The perspective he has presented
reminds us of a reality to which France has always tried
to draw the Security Council’s attention: in a region that
has been shaken by major crises for years, the oldest
conflict in the Middle East has still not been resolved.
Time has not made the Israeli-Palestinian conflict less
dangerous. Far from being an acceptable status quo, the
situation on the ground has been deteriorating every
day, particularly thanks to the Israeli settlements,
which create circumstances capable of degenerating
into a genuine crisis at any time. That has been a regular
occurrence in the past few years, including recently in
relation to the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Year after year, the
notion of peace has faded in people’s words and minds
as successive generations of Palestinians and Israelis
have lost all hope of peaceful coexistence. Nor have
the increasing numbers of regional crises marginalized
or trivialized the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. They
have increased its potential for destabilization and
made its resolution more necessary than ever. Because
of its gravity, its central position in the Middle East,
its symbolic dimension and its place in the collective
imagination, the conflict has a profoundly destabilizing
influence whose scope goes far beyond the borders of
Israel and the Palestinian territories. Any escalation of
the conflict carries with it the risk of uncontrollable
consequences in the region, and its persistence creates
a platform for recruitment to the terrorist groups that
are active in the region, which we should be especially
wary of.
We must come to grips with the fact that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict will not resolve itself on its own. It
will not be settled through the inertia of its principal
actors or by way of illusory shortcuts. The only avenue
is the difficult path towards peace based on mutual
respect and negotiation. For while the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the oldest of those that have torn the Middle
East apart, it is also the only one whose solution is fully
understood and agreed upon within the international
community. Despite the constant deterioration of the
situation on the ground, the parameters of a future
agreement have not changed. They still require two
States living in peace and security within secure and
recognized frontiers, drawn on the basis of the pre1967 borders, with a mutually agreed-on exchange of
land, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States and
including an agreed, realistic, just and lasting solution
for Palestinian refugees.

S/PV. 8072

There is no alternative to a two-State solution
and the vision of a region with two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side. The destinies
of the two peoples are intertwined. Neither State can
sustainably satisfy its national aspirations by denying
those of the other. But the colonization of the Palestinian
territories is imposing a different reality on the ground.
It is expanding at a pace unequalled since 1967, and
ultimately threatens to create a one-State reality in
which two citizenship regimes coexist, an unequal
situation that would therefore be both unacceptable on
principle and produce disastrous consequences.
Violence is already recurring on the ground, as
was shown by the attack that left three dead at the
entrance of a West Bank settlement towards the end of
September. To be clear, we firmly condemn violence
and every kind of incitement to violence, which is
also required under resolution 2334 (2016). In an
already volatile environment, further settlement risks
increasing tension.
With nearly 600,000 settlers in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank, we are approaching the point of
no return. In this year alone, Israeli authorities have
approved the construction of 12,000 new housing
units — three times more than last year. In the past
few days, the construction of new housing in the centre
of Hebron was approved for the first time in 15 years.
Yesterday, 1,300 new housing units were approved in
the West Bank, the majority of those in settlements
deep into the West Bank, which is far from compatible
with a future peace agreement. Just today, the approval
of more than 1,300 additional units was announced.
Faced with such developments, France’s position
is clear. We condemn the construction of settlements,
which is not only illegal under international law, as
recalled in resolution 2334 (2016), but is also dangerous,
because it destroys the possibility of a two-State
solution, both politically and on the ground. Moreover,
from a practical point of view, we are implementing
a differentiation policy between Israel, with which
we hope to continue and deepen our discussions, and
the occupied territories. Within the framework of the
European Union, that approach is reflected in provisions
that exclude Israeli settlements from the benefits of the
agreements that we have signed with Israel, as well
as in specific recommendations on identifying the
origin of goods from those settlements. Let us be clear,
however, that distinction, which is also called for under
resolution 2334 (2016), is in no way related, either

17-3328125/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

directly or indirectly, to any kind of boycott. I reiterate
once again that France will remain extremely firm in its
refusal and condemnation of appeals to boycott Israel.
Beyond the violence that we are already seeing on
the ground, which we condemn, settlement activity
presents a double impasse — for the Palestinians that
constitutes the failure of their aspirations to become
a State, and for the Israelis the ruin of their national
democratic project.
Finally, while preserving the continuity of the
Palestinian territories is essential for a future agreement
on their final status, Palestinian political and territorial
unity is equally as important for such an agreement to
be viable. For the past decade, we have called on the
Palestinians to end the division between Gaza and the
West Bank and once again become unified, under the
authority of President Mahmoud Abbas and within the
framework of the principles endorsed by the Palestine
Liberation Organization: non-violence, the recognition
of Israel and respect for signed agreements.
The agreement signed in Cairo on 12 October by
Fatah and Hamas, preceded by a visit by the Palestinian
Authority Government to Gaza 10 days earlier, is an
encouraging development in that direction. That result
could not have been reaached without the considerable
and continuing efforts made by Egypt, which we would
like to commend. The discussions under way should
enable the Palestinian Authority to fully exercise its
prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in the area of
security. It must also put an end to the energy crisis
as quickly as possible, of which the population of
Gaza is the only victim. Finally, through appropriate
security arrangements, it must facilitate the lifting of
the blockade imposed on the people of Gaza.

18/10/2017

new diplomatic effort will help to reignite a dynamic of
negotiation between the parties, within the framework
of international law and with the objective of the twoState solution. As a friend of the Palestinians and the
Israelis, France cannot resign itself to a situation that
leaves either party at an impasse. It is high time to put
an end to that.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I would remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate their texts in writing and deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on today’s open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned countries at this quarterly
open debate on a topic to which we have historically
attached particular importance — the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
First of all, we would like to convey our gratitude
to Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his valuable briefing.

France is a friend to both Palestinians and Israelis.
That is why we must speak plainly with them and
tirelessly call on them to return to the negotiating
table. In that regard, we want to continue to work with
our main partners. With our partners in the European
Union, we remain engaged to help resume negotiations
by using all of our collective tools. France associates
itself with the statement to be delivered shortly on
behalf of the European Union.

Against the backdrop of the ongoing critical situation
and diminishing prospects for peace, the Non-Aligned
Movement takes this opportunity to reaffirm its
abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
unwavering support for their just cause, while renewing
its commitment to further strengthen and coordinate
efforts to promote a just, lasting, comprehensive and
peaceful solution to the Palestinian question in all its
aspects, including the achievement of justice and the
rights of the Palestinian people — an objective that
remains a priority on the Movement’s agenda.

As for the region, the Arab Peace Initiative remains
an essential framework for making peace with the
Palestinians the first step towards Israel’s regional
integration, which will benefit all. We hope that the
commitment of the United States Administration in its

The principled positions of the Movement in
relation to the question of Palestine were clearly
reaffirmed almost a month ago, on 19 September,
when the Ministerial Committee of the Non-Aligned
Movement on Palestine issued a political declaration

26/54

17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of support and solidarity with the Palestinian people,
which was later endorsed by consensus by the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Movement.
Moreover, the member States of the Movement
reaffirm that the ongoing Israeli occupation and the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole continue to pose a
serious threat to international peace and security, which
requires urgent attention and a solution, in accordance
with international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the United
Nations itself. In that regard, the Movement stands
ready to contribute to the achievement of a just, lasting
and peaceful solution, and we call for the intensification
of international and regional efforts in support of that
goal, while recalling the responsibilities of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly in that regard, as
was most recently reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016),
which was wholeheartedly welcomed and supported by
the Movement.
We believe that the resolution provides the
most viable path, setting forth the requirements and
parameters for a just solution that would safeguard
the two-State solution along the 1967 lines and create
the necessary conditions to end the occupation,
justly resolve the conflict in all its aspects and make
Palestinian-Israeli peace and security a reality. In
addition, the Movement continues to call for the
resolution to be fully respected and implemented,
while stressing that it remains central to redressing
the situation on the ground, de-escalating tensions and
fostering an appropriate environment for the pursuit
of peace. In that regard, we reiterate the need for a
substantive written report to be presented regarding the
implementation of the resolution, in order to support
the Council’s duties and ensure proper documentation
of the implementation of the resolution’s provisions,
especially in the light of Israel’s continued disregard
of the Security Council and its violation of its legally
binding resolutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its grave
concern regarding recent developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. In
particular, the Movement is concerned about the
ongoing, escalating policies and measures by Israel,
the occupying Power, aimed at expanding its illegal
settlements campaign and to continue to consolidate
its half-century of invasion and occupation of
Palestinian land and its violation of the rights of the
Palestinian people.

S/PV. 8072

Rather than ceasing its violations, reversing the
negative trends on the ground and demonstrating its
commitment to the two-State solution on the basis
of the pre-1967 lines, as demanded by the Security
Council and the international community as a whole,
Israel continues to act with contempt for the Council
and in breach of its legal obligations. In that regard,
member States of the Movement strongly condemn the
recent provocative decisions of Israel, the occupying
Power, to proceed with its settlement activities in grave
breach of international law and of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Moreover, we are alarmed by and deeply deplore the
flagrant contempt of Israel, the occupying Power, for
the unequivocal decision by the Security Council in that
regard, which clearly reaffirmed that Israel’s settlement
activities have no legal validity and that they constitute
a flagrant violation of international law. That resolution
also calls on Israel to immediately and completely cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and to fully respect
all of its legal obligations, including under the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
We must also once again warn of the high risk for
further deterioration and destabilization, as witnessed
recently in occupied East Jerusalem due to provocative
and illegal Israeli actions in the Old City and at
Haram Al-Sharif, which houses the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
including attempts to undermine the historic status quo
at the holy site, which dramatically raised tensions and
inflamed religious sensitivities. Those practices must
stop in order, among other things, to ensure Palestinian
freedom of access and worship, as well as to ensure full
respect for the sanctity of all the holy sites and to avert
any further destabilization.
The situation in Gaza continues to elicit great
concern for the Movement, in particular the grave
humanitarian situation. In that regard, the Movement
reiterates its call for the complete lifting of the more
than 10-year-long Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip,
while also stressing that the crisis in Gaza must
be comprehensively addressed in accordance with
international law, including humanitarian law and
human rights law, and in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions in the context of the overall
situation of the continuation of the illegitimate,
belligerent Israeli foreign occupation of Palestinian
territory since 1967, including East Jerusalem, and

17-3328127/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the unequivocal calls for an end to a half-century
of occupation.
Moreover, the Non-Aligned Movement welcomes
recent steps being taken towards Palestinian
reconciliation, including the signing of the unity
agreement between the Palestinian Authority and
Hamas on 12 October, and expresses its full and resolute
support for efforts aimed at ensuring Palestinian unity
and the effective functioning of a Palestinian national
consensus government in Gaza.
Next month will mark another sombre anniversary
for the question of Palestine: the seventieth anniversary
of the General Assembly’s decision to split Mandated
Palestine via its adoption of resolution 181 (II), of
29 November 1947. In that regard, the member States of
the Movement reiterate their calls for the intensification
of international efforts aimed at achieving, without
further delay, an end to the Israeli occupation that began
in 1967 and a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution, while reiterating the Movement’s readiness to
cooperate and support all relevant efforts in line with
the decisions taken during the seventeenth Summit of
the Non-Aligned Movement on Margarita Island.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries reaffirms
that all measures and actions taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, such as its illegal decision of
14 December 1981, which purports to alter the legal,
geographical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, in addition
to Israel’s measures to apply its jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. In that regard, in line with our principled
position, we demand once again that Israel abide by
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In addition member States of the Movement
emphasize the need for Israel to withdraw from all
Lebanese territories, including the Sheba’a farms land,
the Kfar Shuba Hills and the Lebanese part of Ghajar
Village, up until behind the Blue Line, in accordance
with the relevant international resolutions, and in
particular resolution 1701 (2006).
In conclusion, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries avails itself of this opportunity to reiterate
its appeal to the States Members of the Organization
to redouble current efforts aimed at overcoming the
continued financial shortfalls of the United Nations
28/54

18/10/2017

Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East with a view to ensuring adequate, sufficient,
predictable and sustained funding for the Agency for
the duration of its mandate so it can fully meet the
needs of Palestinian refugees and thereby fulfil is
humanitarian mission. In that regard, we underscore
the need to continue providing political, economic
and humanitarian support to assist the Palestinian
people and to bolster their resilience and efforts aimed
at achieving their legitimate national aspirations,
including their inalienable right to self-determination
and freedom in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in French): How
many Security Council meetings have been dedicated
to the situation in my region since I took office as the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon in 2007? How
many times have we witnessed the deterioration of
peace prospects in the Middle East despite so many
good intentions, including the commendable efforts
of France?
I have watched closely, and often with indignation,
the growing feelings of injustice and disappointment
fuelled by three deadly wars in Gaza, an unprecedented
intensification of the occupation and a plethora of
initiatives for negotiations that would never come to
pass. All that is in addition to the underlying wounded
memory that seems increasingly difficult to heal and
that leads to the sad radicalization of minds. Despite
this lugubrious reality, we must not fail to welcome the
Palestinian reconciliation agreement reached last week,
which rightly revives a certain hope. In that regard,
it is also appropriate to thank Egypt for its sustained
mediation efforts.
Yet how can that hope be translated into reality
when the Israeli authorities continue their relentless
pursuit of colonization, which, it should be recalled,
is illegal under international law? Simply note Israel’s
approval of new construction in Hebron, a first in
15 years. That should be resolutely condemned by
the Council without further delay. That expansionist
policy, which has lasted more than half a century, was
summarized by Ariel Sharon in the following terms:
“Everybody has to move, run and grab as many
hilltops as they can to enlarge the settlements;
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8072

because everything we take now will stay ours.
Everything we do not grab will go to them”.

we again call upon the Council to act without further
delay to compel Israel to fulfil its responsibilities.

There is no need to repeat that, as long as the Security
Council remains a prisoner of its inability to put an end
to those flagrant violations, we will move further away
from the two-State solution, with the greatest contempt
for the relevant resolutions adopted by this organ.

With regard to Syria, Lebanon welcomes the
considerable reduction in violence since the signing
of the memorandum on the creation of de-escalation
zones last May in Astana. We support the efforts of the
co-sponsors of the process to maintain the ceasefire and
facilitate humanitarian access throughout Syria. The
international community must also consolidate progress
on the ground and support the efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura to resume negotiations in Geneva
in order to reach a political solution to the crisis,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The solution must take into account the aspirations
of the Syrian people to live in peace and dignity in a
sovereign and unified country. That will pave the way
for a viable reconstruction process and for millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons to return to
their homes.

Before turning to Lebanon, with your indulgence,
Madam President, I would like to remind the
downtrodden Palestinian people, in this difficult time,
of these words from General de Gaulle:
“[a]t the end of our sorrow, there is the greatest
glory of the world, that of the men who did not
give in”.
As for Lebanon, my Government remains deeply
committed to the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). In that regard, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon has demonstrated that it is carrying out its
thorny mission, and we reiterate our full confidence
in it. Its mission is all the more important because the
environment remains exacting. Not one day passes
without Israel violating my country’s sovereignty, or its
leaders bombarding it with incessant threats, which is
in direct violation of the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006). I would like to recall that those violations and
repeated threats have been duly recorded in letters
sent by the Lebanese Mission to the Security Council.
It is high time that the Council shoulder its onerous
responsibility and ensure that the rules and principles
of international law are upheld in order to put an end to
such acts.
Could the Council not at least swiftly condemn
the unspeakable remarks of Naftali Bennet, Israeli
Minister of Education, who, after threatening to send
Lebanon back to the Middle Ages, now threatens to
attack “the infrastructure, the international airport
and the Government institutions” of my country?
I repeat that those remarks were made by Israel’s
Education Minister.
It has now been more than 10 years since the
General Assembly adopted a resolution, by an
overwhelming majority, calling upon Israel to shoulder
its responsibility and compensate my country for the oil
spill it caused in 2006 when it bombed the Jiyeh power
plant. My country has been treated unjustly. Peace and
security cannot be maintained if States are not held to
account for the damage they cause. It is in that spirit that

To conclude what could be my last statement as the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the Security
Council, I can only hope that the Council will finally,
and without delay, shoulder its responsibilities, as
outlined in the Charter of the United Nations, and
allow a genuine opportunity for fair and lasting peace
to be achieved.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Mauro Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in French): I
thank France for convening today’s meeting.
I will deliver an abridged version of my statement.
The full text of the statement will be available
for circulation.
We welcome new developments towards the political
reunification of the State of Palestine, in particular the
agreement signed in Cairo on 12 October and steps taken
to extend the authority of the Government of National
Consensus to the Gaza Strip. We encourage Palestinian
political groups to continue their dialogue. However,
we remain concerned about the continued expansion
of illegal settlements in the occupied territories and
about discussions on the amendment of the Basic Law:
Jerusalem, Capital of Israel, adopted by Israel in 1980
and negated by resolution 478 (1980). It is imperative
to avoid other unilateral actions that could impede the
peace process.

17-3328129/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/10/2017

Brazil reiterates its full commitment to the twoState solution, with Israel and Palestine living side
by side in peace and security, within internationally
recognized and mutually agreed boundaries and on
the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with East Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Palestine. We recall the
fundamental responsibility of the Council to support the
resumption of direct negotiations between the parties.

four de-escalation zones that emerged from the Astana
process. We must now ensure that efforts under way
to address the security dimension of the crisis lead to
tangible progress towards a political solution based
on resolution 2254 (2015). We welcome the ongoing
liberation of areas previously occupied by Da’esh in
eastern Syria, but underscore the imperative to respect
international humanitarian law in such offensives.

Brazil welcomes the Security Council’s decision to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We acknowledge the constructive
engagement of France and Italy in negotiations to
ensure the continuity of the essential elements of the
Force’s mandate. The international community must
fully appreciate UNIFIL’s contribution to the stability
of Lebanon. The Force’s Maritime Task Force has
played a valuable role in preventing arms trafficking
to non-State actors in Lebanon and in training the
Lebanese Naval Forces. It must continue to have the
means necessary to carry out its tasks. We hope that
the Council will continue to give its full support to
UNIFIL and take into consideration the views of the
Government of Lebanon and the troop-contributing
countries in its next mandate renewal.

In addition, with regard to the fight against terrorism,
we note an increase in the number of letters submitted
to the Security Council to justify the use of military
action for counter-terrorism purposes under Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations. It is essential that
those letters provide sufficient information concerning
attacks in which legitimate self-defence is invoked,
which will allow for proportionality and need for the
use of force to be assessed. To enhance transparency,
Brazil suggests that all such communications be listed
on the Security Council’s website. We note with interest
the ongoing discussions on measures to promote
reconstruction and economic recovery in Syria. It
is important to create conditions that allow for the
dignified voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Brazil is also concerned about the plight of
Syrian and Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. While
acknowledging the hospitality, generosity and spirit
of tolerance that permeates Lebanese democracy,
we underscore the need to strengthen international
cooperation in order to assist those people. It is vital
to provide funding for contingency plans drawn up by
multilateral agencies for use in the field; improve the
social and economic conditions of host communities;
promote refugee resettlement initiatives; and ensure
their right to return.

Finally, I would like to say a word about Iran. Brazil
joins with many other countries that support the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme. It is a solid multilateral framework, which
was legally adopted by resolution 2231 (2015) and
plays a key role in stabilizing the Middle East and in
implementing the non-proliferation regime.

Our country has done its part by hosting thousands
of refugees affected by the conflict in Syria. Our new
migration law will establish a humanitarian visa for
travel to Brazil, which will be granted to stateless
persons and nationals of countries plagued by instability,
armed conflict, disasters or serious violations of
human rights law or international humanitarian law.
We encourage other countries to take steps to host
refugees from conflicts in the Middle East and reduce
current pressure on nearby developing countries, such
as Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.
Turning now to the conflict in Syria, we welcome
the finalization of parameters for the implementation of
30/54

Brazil has long believed that the establishment
of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East would contribute to peace in the region.
We are adding to that traditional position a new legal
instrument for promoting a nuclear-free world — the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which
Brazil was the first country to sign. We encourage
all countries to accede to the Treaty, and we warmly
congratulate the International Campaign to Abolish
Nuclear Weapons, our partner in the process, on its
having been awarded the 2017 Nobel Peace Prize.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I convey
my delegation’s appreciation to the French presidency
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I align myself with the statement made on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Israeli occupation of Palestinian lands is
central to every conflict in the Middle East. That
injustice has continued for more than seven decades
and has been exacerbated by Israeli expansionism
and aggressive policies towards Palestinians and the
whole region. Attempts by the United States to exclude
the issue from the Security Council’s agenda serves
no other purpose than to ignore the suffering of the
Palestinian people resulting from Israeli suppression
and occupation — the most prolonged tragic situation,
supported by the United States in the Middle East.
The entirety of Israeli history begins with the illegal
occupation of Palestinian land and unchecked aggression
against its neighbours and other countries in the Middle
East — on at least 14 occasions since 1948. That regime
arrogantly and flagrantly continues to violate at least
86 Council resolutions, from resolution 54 (1948) to
2334 (2016). Those violations have taken place with
the total impunity that the regime continues to enjoy.
Israel also continues to flout all international regimes
governing weapons of mass destruction by refusing to
adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Biological Weapons Convention and the
Chemical Weapons Convention. The nuclear weapons
in the hands of the regime represent the most serious
threat to the security of every State in the Middle East.
Although the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
lands certainly is the main source of instability in the
Middle Ease, there are other contributors. Foreign
intervention, occupation and its consequent instability
and attempts to engineer societies in the Middle East
have created breeding grounds for terrorism, terrorists
and extremist groups. Those groups, which initially
received support from the United States and its allies,
have been transformed into the monsters that now
threaten those who once supported and created them.
The United States tries to give the wrong attribution
when it comes to the root causes of insecurity in the
Middle East. As our Supreme Leader emphasized only
today, we will not waste our time replying to rants of a
brute nature.
We have not neglected the serious crises affecting
the region, and, on numerous occasions, have proposed
plans to end armed conflicts. Unfortunately, almost

S/PV. 8072

every one of our proposals, including initiating a forum
for regional dialogue, has fallen on deaf ears. However,
those crises are perpetuated by those willing to spend
their dollars on beautiful American military equipment.
Military equipment and weapons targeting women and
children in Yemen are not beautiful. Beauty, rather, lies
in the eyes of the innocent children who are being killed.
I am most confident to say that no country has done
more than Iran in combating Da’esh in the region. If
we had hegemonic ambitions, the nuclear deal would
never have been reached. The new United States
Administration’s approach and the recent dangerous
strategy adopted with regard to the deal and Iran run
counter to the will of the international community.
We are witnessing today a United States that is more
isolated globally than ever before, while the goodfaith nature of Iran’s policies and positions has become
apparent to the international community.
In conclusion, with regard to the Middle East, I
should say that the right approach is not difficult to
find. It requires a willingness to engage and search
for peace and justice with regard to the long-standing
problem of the Palestinian issue in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first congratulate
France for once again raising this important issue
within the framework of an open debate of the Security
Council on the Middle East.
We also wish to align ourselves with the statement
made by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and that to be made by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. We also
thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Indonesia is pleased to welcome the landmark
agreement reached last week by the leaders of Hamas
and Fatah. We believe that a united Palestine will
further strengthen their struggle to achieve a peaceful
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through
a two-State solution. As a consistent advocate of the
Palestinian cause, Indonesia has always urged unity
among all Palestinians in order to enable them to
confront their common issues together. The agreement
is an essential step towards the full reunification of

17-3328131/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the West Bank and Gaza, and keeps alive prospects
for the peaceful emergence of a Palestinian State. We
appreciate Egypt’s role in that regard. The agreement
is of tremendous interest in Indonesia, where it
was warmly welcomed by all our people. Indonesia
commends the leadership of the Palestinian people and
celebrates Palestinian unity.
Indonesia once again reiterates its call upon
members of the international community to fulfil
their obligation to push for peace in the Middle East
by playing their due parts, just as the Palestinian
leadership did last week by coming together. That
call is of particular importance in the context of the
Security Council, in view of fulfilling its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
It has always been of grave concern to Indonesia
that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has needlessly
gone on for too long in the history of humankind, with
unhappy implications for generations of children who
have found it difficult to lead normal lives. We reiterate
that the time has come to end that conflict, while
recalling the pivotal adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
of December 2016, and once again calling for its full
implementation. In the resolution’s wisdom of casting
its vision upon the road to peace, the Council rejected
Israel’s establishment of settlements in Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967, while categorically
condemning them as illegal and a flagrant violation of
international law. Settlements continue to be a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.
We therefore express our dismay that, as of this
open debate, States Members of the United Nations have
not received a substantive report from the SecretaryGeneral, as stipulated by the resolution, detailing its
implementation. In effect, three of those quarterly
reports have yet to be forwarded.
My delegation recalls that, merely months
following the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), the
Government of Israel announced the construction of the
first new settlement in the West Bank in two decades.
That policy derailed the authority of the Council, in
particular with regard to the substance of resolution
2334 (2016). A failure by the United Nations to take
measures in its implementation and to report diligently
when expected at the due time can only serve to yield
to Israel misplaced confidence in the error of its ways
32/54

18/10/2017

and encourage it to continue to undermine the just and
lasting solution envisaged in the two-State solution.
On Yemen, Indonesia sees no other way to arrive at
a solution to the conflict except through a Yemeni-led
negotiation process, in which all the parties involved
participate in an inclusive, peaceful and democratic
manner. There is no military solution to the conflict.
The lack of concrete results in the peace process
continues to create suffering for Yemeni civilians,
causing great damage every day to the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, which is aggravated by famine and
the outbreak of cholera. Indonesia emphatically urges
the parties to return to the negotiating table in good
faith so as to ensure a peaceful settlement.
On Syria, Indonesia underscores that the Astana
process and other regional initiatives launched in
the recent months to end local hostilities have led to
a considerable reduction in the level of fighting in
the country, through the implementation of various
de-escalation zones. We underline the need to preserve
the unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. What is further needed is reconstruction and
rehabilitation, as well as to ensure the safety and wellbeing of civilians in Syria. Indonesia highly appreciates
the activities of the humanitarian personnel of the
United Nations stationed in Syria, namely, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
World Health Organization, as well as of the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent.
I would like to once again emphasize that Indonesia
will never waver from its commitment to supporting the
Palestinian struggle for independence as a true partner
in the efforts to find a peaceful solution to sustaining
peace in the Middle East. Nevertheless, I would like
to end by posing a question to the Chamber, namely,
How many more open debates do we need to have on
the issue of Palestine before there is progress on the
ground? Life is at stake.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the convening of this quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We are grateful for the valuable
briefing made by Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The treatment afforded to the sensitive issue of the
Palestinian question in a forum such as this usually leads
to actions on the ground that undermine the expected
two-State solution. The serious deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and the various terrorist
acts tend to be the focus of our attention in debates such
as this. On this occasion, however, we appreciate the
commitment to intra-Palestinian reconciliation agreed
to in recent days, under the auspices of Egypt, which
we hope will further the peace process between Israel
and Palestine. We hope that such agreement will make
it possible for the Government of National Consensus
to resume its responsibilities in the Gaza Strip and be
better able to meet the pressing humanitarian needs
of its population, particularly in the provision of basic
services. We also ohpe that it will lay the foundation for
the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, under the control of a legitimate and
democratic Palestinian Government. We furthermore
expect that the agreement, by having a positive impact
on security conditions, will pave the way for the
gradual elimination of restrictions on the movement of
goods and people to and from Gaza. For that purpose,
a definitive renunciation of the use of violence and
a recognition of the existence of the State of Israel
are imperative.
In that context, it is necessary to lend a renewed
sense of urgency to the efforts of the international
community to promote direct negotiations between the
parties in order to achieve the two-State solution — two
States living side by side in conditions of peace and
mutual recognition. In that regard, Peru encourages
and supports the more visible commitment being
undertaken by the Quartet, the renewed support for
the Arab Peace Initiative in Amman, the good offices
deployed by various European States, the efforts of the
United States and the very praiseworthy efforts of Egypt
in the name of peace. We also highlight the personal
commitment expressed by Secretary-General António
Guterres during his first official visit to the region of
helping the parties to resume meaningful negotiations.
Peru, a country committed to multilateralism and
the development of international law, attaches the
utmost importance to compliance with resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, such as resolution
2334 (2016), which calls upon Israel to cease its
settlement practices, demolition of homes and evictions
in the territories occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem. Peru notes with concern the reports provided

S/PV. 8072

by Mr. Mladenov regarding the intensification of those
practices throughout the year. Such practices seriously
endanger the territorial integrity of the Palestinian
State and make the two-State solution increasingly
distant. Moreover, in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016), we reiterate the call to all parties
directly involved to put an end to acts of violence,
human rights abuses and inflammatory rhetoric, which
exacerbate feelings and deepens resentment.
In that regard, Peru recognizes the inalienable right
of Israel to safeguard its own security and existence
by exercising legitimate self-defence, in accordance
with the principles of proportionality and lawfulness.
Since 1947, when Peru was part of the United Nations
Special Committee on Palestine, we have maintained
an unchanging and clear position on the issue. We
support the solution of two States living within
secure and mutually recognized borders as a basis for
peaceful coexistence.
Along those lines, during its forthcoming
participation as a non-permanent member of the
Council during 2018 and 2019, Peru will continue to
support the facilitation of a minimum framework of
understanding for the resumption of direct negotiations
between the parties, as well as an improvement of the
situation on the ground.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation thanks
the French presidency of the Security Council for
convening this open debate. Let me also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing.
Discussions on the situation in the Middle East
invariably become a sombre reminder of the spectre
of violence, turmoil and conflict that has afflicted
millions of people across the region. Nothing
epitomizes that more than the plight and suffering of
the Palestinian people. On the fiftieth anniversary of
the illegal occupation of their homeland, the aspirations
of the Palestinian people to live a life of freedom and
dignity still remain a distant and elusive ideal. The
lack of progress on the Palestinian issue has not only
betrayed the hopes and aspirations of generations of
Palestinians, it has also sowed the seeds of seemingly
endless hostility and discord in the region.
However, some aspects of the Middle East’s
political landscape today offer reason for optimism.

17-3328133/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The political reconciliation forged between Fatah and
Hamas in Cairo last week is a landmark achievement.
It not only restores political unity within Palestinian
ranks, but also provides renewed strength and vigour
to the legitimate cause of the Palestinian people.
We congratulate the Palestinians on that singular
achievement and hope that it will lead to real progress.
But that development by itself is not enough to tip
the scales of justice in favour of the long-suffering
Palestinians. The international community must renew
its resolve to sustain that positive momentum. As a first
step, the illegal and oppressive siege of Gaza by Israel
must be lifted.
A viable, independent and contiguous State of
Palestine — on the basis of internationally agreed
parameters, the pre-1967 borders and Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital — is the only sustainable guarantee for
enduring peace in the Middle East. During his recent
visit to Gaza, Secretary-General António Guterres
said: “I have a dream. A dream to one day see the Holy
Land with two States”. Yet that vision is consistently
and brazenly being undermined by the illegal Israeli
settlements in occupied territories. As affirmed by the
Secretary-General’s reports to the Security Council
pursuant to its resolution 2334 (2016), settlement
activity has in fact been stepped up. It has intensified.
In addition, the systematic practice of dispossessing
Palestinians of their homes and displacing them from
their lands and livelihoods in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, continues unabated.
Any unilateral attempts by Israel to alter or
re-engineer the existing status quo in the old city of
Jerusalem is an unacceptable provocation for billions
of Muslims around the world — it must cease. That was
highlighted again during tensions surrounding the Holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque in July. Creating alternative facts on
the ground cannot change historic realities or neutralize
or reverse the legal rights of people living under foreign
occupation, in Palestine or indeed elsewhere.
A just peace in Palestine is not only a matter of
regional significance; it is a fundamental precondition
for global peace and security. A two-State solution
remains an absolute imperative. There is no “plan B”.
There can be no other plan than a two-State solution for
the region.
Challenges confronting the Middle East are
complex and myriad. They are also often mutually
reinforcing and interlinked, and therefore require
34/54

18/10/2017

greater cooperation and coordination between the
States of the region.
Pakistan reaffirms its unequivocal support to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the brotherly
people of Iraq. We are convinced that a solution to
Iraq’s problems must be found within a united and
inclusive Iraqi State, while recognizing and reconciling
the interests of all Iraqi people.
On Syria, a Syrian-led and Syrian-driven process
of political reconciliation is the only pathway to lasting
peace in that country. The intra-Syrian talks are
pivotal to that end. We hope that the parties will show
the necessary flexibility and compromise to bridge
their differences.
The situation in Yemen remains grim: 15 million
people in the country lack adequate access to clean
water, sanitation and hygiene, while 7 million are faced
with the threat of famine. All of that is exacerbated by the
over 800,000 suspected cases of cholera. That demands
a surge in diplomacy as well as in humanitarian support
to the millions of people in need across the country.
In conclusion, Secretary-General António Guterres
noted in his address to the General Assembly this year
that “[w]e are a world in pieces. We need to be a world
at peace.” (A/72/PV.3, p. 1) Our journey towards this
shared ideal for world peace and world accord can only
begin in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): On 2 November 1917, almost exactly
100 years ago, a British colonialist declaration
was issued unilaterally and without consulting
the Palestinians — the landowners. The Balfour
Declaration, adopted by the League of Nations, tried to
legitimize that act by inserting into it what was referred
to as the British Mandate for Palestine in 1922.
We heard our British colleague this morning
express the pride of his country’s Government in
issuing that Declaration, which is known legally and
internationally as a promise from someone who does
not own something to someone who does not deserve it.
By then the League of Nations operated as a colonialist
company, which replicated in Palestine the experiences
of the East India Company and the British South Africa
Company. Both experiences generated racist regimes,
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

including in South Africa in what used to be called
Southern Rhodesia.
The United Nations did not seek to rectify the
mistake of the League of Nations, as it did with
many other issues. Instead, it continued the same
approach with regard to Palestine and adopted General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), in 1947, which provided
for the partition of Palestine and the creation of the
Israeli entity. That entity later enjoyed membership
of the United Nations following pressure exerted by
powerful States.
The support, assistance and protection provided
to Israel by certain States, including some permanent
members of the Security Council, as well as the systemic
and deliberate obstruction of the implementation
of dozens of resolutions intended to end this brutal
occupation, have led to Israel’s arrogance in both
the region and the Security Council Chamber. It has
led to Israel’s expansion and further expropriation of
Palestinian Arab land and the perpetration of crimes,
aggression and systematic violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law that could
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.
General Assembly resolution 273 (III), of
1949, outlined the conditions for approving Israel’s
membership of the United Nations. Israel was to
comply with resolution 181 (II), which provided for
the establishment of the Palestinian State. It was also
required to comply with resolution 194 (III), of 1948,
which provided for the return of Palestinian refugees
to their homeland. However, unfortunately, what
happened afterwards was the complete opposite.
The United Nations implemented half of resolution
181 (II). It allowed for the creation of Israel in Palestine,
but denied Palestinians their right to establish their
State. It has also completely abandoned implementation
of resolution 194 (III), which provided for the return
of Palestinian refugees to their homeland. That served
to compound the injustice suffered by the Palestinian
people, whose destiney has remained under a racist
occupation that is unparalleled in history.
My country, as the Council is aware, is a key party
in Security Council debates on the situation the Middle
East, and we reiterate once again that Syria’s sovereign
rights in the Golan Heights, along the borders of 4 June
the 1967, are not subject to compromise or surrender. All
of our occupied lands and rights will be returned fully
to their rightful owners — the settlers will have to leave

S/PV. 8072

our land sooner or later. We will not abandon our right
to reclaim our occupied land and liberate our citizens
living under Israeli occupation in the Syrian Golan,
using all the instruments available under the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law and the Council’s resolutions.
The world’s suspicious and continuing silence in the
face of Israel’s policies and practices has encouraged
Israel to continue to violate the Separation of Forces
Agreement and the resolutions of Security Council. It
has provided all forms of support to armed terrorist
groups in the area of separation, including Jabhat
Al-Nusra and Da’esh, and has facilitated those groups
taking over sites of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, thereby jeopardizing the lives of its
personnel. In fact, groups of troops were kidnapped
from the Fiji and Philippines contingents.
Israel has continued to commit crimes by providing
direct and indirect support to Da’esh and other terrorist
groups and launching repeated attacks on the territories
of the Syrian Arab Republic. That means that Israel
is not only supporting Da’esh in the occupied Syrian
Golan but also supporting terrorist elements inside
Syria itself. It is supporting the Da’esh terrorist gangs
in Syria.
My country believes that the Security Council still
shoulders a historical responsibility in rectifying its
course and restoring justice. The goal that has brought
us here every month for many years must take the form
of immediate, necessary measures by the Security
Council — if it is indeed keen to achieve peace and
security in the region in order to end the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan. That must include Israel’s withdrawal from the
occupied territories in the Syrian Golan, Palestine and
parts of southern Lebanon, to the borders of 4 June
1967, as well as the implementation of resolutions 497
(1981), 338 (1973) and 242 (1967).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas
Auza, Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the
Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: The region of the Middle East
continues to be the epicentre of multiple armed conflicts
driven by various causes and by interests of a multitude
of actors who participate in them in one way or another.
Among those conflicts, which have been of deep concern
for the international community for the past 70 years,

17-3328135/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are the unachieved Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.
The Palestinian question remains paramount among all
the problems affecting the Middle East. Its resolution
would have a beneficial, cascading effect on the other
crises in the region, thereby favouring the advent of
durable peace and mutual respect among the diverse
components and stakeholders in the Middle East.
For that reason, as it has done since 1947, the Holy
See once again reaffirms its unwavering support for the
right of both Israel and Palestine to live in peace within
secure and recognized borders in an atmosphere of
mutual respect and cooperation. The Holy See reiterates
its support for the solution of two independent States,
convinced that it is the only option that would allow for
the peaceful coexistence of Israel and Palestine.
The Holy See calls on the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to show determined political will to reach
a solution and give their peoples the precious gift of
living in peace and security. Such determination would
involve refraining from provocative actions, incitement
or inflammatory rhetoric in order to de-escalate tensions
on the ground, rebuild trust and create the conditions
necessary for negotiations. The impartial support of
the international community is needed to assist the two
parties in negotiating with confidence and respect for
mutual rights and helping them to realize that sincere
negotiation is the most effective way towards an
honourable and mutually beneficial outcome.
The Holy See acknowledges with satisfaction the
recent agreement among the Palestinians, which seems
to indicate firm will towards reaching a durable solution.
The Holy See wishes to reaffirm the historic status
quo of Jerusalem, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and rejects any unilateral
measure aimed at changing it. My delegation believes
that the Holy City should be a place of convergence and
peace and that the followers of the three monotheistic
religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam — indeed,
all people of goodwill — should be guaranteed free and
unhindered access to the holy places.
My delegation wishes to convey the deep
appreciation and strong encouragement of Pope Francis
to all who tirelessly toil to find fair political solutions
to the many conflicts in the Middle East and to assist
in every way the victims of untold violence. Given the
continuing overwhelming humanitarian needs in the
region, the Holy See continues to add its voice to the
appeals for increased funding to help refugees and the
36/54

18/10/2017

host countries affected, in particular Jordan, Lebanon,
Iraq, Turkey and Egypt.
The rights of every citizen everywhere in the Middle
East must be respected. In that regard, the rule of law,
including respect for religious freedom and equality
before the law based on the principle of citizenship,
regardless of one’s race, ethnic origin or religion, is
fundamental for the achievement and maintenance of
peaceful and fruitful coexistence among individuals
and communities in the region and beyond.
For 2017 to be the start of an era of peace for all the
peoples of the Middle East, all the parties concerned
in the conflicts in the region, their foreign allies and
the entire international community must spare no
effort to silence the clamour of war and to start serious
negotiations to achieve lasting political solutions to the
problems in the Middle East, both recent and ongoing.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Let me
thank the President for convening this meeting, as
well as Mr. Jenča for his important briefing to the
Security Council.
We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
More than 50 years have passed since the start
of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. In that time, we have seen
continuous violations of the most fundamental rules
of international law, including breaches by Israel
of its legal obligations as an occupying Power under
international conventions.
The illegal plans and policies aimed at Judaizing
the Holy City, distorting its national Arab identity and
at altering its demographic composition, in addition
to isolating it from the rest of Palestinian territory,
continue, as does the illegal expansion of settlement
activities in the Palestinian territories. Thas has taken
place despite the numerous Security Council resolutions
that have condemned Israeli practices and confirmed
their illegality, the most recent being resolution 2334
(2016). Faced with that fact, the international community
has remained incapable of making the occupying force
comply with its resolutions. It is disconcerting to see
the disdain shown by the occupying Power for the
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council and its resolutions, which are supposed to
be enforceable under Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We reject all Israeli unilateral steps aimed at
changing the facts on the ground and compromising
the two-State solution within the pre-1967 borders.
We reiterate that the desired peace must include an
end to the occupation, which has already lasted for 50
years, in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principle of land for peace, the Quartet
road map and the 2002 Beirut Arab Peace Initiative.
These are based on the terms of reference that call
for the withdrawal of Israel from all the Palestinian,
Syrian and Lebanese territories to the borders of 4 June
1967, including addressing all final status issues in
order to allow the Palestinian people to enjoy their
political rights.
The State of Kuwait welcomes the agreement
among our Palestinian brothers in Fatah and Hamas,
and we pay tribute to the efforts made by the Arab
Republic of Egypt to arrive at that agreement. National
reconciliation among our Palestinian brothers is a
historic achievement and an important step in the
right direction to end the division that has harmed the
Palestinian cause. The agreement is also a prologue
to unifying the ranks of the Palestinians so that they
will be better equipped to face the challenges that
the Palestinian question is confronted with. It will
contribute to the fulfilment of the aspirations of the
Palestinian people.
As Kuwait will soon join the Security Council as an
elected member for the period 2018-2019, we would like
to stress that we will continue to support the Palestinian
question and to bring pressure to bear on Israel, the
occupying Power, so that it desists forthwith from
policies that run counter to international legitimacy and
international agreements, including the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention. We will continue to work to ensure
that Israel respects and implements Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2234 (2016), as well
as to make progress in a process led by the international
community, in particular the Security Council and the
five permanent members, as well as the Middle East
Quartet. In that way, our efforts would be helpful in
establishing a time frame to complete the negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli parties in order to
arrive at a two-State solution.

S/PV. 8072

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expression appreciation to you,
Madam, and the delegation of France for organizing
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM).
We also welcome the report (S/2017/515) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). However, we reiterate the position,
articulated by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of NAM, on the need for a substantive written
report, which would provide a valuable record of
the implementation process and dissuade continued
violations of the resolution. It should also include an
assessment of the long-term humanitarian impact of
such violations.
This open debate is taking place against the
backdrop of the announcement by Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu that the construction of 3,800
new housing units in the West Bank for Jewish settlers
has been approved. The increased settlement expansion
constitutes a contravention of international law,
particularly the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention. It also
illustrates continued disregard for international norms
necessary for the Security Council to fulfil its primary
mandate of pursuing international peace and security,
as well as a direct violation of resolution 2334 (2016).
The situation on the ground cannot be allowed
to continue. It is a blight of on the conscience of the
international community. There is no doubt that the
pattern of human rights violations associated with
the occupation is inextricably linked to the settlement
enterprise. The ongoing settlement activities by
Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories seriously
undermines the two-State solution and threatens
the viability and territorial contiguity of the future
Palestinian State. It is an enduring impediment to
peace, security, stability and development in the wider
Middle East region.
South Africa would like to emphasize the urgent
need for Israel to lift the illegal land and naval
blockade on Gaza, which has now entered its eleventh

17-3328137/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

year. The blockade continues to worsen the already
dire socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in
Gaza. Unemployment in Gaza stands at 38.4 per cent,
with youth and women unemployment at a shocking
60 per cent and 84 per cent, respectively. This
economic situation has not been helped by Palestine’s
state of energy dependence on Israel, and can only fuel
resentment among a disenfranchised youth population.
The ongoing occupation and the situation in Gaza
makes it virtually impossible to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. These recent actions are part of a
long-established pattern of stifling the development of
a viable Palestinian State and illustrate a disingenuous
approach to finding a solution to the crisis, which has
persisted for half a century without resolution.
South Africa welcomes the positive outcome of
the Palestinian reconciliation deal and hopes that it
will provide an effective and unified base on which
to govern Gaza and promote greater national unity
within Palestine. Such unity should prove vital not only
in pursuing a better life for Palestinians in Gaza, but
in presenting a unified and coherent articulation of
Palestinian concerns.
My delegation continues to express deep concerns
regarding the situation of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees, specifically women and children. This
situation remains of serious concern to the international
community as well. In that regard, we call on Israel to
respect the human rights of all Palestinian prisoners
and abide by the relevant international humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. We
also call on the Israeli authorities to implement in
full and immediately the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, known
as the Nelson Mandela Rules, as well as the Rules
for the Treatment of Women Prisoners, known as the
Bangkok Rules.
My delegation is furthermore concerned about
the funding gap in the operational budget of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). In the absence of
a lasting political solution, the international community
cannot abdicate its responsibility and duty towards
Palestinian refugees and for ensuring the continuation
of the agency’s work on a sound financial basis. For its
part, South Africa will continue to support UNRWA
through its financial contributions. As a member of
the group made up of India, Brazil and South Africa
(IBSA), we will provide humanitarian assistance to the
38/54

18/10/2017

Palestinian people through the IBSA fund. Furthermore,
in cooperation with the Palestinian Authority and other
international organizations, we support projects in
Nablus and in Gaza.
In conclusion, South Africa concurs with the
international community that the only way to bring
about genuine and lasting peace between Israel and
Palestine is through comprehensive and unconditional
negotiations. Such negotiations should deal with all
final-status issues, including the unrelenting expansion
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, the lifting of the illegal Gaza blockade and
the continuing occupation of the Palestinian territory.
We believe that would contribute immensely to peace
and security throughout the Middle East and resolve
one of the most protracted conflicts the past century
has known.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I also thank you for organizing this open debate
on the important topic of the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jenčafor his comprehensive and detailed briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, as well as with the statement to be delivered
by representative of Nicaragua on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
Since our previous meeting, in July (see S/PV.8011),
Israel has continued to increase its settlement activity
at a faster rate than last year. Settlement activity during
this reporting period was centred on East Jerusalem,
where plans were made for over 2,300 housing units
in July. According to resolution 2334 (2016), Israel
has not ceased all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, or fully
respected all of its legal obligations in that regard. The
settlements are illegal under international law. They
are a serious impediment to the peace process and the
realization of the two-State solution.
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The destruction of Palestinian homes and
infrastructure in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, has also continued, albeit at a slower rate,
with 344 structures having been demolished since
January 2017, thereby displacing approximately 500
people. Another sad fact is that, on 3 August, educational
facilities attended by 175 children were demolished or
damaged. The Government of Israel said that those
facilities were constructed illegally, despite the fact
that building permits for new Palestinian homes and
infrastructure in the occupied West Bank are almost
impossible to obtain.
On 26 July, an amendment to the Basic Law:
Jerusalem the Capital of Israel passed a first reading in
the Knesset Law Committee. Were the amendment to
be adopted, it would further cement Israeli control over
East Jerusalem.
The issue of violence continues to be one of
the main factors preventing the resolution of this
conflict. As our Constitution clearly states, Namibia
“encourages the settlement of international disputes by
peaceful means”. We note the deaths on both sides due
to attacks — Palestinians and Israelis — with sadness
and concern. We take this opportunity once again
to condemn terrorism in all its forms and to call for
dialogue between all parties.
Despite the ongoing challenges, we are encouraged
by the visit of Palestinian Prime Minister Rami
Hamdallah to Gaza at the beginning of October, his first
in two years. On 12 October, Hamas and the Palestinian
Authority signed a reconciliation agreement that aims
to mend the decade-long rift. It places Gaza and the
West Bank under one Government for the first time
since 2007. Those are all positive steps, which we hope
indicate forward movement.
As the conflict in Syria continues, we are
encouraged by recent efforts to de-escalate the crisis
following talks. However, much more work needs to be
done, and we hope that the eighth round of intra-Syrian
talks convened by Mr. Staffan de Mistura in Geneva
will provide further positive steps.
As the conflict in Yemen continues, the lives of
20.7 million people have been severely impacted.
They require humanitarian protection and support,
with 9.8 million people in acute need of assistance. An
estimated 17 million people are food insecure. Cholera
is also rife in the country. This humanitarian crisis is
man-made and must be brought to an end without delay.

S/PV. 8072

As those conflicts continue in the Middle East
region, the Arab-Israeli conflict stretches back over
many decades. Namibia firmly believes that ending
the Arab-Israeli conflict will help curtail other violent
conflicts in the region. We call on the Israeli Government
to end all construction of settlements and the destruction
of Palestinian homes and infrastructure. We once
again call for Israel’s complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and urge all parties to return
to the negotiating table to ensure that the Palestinian
people are able to exercise their inalienable rights in
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and as a rightful Member of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the French presidency for having
convened this open debate.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for his comprehensive oral report
pursuant to resolution 2234 (2016) and would once
again underline the need for a written report. We also
align ourselves with the concrete points made by the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.
In this fiftieth year of the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian and Arab territories, we reiterate the need
for the Security Council to demonstrate its resolve to
address the Palestinian question as a matter of urgency.
It is worth noting that this year also marks the fiftieth
anniversary of resolution 242 (1967).
As Bangladesh is currently overwhelmed by the
massive, unprecedented influx of forcibly displaced
people from Myanmar’s Rakhine state, we cannot but
remain profoundly concerned over the protracted illegal
occupation and humanitarian situation faced by the
Palestinian people. Bangladesh has been dealing with
the Rohingya situation for the past three decades and is
seeking the Security Council’s collective and decisive
initiative to lend support to the bilateral diplomatic
efforts pursued by Bangladesh with Myanmar. It is
crucial that the Security Council demonstrate the unity
of purpose to find peaceful, just and lasting solutions

17-3328139/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to all of these protracted crises, which will otherwise
continue to pose serious threats to international and
regional peace and security.
The
continued
breaches
of
international
humanitarian law and the systematic human rights
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories have
given rise to an egregious culture of impunity. In the
absence of effective international accountability, the
occupying Power continues to enforce violence against
Palestinian citizens, imprisoning and abusing scores of
Palestinians in its detention centres and dispossessing
and displacing thousands of Palestinian families through
its construction and expansion of illegal settlements.
We share the concerns over the reported lack of
progress in implementing resolution 2234 (2016). It is
obvious that the illegal Israeli settlements as well as the
wall in and around occupied East Jerusalem are being
deliberately pursued in order to fundamentally change
the character, status and demography of the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The Council has a moral obligation to prevail upon
Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, lift the blockade in the
Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms of occupation.
Immediate priority must be given to ensuring
international protection for the Palestinian people,
who have suffered for decades from Israel’s policy
of collective punishment. The hunger strike recently
observed by thousands of prisoners in Israeli detention
centres underscores the need for the international
community’s sustained efforts to address their
grievances and plight.
Under the guidance of our Honourable Prime
Minister, the Government and the people of Bangladesh
remain steadfast in our support for the just and legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent, viable, contiguous
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in the framework of a two-State solution.
Bangladesh acknowledges the developments on
political unity and reconciliation in Palestine, which we
consider to be a step in the right direction.
Bangladesh looks forward to positive signs
emerging from the various regional and bilateral
initiatives being pursued to address the Palestinian
question in the context of the two-State solution. We
continue to urge all key actors to continue their efforts
40/54

18/10/2017

to pursue a comprehensive solution to the Palestinian
issue, consistent with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and in accordance with the Arab Peace
Initiative, the Quartet road map and the principle of
land for peace.
We also echo the need to ensure enhanced,
predictable and sustainable funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in order for it to effectively
carry out its humanitarian mandate in support of the
Palestinian refugees.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased, Madam, to congratulate you on France’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and I thank you for the initiative to
discuss the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. I also thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his valuable briefing on the issue.
Palestine witnessed a positive development with
the reconciliation among Palestinian factions and the
exercise by the Palestinian Authority of its authority
over the Palestinian territories. This will serve the
interests of the Palestinian people and allow them to
achieve their aspiration of establishing their own State
on Palestinian territory, within the 1967 borders.
We reiterate that, regrettably, the Palestinian
question remains at an impasse, without any possible
opening or détente that would allow the parties to sit
at the negotiating table, because the international
community is preoccupied with events in the region and
in the international arena. This negative state of affairs
is reflected in the deteriorating Palestinian situation
and the deadlock that has characterized it since 2014.
Israel, regrettably, continues to pursue a policy
of settlement in the territories occupied since 1967.
This runs counter to international law, including
resolution 2334 (2016). The 50 years of occupation of
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the policy of
Judaization and the settlement policy have given rise
to a sense of failure among the Palestinian people, who
feel that the international community has betrayed
them. This has had many negative repercussions,
including an increase in the level of violence and the
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resort to terrorism by some who believe that they have
no other option.
Jerusalem is a symbol of coexistence. It has a
special status not only among the people of Jerusalem
but also for adherents to the three faiths. It is the Qibla
of more than 3 billion Muslims, and any attempt to
compromise the legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
will only foment hatred and push people to embrace
terrorism and encourage it in the region as a whole.
The Kingdom of Morocco and His Highness the
King of Morocco, who presides over the Jerusalem
Committee, call for the establishment of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, because
His Highness believes that this is the only way to
achieve peace and end conflict in the Middle East and
to promote international peace and security. His Royal
Highness has stressed on more than one occasion and
through different means, including a letter addressed to
the Secretary-General in June, the violations by Israel of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the danger of the Judaization
of Jerusalem, as well as the unilateral decisions
taken and the need to end settlement activities. His
Royal Highness stressed the support of the Kingdom
of Morocco for all initiatives aimed at arriving at
a settlement that guarantees the establishment of a
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the 1967 borders, living side by side in peace
and security with Israel.
In conclusion, the position of Morocco continues to
be based on the tenets of the Arab Peace Initiative and
the terms of reference that call for the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, within the June 1967 borders.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Ms. Adamson: The candidate countries Montenegro
and Albania align themselves with this statement.
On 16 October, the 28 Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the European Union (EU) adopted a statement on the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) — the
culmination of 12 years of diplomacy facilitated by
the EU, unanimously endorsed by Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015). The successful implementation
of the JCPOA continues to ensure that Iran’s nuclear
programme remains exclusively peaceful. While the

S/PV. 8072

EU expresses its concerns related to ballistic missiles
and increasing tensions in the region, the EU reiterates
the need to address them outside the JCPOA, and it is
determined to preserve the JCPOA as a key pillar of the
international non-proliferation architecture.
The Middle East peace process remains at the top
of the European Union agenda. At the open debate on
25 July (see S/PV.8011), we restated the EU’s core policy
positions on this topic, as reflected in successive EU
Council conclusions, proving clarity and consistency.
The EU’s commitment to achieving a two-State solution
is the central element of our policy. A negotiated twoState solution that ends the occupation and fulfils
the aspirations of both sides is the only way to bring
about the lasting peace and security that both Israelis
and Palestinians deserve. That is also why the EU will
continue to speak out clearly when developments or
incidents threaten the two-State solution and undermine
the peace process.
We have noted with deep concern the reports of
the United Nations Special Coordinator Mladenov
on settlement activities and related actions, not least
in East Jerusalem, including the third report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), stressing the
high rate of settlement activities throughout 2017.
The EU deeply deplores the decisions taken this
week by the Israeli authorities to promote further plans,
tenders and permits for thousands of settlement units
across the West Bank, including, for the first time since
2002, in the heart of Hebron. We have also seen reports
of construction work starting for the first new settlement
in 20 years, Amihai, and of preparatory ground work
being initiated in the sensitive area of Givat Hamatos in
East Jerusalem, where further settlement construction
would severely jeopardize the contiguity and viability
of a future Palestinian State. We urge Israel to reverse
those decisions, which run counter to international law
and directly threaten the two-State solution.
The EU’s position on Israeli settlement construction
and related activities, including recent evictions in East
Jerusalem and plans leading to the forced transfer of
the Bedouin communities in the West Bank, is clear
and has not changed — the EU remains strongly
opposed to Israel’s settlement policy, which is illegal
under international law. As reaffirmed by resolution
2334 (2016), it also dangerously threatens the viability
of the two-State solution. The international community
will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967

17-3328141/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed to by the parties themselves through
negotiations. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem
seriously jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem
serving as the future capital of both States.
The EU also strongly opposes related actions
taken in the same context, such as continued
demolitions and confiscations — including of EU and
EU member State-funded projects — in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The EU is deeply concerned that the continuing
cycle of violence has led to a serious loss of human life
in Israel and the Palestinian territory in recent months.
The EU firmly condemns the terror attacks and
violence from all sides and in any circumstances. In
late September, a fatal shooting incident took place at
the entrance of a West Bank settlement, as a Palestinian
gunman killed three Israelis — one police man and two
security guards. Another security guard was gravely
injured. The EU expresses condolences to those
affected, and its regret for all loss of life. Resolution
2334 (2016) condemns all acts of violence against
civilians. The EU also firmly rejects any incitement
to hatred or violence, which we see as fundamentally
incompatible with advancing a peaceful resolution.
Upholding commitments to act effectively against
violence and incitement is critical in order to rebuild
mutual trust and avoid another escalation.
Let me now turn to the situation in Gaza, where an
already dire humanitarian situation has been worsening
in past months, not least due to the division in the
Palestinian political arena. The EU has consistently
urged all Palestinian factions to work together to address
the needs of the Palestinian population. A single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority, with
full control over the West Bank and Gaza, is critical for
achieving a viable Palestinian State.
The EU welcomes the agreement signed in Cairo on
12 October. We believe that it can become an important
step for making genuine progress on intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. The EU will closely study the details of
the agreement and its implications, and we welcome the
continuing engagement of Egypt. If fully implemented,
the agreement can become an important step towards
achieving the goal of Palestinian unity under a single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian national authority
on the basis of the Palestine Liberation Organization
platform, the Quartet principles and in accordance with
42/54

18/10/2017

existing agreements. The EU is ready to fully support
those efforts and will continue to liaise with Egypt,
our interlocutors on the ground and our international
partners, in order to help the process succeed.
The EU calls for unimpeded humanitarian access
to Gaza, as foreseen by international humanitarian
law, for national, local and international humanitarian
organizations, including EU bodies and all EU member
States. The unsustainable situation in Gaza and recent
tensions in Jerusalem serve to underline the need for
a political horizon. That is why the EU will continue
to work tirelessly with the parties and regional and
international partners, not least within the Middle
East Quartet, to promote a return to a meaningful
process towards a negotiated two-State solution, in line
with known parameters — towards a peace that can
be sustained.
Let me also speak about Lebanon. On 30 August
2017, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2373 (2017), renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for one year. We welcome the resolution and reaffirm
our full support of UNIFIL, including its maritime
component, whose deployment within its existing
mandate, alongside the Lebanese Armed Forces, is
crucial to maintain stability and security in southern
Lebanon and along the Lebanese shores. UNIFIL must
be provided with the necessary means and equipment
to guarantee its full operational capability. In parallel,
assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces must continue
to allow it to maintain security across the country and
fight terrorism.
In Syria, the fighting is not over. The EU firmly
believes that there can be no military solution to the
conflict, and is committed to the unity, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Syrian
State. Only a credible political solution, as defined in
resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), will ensure the stability of Syria
and enable a decisive defeat of Da’esh and other United
Nations-designated terrorist groups in Syria. The EU
fully supports Special Envoy de Mistura’s efforts to
that end.
The EU strongly condemns the continued
systematic, widespread and gross violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties, particularly by the
Syrian regime. This must end and those responsible
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

must be held accountable. At the Syria event that the EU
organized in New York on the margins of the General
Assembly, High Representative Mogherini launched the
Brussels process, which aims at maintaining the focus
of the international community on the conflict in Syria,
the continuing humanitarian situation and sustaining
international engagement in support of achieving a
lasting political solution, negotiated in Geneva in line
with resolution 2254 (2015), to the benefit of the Syrian
people and the region. The EU has agreed to increase
efforts to ensure both the full and effective participation
of women and sustained consultation and dialogue with
civil society in the political process.
The EU reiterates that it will be ready to assist in
the reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, negotiated
by the Syrian parties in the conflict, on the basis of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué, is
firmly under way.
Turning to Iraq, first of all, we welcome that Iraqi
forces — with the support of the Global Coalition
against Da’esh — have succeeded in inflicting a
rapid defeat on Da’esh in Hawijah. In relation to the
unilateral referendum held in the Kurdistan Region of
Iraq, the EU continues to support the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq. The EU believes that
the general interests of Iraqi people are best served
through dialogue and cooperation, that unilateral steps
must be avoided and that all open questions must be
resolved through consensual positions based on the full
application of the provisions of the Iraqi Constitution.
The EU calls on the Federal Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government to build on their
successful cooperation on security in the campaign to
liberate Mosul and to engage in a constructive dialogue
on all issues across the political and economic spectrum,
including the disputed internal boundaries. The EU
also urges all parties in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
to seek common ground and restore the functioning
of its democratic institutions, including by holding
regional elections.
In that respect, we are extremely worried about
the risk of escalation, not least in Kirkuk. There can
be no military solution to intra-Iraqi differences. All
parties must now show restraint, refrain from further
escalation and engage in a constructive dialogue about
all open questions, based on the provisions of the
Iraqi Constitution.

S/PV. 8072

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
President for convening today’s meeting and Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his briefing.
This open debate is taking place against a backdrop
of important developments, with the promise of a new
era of Palestinian unity through the formation of a
Palestinian National Unity Government that represents
all Palestinian factions. In that regard, I reiterate
that Qatar welcomes the signing of a reconciliation
agreement between Fatah and Hamas, along with the
formation of a national Government and its assumption
of its duties in the Gaza Strip. We in Qatar are
conscious of the significance of the current phase in
the continuing efforts to achieve peace in the Middle
East and want to emphasize the importance of making
progress in implementing the reconciliation agreement,
with a view to achieving the national unity that the
Palestinian people aspire to. We are hopeful that those
recent positive developments will be an additional
incentive to making progress and moving past the
current stagnation in the peace process, in order to give
the region’s nations and people renewed hope. Qatar
has recently been striving to do all it can to help move
the peace process forward, including by supporting
Palestinian reconciliation and providing humanitarian
assistance to our Palestinian brethren, while also
continuing to work with the international community
to achieve peace.
If we are to achieve peace for both Palestine and
Israel, all the parties must comply with international
law while working diligently to create an environment
conducive to peace and security through de-escalation
efforts and by ensuring respect for religious sites,
particularly Al-Haram Al-Sharif, with the aim of
achieving stability in the region and helping to
de-escalate other crises. Qatar supports the concept
of a two-State solution whereby the two countries can
live side by side in peaceful coexistence. That entails
establishing an independent Palestinian State, within
its 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The risks and threats to international peace and
security posed by the continuing crisis in Syria will
require intensified effort if we are to reach a political
solution. We reiterate our position in support of all efforts

17-3328143/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in that regard, based on the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015), in order
to fulfil the Syrian people’s desire to achieve stability
and safeguard their country’s territorial integrity. In
that regard, we support all efforts to de-escalate the
situation and prevent tensions, based on the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and international
humanitarian law, as well as the Astana process. We
will also increase our cooperation with our international
partners in providing assistance to our Syrian brothers
and sisters.
If we are to address the current crisis in the Middle
East and end extremism and terrorism there, we must
tackle its grave and complex challenges through joint
efforts and intensified cooperation. As new conflicts
emerge, they contribute to the complexity of the
existing crises and hinder international efforts at a
time when the overall scenario in the region is already
very complicated. Qatar has been experiencing a
completely unjustifiable blockade since the beginning
of June that is a blatant violation of international law
and the Charter and that undermines friendly relations
among States, creating an atmosphere of instability in
the region. Despite those attacks on Qatar, which is
maintaining its policy of working to resolve conflicts
peacefully, we reiterate our support for the offer by His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
the Amir of Kuwait, to provide genuine mediation and
appreciate the attitude of all the allied nations that have
supported it.
In conclusion, Qatar reiterates its commitment to
participating effectively and positively in support of all
efforts aimed at achieving peace in the Middle East and
the Security Council’s objectives in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (spoke in Spanish):
Seventy years after the General Assembly decided
to partition Palestine and laid the foundations for the
creation of the State of Israel, the State of Palestine
has yet to attain independence and the rights of the
Palestinian people continue to be violated. Until the
Palestine question is resolved in every aspect, the United
Nations and its organs, including the Security Council,
will have a historical and permanent responsibility to
44/54

18/10/2017

assist the Palestinian people in achieving peace and a
dignified life through the exercise of their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination and
national independence, as well as the rights of refugees.
The members of the Security Council have
repeatedly stressed that the current status quo is
unsustainable. After his visit to Israel and Palestine,
the Secretary-General warned that we should not allow
today’s stagnating peace process to lead to tomorrow’s
escalation. At a time when the 50-year-long occupation is
gradually, if not immediately, becoming an annexation,
it is increasingly evident that the status quo is far from
static. Rather, we are witnessing a steadily deteriorating
situation on the ground along with the systematic
dispossession of the Palestinian people, crushing any
hope for them of achieving freedom, equal rights and
a just peace. The ongoing Israeli settlement campaign,
which the Council has denounced as illegal, is proof of
the growing trend towards displacement. Last month,
Israel announced plans to evacuate Susiya and Khan
Al-Ahmar in Area C of the West Bank, communities
living on lands that are supposedly intended for
settlement expansion. In addition, in August the Israeli
authorities issued a military order creating a public
administration in Hebron that strengthens the situation
of settlers there. The Israeli group Peace Now has
warned that the order formalizes the apartheid system
in that city.
At its September conference the Israeli National
Union faction announced a bold plan providing for the
annexation of occupied territory, displacing Palestinians
and stripping them of their inalienable rights if they
are not willing to give them up. Such extremist plans
are continuously compounded by the provocative and
inflammatory rhetoric of the Israeli Government and
military officials, including the Prime Minister himself.
The Committee reiterates the Council’s repeated calls
on both parties to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric.
The Council cannot ignore these dangerous
developments. Moreover, we are not doomed to collective
failure; there is a way out of the conundrum. There is
a consensus that Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, not only
violate international law, but also dangerously imperil
the viability of the two-State solution. Resolution 2334
(2016) provides Member States with the tools to reverse
the negative trends on the ground, salvage the two-State
solution and, in accordance with the mandate entrusted
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8072

to the Council in the Charter of the United Nations,
advance the cause of peace and security.

resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People stands ready to support
the Council in its efforts to consider practical ways and
means to secure full compliance with the resolution.
In addition, with regard to the recommendations
contained in its 2017 annual report to the General
Assembly (A/72/35), the Committee reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to present reports on its
implementation in written format, including proposals
on measures to ensure accountability for settlement
activities and other violations of international law.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.

The Committee welcomes the necessary political
will demonstrated by all parties to facilitate Palestinian
reconciliation and create conditions favourable for
the effective functioning of a Palestinian Government
of national consensus. Let me acknowledge the
constructive role played by Egypt toward this end. The
Committee offers its support to all efforts to advance
intra-Palestinian unity and reiterates its demand for
ending the unlawful 10-year Israeli blockade on the
Gaza Strip. It also welcomes ongoing diplomatic efforts
towards the achievement of the two-State solution,
including by China, the Russian Federation, the United
States and Arab countries, among others.

The United Arab Emirates supports the regional
and international efforts to push the Middle East
peace process forward that resulted in the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016) and the signing of the
intra-Palestinian agreement last week in Cairo. In this
regard, we strongly commend the efforts of the brotherly
Arab Republic of Egypt to reunify the Palestinian
people and support stability in the region.

To support the Palestinian State-building process,
the Committee will continue to expand its capacitybuilding programme by, inter alia, sponsoring a
Palestinian official in a training course on multilateral
environmental negotiations, to be held in France,
and three other officials on United Nations catalytic
support to South-South and triangular cooperation in
implementing the 2030 Agenda, to be held in Germany.
Last month, the gathering of world leaders in New
York for the annual general debate testified to faith in
multilateralism and a rules-based international order as
the only path to address threats to international peace
and security.
If we wish to restore hope and make a difference in
the lives of ordinary people; if we want to put conflict
prevention and resolution at the centre of United
Nations reform and if we seek to build sustainable
peace in the Middle East, urgent action is required
from the Council. In this spirit, the Committee calls on
everyone to redouble efforts towards the achievement
of the two-State solution based on the 1967 borders
and in accordance with the relevant United Nations

Mr. Almahmoud (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
congratulate France on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and thank it for presiding over this
important quarterly debate. The United Arab Emirates
also extends its gratitude to Mr. Miroslav Jenča,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing this morning.

Despite international efforts to achieve peace in the
region, Israel continues to violate international laws and
resolutions and to expand its illegal settlement activities,
hindering the two-State solution. The illegal Israeli
practices against the Palestinian people have resulted
in the deterioration of the humanitarian, economic and
social conditions in the occupied Palestinian territories.
This situation has been exploited by terrorist groups
and their supporters to spread extremism and violence
in the Middle East.
The United Arab Emirates reaffirms the need to
put an end to the Israeli occupation and to grant the
Palestinian people their inalienable rights, including
their right to establish an independent Palestinian State
based on the June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with all international
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid
principles. In addition, we stress the importance of
providing support to meet the needs of the Palestinian
people and empowering them to build their State and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, like all
other countries. This year, the United Arab Emirates has
provided additional contributions to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Middle East to enable the Agency to deliver basic
services to the Palestinian people, including nutrition,
education and health care.

17-3328145/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is important to continue to work to reach a just
and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian cause.
The United Arab Emirates is also actively working
to restore stability in our region, which is enduring
multiple dangerous conflicts and crises. The absence
of security and stability in the region has caused
significant loss of life, the displacement of people and
the destruction of economic and social infrastructure.
There is no doubt that the continued provocative
behaviour and regional intervention of rogue States,
as well as their support of extremism and terrorism,
have destabilized the region and threaten international
security. Therefore, these States must respect their
obligations under international law and the Charter of
the United Nations and stop spreading conflicts and
regional and international chaos. The Security Council
and the international community should hold countries
that support and finance terrorism accountable and
demonstrate zero tolerance for whomever offers
assistance or safe haven to terrorist groups that wreak
havoc in the region.
In conclusion, we emphasize that political
solutions to the crises in Libya, Syria and Yemen are
the only way to restore stability. In this regard, the
United Arab Emirates reaffirms its support for United
Nations peace efforts to encourage parties in these
countries to negotiate and reach comprehensive and
political solutions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Haidara (Nigeria): We thank you, Madam, for
convening today’s meeting, which provides us with an
opportunity to reflect on recent developments in the
Middle East. We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Jenča for his informative briefing.

18/10/2017

Government of Egypt for its crucial role in facilitating
the agreement. We believe that the development will
facilitate in lifting the closures of the crossings, while
addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns,
and unlock international support for Gaza’s growth,
stability and prosperity, which is critical to efforts to
achieve lasting peace.
It is essential to continue to engage with Israel,
the Palestinian authorities and the region in support of
that process. In the meantime, it is essential to address
the humanitarian situation in Gaza, which has had an
impact on the health and the social and economic wellbeing of the population. In that regard, we encourage
the international community to act accordingly. We
seize the opportunity of this debate to underline that
continued settlement activity on the part of Israel,
which is illegal under international law, is undermining
the two-State solution. It is a matter of great concern
to us. The two-State solution lies at the heart of the
Middle East peace process. It has the support of the
international community and is widely acknowledged
as the path to lasting peace between the two sides. We
urge the Israeli political leadership to demonstrate its
commitment to the two-State solution.
We call on States with influence over the parties to
encourage them to re-engage in dialogue on the basis
of relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Middle East Quartet road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative and existing agreements between the
parties. Nigeria reaffirms its unwavering support for a
two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing
side by side in peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I congratulate France on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. I would like to thank Mr. Jenča for his
extremely useful briefing.

After years of tension, we welcome the decision
of Hamas to accept the conditions of the Ramallah
Government to reunite the West Bank and Gaza into
one entity, under one law and one Government. In
that regard, Nigeria welcomes the signing of the
intra-Palestinian agreement in Cairo on 12 October.
We commend the President of the State of Palestine and
all other concerned stakeholders on that achievement.
We particularly express our deep appreciation to the

The members of the Security Council and the
international community have reiterated in various
international forums the importance of achieving peace
and stability in the Middle East, demonstrating their
conviction that stability in the region is in the interests
of both the region and the international community as a
whole and will foster international peace and security.
We agree on that common ground. We share the wish for
peace and recognize the need to take into account the

46/54

17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

aspirations of peoples to achieve stability. We reiterate
that peace will be possible only through cooperation
and dialogue, along with joint efforts to address the
underlying causes of the conflict and to deal with them
objectively, in accordance with international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Jordan has played a major role in the Middle
East’s political landscape, especially through our
wise and balanced foreign policy in a region that is
rife with conflict. We are a haven of peace and enjoy
close relations with all of the various regional and
international partners. We shall use those relations in
order to promote peace and security in the region, tackle
terrorism and find peaceful solutions to conflicts,
especially the Arab-Israeli conflict. Reaching a lasting,
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question is
a major factor for political stability in the region. We
welcome all efforts to seek a just settlement to the
question, which could drive forward the peace process
and relaunch and reactivate time-bound negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians on the basis of the
two-State solution. That is the only means of resolving
the issue.
Israel’s future and its acceptance by the region and
the Arab/Muslim world are dependent on the future
of the Palestinians. Peace will not emerge between
the two parties until an independent Palestinian State
is established within the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. There are many elements to
this issue, especially with respect to the Arab, Muslim
and international consensus regarding the two-State
solution. That is reiterated in the Arab Peace Initiative,
which defined the political horizon necessary to a
peaceful solution that would meet the aspirations of the
Palestinian people, while also taking Israeli interests
into account.
Under the Hashemite custodial protection of
Muslim and Christian holy sites, Jordan has made
great efforts to defend holy sites in Jerusalem and
preserve their historic and legal importance. It has
undertaken diplomatic initiatives in many international
forums, especially UNESCO, and the promotion of
international Arab consensus regarding a number of
resolutions that retain Jerusalem on the agenda of the
UNESCO Executive Board, which reiterates that the
legislative and administrative measures taken by Israel
to change the nature of Jerusalem and its legal status
are null and void. I reiterate the importance of the most

S/PV. 8072

recent resolution adopted by the 58 States members of
the UNESCO Executive Board.
We reiterate the importance of the national
reconciliation agreement between the Palestinians
as the first major step towards putting an end to
divisions and promoting Palestinian national unity,
thereby contributing to conditions conducive to IsraeliPalestinian negotiations with the goal of creating an
independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We support
Egypt’s efforts and highlight its role in bringing about
Palestinian national reconciliation.
With regard to the Syrian crisis, we shall use our
relations with all stakeholders to achieve peace in
Syria. We have reached an agreement with the United
States and the Russian Federation that will end to
violence in the south and west of Syria. We emphasize
the importance of achieving a political solution to the
Syrian crisis that would preserve Syria’s territorial
integrity and ensure a better future that will meet
the aspirations of the Syrian people and allow for the
return of Syrian refugees and the reconstruction of the
country.
We reaffirm our cooperation with all international
partners to establish a peaceful and stable environment
throughout Syria with a view to allowing access
to humanitarian aid for all of those in need and to
promoting stability for the Syrian people, who have
experienced seven years of violence. We hope that
the Astana peace process and the Geneva talks, which
are both taking place under the auspices of the United
Nations, will promote the political process, taking
into account the various relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2254 (2015).
We restate the importance of putting an end to the
Yemeni crisis. There is a need to restore legitimacy and
calm in Yemen, on the basis of the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
as well as the National Dialogue Conference and
relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015).
We support the plan approved by the United Nations
to relaunch the peace process in Libya, and hope that
we will be able to provide the Libyan people with a
good transitional mechanism.
Lastly, we shall make every effort to put an end to
the extremism and terrorism that are destabilizing the

17-3328147/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Middle East. We reaffirm the importance of combating
terrorism at all levels, theoretical and practical alike,
which requires collective international endeavours with
respect to the Middle East and elsewhere. The peoples
of the region want peace and stability and peaceful
solutions to the crises. Achieving stability is key to
promoting economic and sustainable development,
in addition to investing in the future, our youth and
generations to come.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome this open debate of the Security Council
and support the statement made by the delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Once again, we express our deep concern over
the situation in the Middle East, in particular the
lack of tangible progress towards a just, peaceful,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which is at the heart of the ArabIsraeli conflict.
It is regrettable that since the last time the Council
convened to consider this issue, there has been no
improvement in the situation on the ground. The
occupation of the Palestinian territory continues, as
do the confiscation of Palestinian lands and property,
the construction and expansion of settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, forced displacement, the full gamut of
illegal settlement policies and practices, and collective
punishment of the Palestinian people.
The Security Council must adopt concrete measures
to put an end to this historic injustice without further
delay. It should also immediately put an end to the
nearly decade-long blockade of the Gaza Strip, where
more than 2 million Palestinian civilians are immersed
in a deep socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis.
Cuba notes and supports the initiatives to resume
direct peace negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis and to promote reconciliation and
intra-Palestinian unity. Our country will continue to
support a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict that is based on a twoState solution and allows the Palestinians to enjoy their
right to self-determination and a free, independent
and sovereign State, with its capital in East Jerusalem
48/54

18/10/2017

and within the pre-1967 borders, as well as the right
of refugees to return. We will also continue to
support the entry of Palestine as a full Member of the
United Nations.
With regard to the Syrian Golan, Cuba demands
the end of the Israeli occupation and reiterates that
any measures or actions that have been or are being
taken to change the legal, physical and demographic
status and the institutional structure of the occupied
Syrian Golan, as well as Israel’s measures to exercise
its jurisdiction and administration in that territory,
constitute violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including Security Council resolution 497
(1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Cuba calls for a constructive and respectful
dialogue among the peoples of the region and for an end
to the violence, interference in internal affairs, foreign
aggression and conflicts in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank France, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council, for convening this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
An independent Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel, is the only
solution to the question of Palestine. We believe that
the only viable way to that end is for Israel to withdraw
from the occupied territories to the pre-1967 borders
and allow refugees to return to their rightful lands.
The Security Council did the right thing by adopting
the historic resolution 2334 (2016) in December 2016,
demanding that Israel immediately and completely
cease all settlement activities in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem. The Security Council made
it crystal clear that it will not recognize any changes
to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to
Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the two sides
through negotiations.
The Maldives strongly condemns the restrictions
imposed by the occupying Power to alter the historic
and legal status quo in East Jerusalem, notably
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
The Government of Maldives calls on the occupying
Power, Israel, to immediately stop its illegal activities
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8072

and respect its international legal obligations, including
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.

The Maldives also welcomes the third report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), and supports the calls for substantive
written reports in support of the Council’s duties to
advance the resolution’s objectives. We believe that
proper documentation is necessary, especially when
Israel, as the occupying Power, continues to disregard
the Council’s legally binding resolutions.

Mr. Hattrem (Norway): At the outset, let me thank
France for assuming the presidency of the Council
this month.

The Maldives calls on the Council to intensify its
efforts in implementing the resolution so as to ensure
that Israel brings an end to the illegal occupation of
Palestine and the Syrian Golan, recognizes and respects
the sovereignty of the independent State of Palestine,
and allows for the return of refugees. The Council
has the solemn responsibility of enforcing its own
resolutions. It carries with it the hopes and aspirations
of the oppressed and victims of oppression. Let us keep
those hopes alive.
Such hopes are indeed in short supply in Syria. The
conflict in that historic country is in its seventh year.
Since the start of the conflict, hundreds and thousands
of people have been killed, millions have been
displaced, hospitals and basic infrastructure have been
reduced to rubble and entire cities have been destroyed,
along with the country’s cultural heritage. The people
of Syria continue to live in fear of an uncertain future.
The Maldives calls upon the international community
and the members of the Security Council to bring an
immediate end to the conflict.
Both in Palestine and Syria, one important
human rights value is missing, which is at the core
of the conflict. That is the value of respect for basic
human rights. It should not cost the warring parties
in Syria too much to respect the human rights of one
another. Similarly, it should not cost Israel too much
to respect the basic human rights and human dignity
of the Palestinians. Respecting Palestine’s right to selfdetermination, independence and sovereignty is in
everyone’s interests.
Those are values that the Maldives will promote
and bring to the work of the Security Council if it is
elected to the Council in the elections held next year
for the term 2019-2020. We will work with everyone
concerned to craft shared solutions for a shared destiny,
a destiny of sustainable peace.

Norway is concerned about the recent military
escalation in northern Iraq. We urge all parties to resolve
the conflict by peaceful means. Further escalation will
only exacerbate the difficult humanitarian situation for
millions of Iraqi civilians. It is now vital that we remain
united in our efforts to combat the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). ISIL has lost most of its territory
in both Iraq and Syria, in great part due to the efforts
of the Global Coalition Against Da’esh and its partners.
In Syria, the latest development in Raqqa is
promising. At the same time, humanitarian access
continues to be difficult, despite the establishment of
de-escalation zones. We therefore call on the Council
to ensure that humanitarian actors have access to all
areas throughout Syria where assistance is needed. We
also call on the Council to help secure a viable political
resolution of the conflict, as only this can bring a
sustained reduction in violence and prevent new wars
in the future.
Durable peace, security and prosperity for Israelis
and Palestinians alike can be achieved only through a
negotiated two-State solution. Norway welcomes the
ongoing United States efforts to restart talks and stands
ready to support a political process. The situation
is fragile because the political process has been at a
standstill for a long time. The international donor group
for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
(AHLC), met in New York on 18 September to take
stock of the Palestinian State-building process and to
provide support to a negotiated two-State solution. The
AHLC discussed ways of improving the Palestinian
economy and addressed the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Gaza. Our strategic priorities as the Chair of
the AHLC remain threefold: the fiscal sustainability of
the Palestinian Authority’s budget, sustained economic
development with a focus on energy and water, and the
recovery of Gaza.
Norway welcomes the agreement signed by Fatah
and Hamas in Cairo on 12 October. This is an important
step towards a full return of the Palestinian Authority
to Gaza. We commend the efforts of Egypt, and we
urge all parties to seize this opportunity. Efforts to

17-3328149/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

improve the humanitarian situation for the people of
Gaza are vital.
We are deeply concerned by the deteriorating
situation in Yemen. All parties must respect universal
human rights and international humanitarian law,
especially as regards the rights and needs of children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): The Palestinian issue remains
the core challenge for regional and global stability.
An independent State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital is the only
way for a just, comprehensive and lasting peace that
can also ensure security for both sides.
At the same time, we all should acknowledge the
importance of the preservation of the historical status
and sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The crisis back in
July reminded us once again that attempts to change
the status quo would jeopardize peaceful coexistence.
To prevent further crises, provocative steps in violation
of the relevant United Nations resolutions should be
avoided. In addition, measures in contravention of
international law, in particular continuing settlement
activities that harm the perspective of the two-State
solution, must stop. Above all, Israel is expected to show
political will for a lasting peace, end the occupation
and start working towards a future of harmony with
its neighbours.
We have always emphasized that reaching a
lasting peace also requires the Palestinians to voice
their legitimate demands in unity. Therefore, we
wholeheartedly welcome the reconciliation agreement
signed on 12 October between the representatives
of Fatah and Hamas. We congratulate the people of
Palestine on this significant step towards national unity.
We will continue to support our Palestinian brothers
and sisters in successfully advancing this process. The
agreement clearly refers to ending the occupation and
establishing the sovereignty of the Palestinian State
on all of the Palestinian territories occupied in 1967.
The international community must respond to this
resolute step taken by Palestine. The Palestinian people
deserve a strong confirmation of the two-State vision
and genuine efforts to end the protracted humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.
Last but not least, we welcome the recent
membership of the State of Palestine to INTERPOL.
50/54

18/10/2017

This was another important step for its full integration
into the international system and a strong message of
solidarity by the international community.
Turkey continues its intensive efforts to achieve a
sustainable ceasefire in Syria and create an environment
conducive to a genuine political transition, in line with
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015). At the latest round of Astana
talks on 14 and 15 September, the guarantor States
declared the establishment of the Idlib de-escalation
area and agreed on the deployment of observers in
the security zones around that area. In line with the
memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas
in the Syrian Arab Republic and its modalities,
Turkey started reconnaissance activities and initial
deployment in Idlib last week. The Astana talks have
helped the efforts to calm the situation on the ground
and created an environment conducive to holding the
latest four rounds of Geneva talks. We hope that the
Idlib de-escalation area will give further impetus to the
political process in Geneva. We are looking forward to
the next round of Geneva talks and expect to see some
concrete results.
The opposition has already displayed its political
maturity by engaging in real talks and increasing its
interaction with the different groups. However, if we
are sincere about achieving a durable political solution,
expecting steps only from the opposition will be neither
enough nor fair. The regime representatives should be
pushed to start talking seriously about the real political
issues pertaining to transition in the next round. We
would like to see a stable, prosperous and democratic
future Syria that preserves its political unity and
territorial integrity. The reconstruction of the conflicttorn country is important to ensuring proper living
conditions for the Syrians and enable their voluntary
return. However, recovery and reconstruction support
require a credible political process leading to a genuine
political transition. The regime must not and should not
be rewarded for the destruction it has created. Only a
multidimensional long-term strategy can achieve the
dual objectives of eliminating terrorism and stabilizing
Syria. Our aim should be no terrorists and no State terror
in Syria. We cannot achieve that without addressing the
root cause of the conflict or by replacing one terrorist
organization with another.
Turkey’s resolve to fight Da’esh and other terrorist
organizations in Syria, such as the Democratic
Union Party/People’s Protection Units, remains firm.
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Unilateral steps threatening the unity, territorial
integrity and demographic structure of Syria and
efforts to seek territorial expansion for political
leverage are unacceptable. Inclusiveness and local
ownership are essential for the establishment of
legitimate administrations in areas liberated from the
terrorist organizations. While we refocus our efforts
on ceasefire and political talks, accountability remains
a central concern. Reconciliation and sustainable
peace in Syria will be built upon our success on this
matter. We support all efforts to that end, in particular
investigations of the regime’s use of chemical weapons.
The Syrian people deserve and will have justice.
Before I conclude my remarks, I would like to
underline that we are closely following developments in
the aftermath of the Kurdistan Regional Government’s
unconstitutional referendum. Turkey does not and will
not recognize this initiative. Unilateral moves that
challenge Iraq’s territorial integrity and political unity,
as well as the presence of the Kurdish Workers Party
and other terrorist organizations, instigate further
instability. We believe that lasting peace and stability
in Iraq can be achieved through inclusive national
reconciliation within the constitutional framework.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
meeting. It is being held against a backdrop of major
developments and challenges in our region.
The Kingdom of Bahrain underscores that
achieving just, comprehensive and lasting peace will
remain directly related to restoring the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people. That will be achieved through
the establishment of a Palestinian State, based on the
June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem at its capital, as
outlined by the relevant international resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution, and by
ending the occupation of Palestinian territory and the
settlement activities that Israel continues to conduct, in
blatant violation of Security Council resolutions. In that
regard, we welcome the recent important steps taken
by the Palestinian factions to end divisions, renounce
violence and work together peacefully.
The Kingdom of Bahrain stresses the importance
of undertaking efforts to achieve a political solution
that preserves the political independence and territorial
integrity of Syria, prevents interference in its domestic

S/PV. 8072

affairs, eliminates all terrorist organizations and
secures peace for all Syrians. The Kingdom of Bahrain
reiterates its long-standing position of support for the
legitimate Government in Yemen, under the presidency
of Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, through our
participation in the Arab coalition forces to restore
legitimacy in Yemen, end the control of foreign-backed
militia groups and reach a comprehensive political
solution, based on reparations documents, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and the Implementation
Mechanism, international dialogue outcomes and
resolution 2216 (2015). The goal is to end all external
intervention and ease the humanitarian crisis suffered
by the Yemeni people. We thank the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for his efforts.
Combating terrorism and extremism in all
their forms and manifestations, regardless of their
motivations and wherever they occur in the Middle East,
is one of the most important elements to achieve peace
and stability in the region and the world. Therefore,
the Kingdom of Bahrain applauds the policies of His
Excellency Mr. Donald Trump in an attempt to end
chaos and combat terrorism.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms
its commitment to working with the international
community to address and overcome all challenges in
the Middle East. We are eager to eliminate the threats
posed to the region and to achieve a peaceful and stable
future for all people of the region.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by congratulating you, Madam
President, on France’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month. We also thank you
for convening today’s open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine. I
welcome the efforts of your friendly nation to revive a
peace process that guarantees Palestinian rights and the
establishment of a sovereign Palestinian State, based on
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as it capital. We
reiterate that we will cooperate in those efforts.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomes the
reconciliation agreement among Palestinians. We
look forward to the agreement’s impact on the hopes
and aspirations of the Palestinian people by ending
divisiveness and achieving national unity. That will
empower our Palestinian brothers and sisters to enjoy

17-3328151/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

their legitimate rights, as outlined in the various
international resolutions. In that regard, we commend
the efforts of our Egyptian brothers and sisters, who
helped to make that step possible. We condemn Israel’s
attempts to obstruct the agreement and call on it to
work in good faith to achieve a positive outcome.
The only path to peace is to return to the Arab
Peace Initiative, which my country presented more
than 15 years ago, to establish an effective international
mechanism to ensure that the Palestinian people reclaim
all their inalienable rights, within a specific time frame
and through the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on pre-1967 borders. Israel must withdraw from
all occupied Arab territory, including the Syrian Golan
and Lebanese territories, cease its illegal settlement
activities on Palestinian territory and halt all unilateral
measures taken in Jerusalem.
While regional efforts are being stepped up to
salvage the two-State solution and the international
community agrees that the main obstacle facing the
peace process is the Israeli occupation and settlementbuilding, Israeli authorities pursue their expansionist
policies. In recent weeks, Israel has approved plans to
build thousands of housing units and begun to construct
2,600 units in East Jerusalem. This would result in a
settlement barrier separating Jerusalem from the rest
of the Palestinian territory. Israel has also continued
to build more than 30 units in Hebron — a grave turn
of events that could escalate tensions. Those units will
be built on the verge of the Abrahamic Sanctuary, on
territory that the occupying Power had previously
expropriated for illegitimate reasons. Plans have also
been adopted to build more than 12,200 housing units
in the West Bank.
Israel has also enacted a law legitimizing the
construction of approximately 4,000 residential units
in the occupied West Bank and allowing Israel to
expropriate Palestinian land and for new settlements
to be added to existing settlements at any time. That
is a clear and irrefutable indication that Israel’s
settlement plans will undermine all opportunities
for the establishment of a viable Palestinian State.
Israel is maintaining its de facto policy to quash all
opportunities to achieve a genuine two-State solution.
We underscore that such illegitimate measures must be
decisively countered by the Security Council and by
international judicial bodies.
52/54

18/10/2017

Israel’s decade-long blockade of Gaza is one of the
worst manifestations of Israeli occupation. It has led to
poverty and a deterioration of living standards, which
result in environmental and humanitarian crises that
threaten all areas of life.
The rights of the Palestinian people cannot be
curtailed. We will continue to voice our support of the
Palestinian people, rejecting all attempts by Israel to
impose control and continue settlement activities, and
opposing all unilateral actions to change the status quo
in Jerusalem and Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We also warn
against the risk of exacerbating the situation, thereby
leading to an escalation that could have implications
throughout and far beyond our region.
With regard to the Syrian issue, the King of Saudi
Arabia commends the work of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, the United States of America and the Russian
Federation to establish de-escalation zones in the
southern part of Syria. We hope that such cooperation
will lead to the establishment of no-fly zones in Syria,
thereby ensuring the safety of civilians and leading to
a ceasefire throughout Syrian territory, especially as
we witness the Syrian regime’s continued killing and
forced displacement of persons with the assistance
of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and other
militias, including Hizbullah.
We also commend the progress of the Global
Coalition against Da’esh/the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. The King of Saudi Arabia is a partner in
the Coalition, which is aimed at liberating Iraqi and
Syrian territory from Da’esh. We emphasize that the
elimination of terrorism in all its forms will be neither
successful nor sustainable unless all foreign terrorist
fighters leave, including those who are fighting
alongside the Syrian regime and participating in the
gravest atrocities against the Syrian people. More than
10 million people are in need of assistance, including
more than 3 million who have been trapped in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas and face great peril. In that
regard, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reaffirms the
importance of the international community maintaining
its strong stance against all forms of besiegement and
the killing practiced by the Syrian regime and its allies.
We believe that the struggle of the Syrian people for
dignity and freedom must eventually achieve its end.
The stability of the region and the world depends on the
Syrian people realizing their dream. We call for joint
efforts and the establishment of a transitional authority
17-33281

18/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in Syria that will serve the Syrian people; help them to
achieve their aspirations to peace, security and justice;
and renounce extremism, fanaticism and violence. In
that context, we emphasize our support for the strategy
announced by United States President Donald Trump
with regard to eliminating the terrorist threat posed by
Iran in Syria and the region, in general.
Saudi Arabia has previously supported the nuclear
deal based on its belief that we must work towards
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, but Iran has
exploited the economic returns of the lifting of sanctions
and continued to destabilize the region, including
through developing its ballistic-missile programme and
supporting terrorism through its Revolutionary Guard,
Hizbullah and the Houthi militias. Accordingly, we
commend the vision of the United States Administration,
and its commitment to work together with allies to
confront Iran’s aggressive policies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mrs. Taib (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening and chairing this meeting.
I am grateful to Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
this morning.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
On 25 September, the third report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) for the period
from 20 June to 20 September was presented verbally
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General (see S/PV.8054). During
the presentation of the report, we heard once again a
recounting of the blatant disregard of the call for the
implementation of the provisions in the resolution,
including an increase in the rate of settlement activity.
We remain disappointed by the continued illegal
Israeli settlements, which reflect gross violations of
Palestinian human rights and a blatant disregard of the
provisions outlined in resolution 2334 (2016). When
the Security Council finally decided to take action to
preserve the two-State solution in December 2016, we
did not expect to see the continued disregard for the
responsibility to implement the resolution.

S/PV. 8072

During the NAM Ministerial Meeting on
Palestine in September, we recalled that the political
declaration had highlighted the importance of the
Secretary-General’s reports on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), and, as such, we are committed
to support the movement to institutionalize that
position and explicitly outline measures to ensure that
non-compliance is addressed.
We recognize positive developments and are
encouraged by the reconciliation agreement arrived
at by Fatah and Hamas on 12 October in Cairo. We
urge the negotiating parties to remain fully committed
and to stay on track with regard to honouring those
commitments so as to allow unity to prevail and the
Palestinian Government to assume its responsibilities
in Gaza, including addressing the grave humanitarian
crisis there.
The prolonged occupation and the sustained
settlement enterprise cannot be viewed lightly in the
face of positive developments. They have generated
only more despair, frustration and insecurity in the
region and beyond. We cannot let the Palestinian plight
continue to fall on deaf ears.
Malaysia reiterates the need to address the root cause
of the conflict by ending the repressive occupation of
Palestine by Israel. The international community must
not remain a bystander in relation to the worsening
situation on the ground. We are of the view that it is
misleading to assume that the occupying Power and the
occupied people have the same level of legal, political
and moral obligations and responsibilities. We restate
that substantial obligations are clearly imposed on
occupying Powers to protect the general welfare of
the inhabitants of an occupied territory, including the
protection from forcible transfer, and the protection of
their property. We believe that silence with regard to
that is as good as being complicit.
In conclusion, the words of the Secretary-General
during his recent visit resonated with us and must
be reaffirmed by all of us here that the international
community cannot simply turn away and allow
the situation to deteriorate. We have a role and a
responsibility to support the parties in resolving the
conflict. Malaysia remains committed to advancing a
just, comprehensive and final solution to the conflict
that would see the establishment of an independent,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State based on the

17-3328153/54

S/PV.8072

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side-by-side in peace and security with Israel.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Israel has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): Allow me to comment on
some of the statements that were heard earlier today.
The Iranian representative is under the assumption
that his baseless allegation will somehow divert the
Security Council’s attention from his regime’s deadly
policies and activities. Iran is engaged in a campaign of
aggression in and beyond the Middle East. It backs and
assists the Al-Assad regime, which continues to kill
hundreds of thousands of Syrians, including through the
use of the world’s most despicable means — chemical
weapons. It fuels some of the worst conflicts in our
world today in Yemen and elsewhere. Wherever there

54/54

18/10/2017

is terror, there is Iran. Iran can say all it wants in the
Council, but there will never be enough words to mask
Iran’s true identity. Iran is the world’s first and main
sponsor of terror, in both words and deeds.
As for the Lebanese Ambassador, who spoke
of justice and gave advice, what exactly is justice?
Where is justice in the conditions which Palestinians
and Syrians endure in Lebanon under the country’s
discriminatory legislation? And on what grounds
does he have the authority to give advice? Is it on the
ground of having a Government that is controlled by a
designated terrorist organization and the moral basis of
following policies created by Hizbullah operatives? To
those countries, I would recommend taking a long look
in the mirror before taking the floor, and especially
before attempting to advise others.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

17-33281
