S/2017/801

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Colombia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the final report on the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Colombia, which concludes on 25 September 2017.
In addition to covering major developments during the final 90 -day reporting
period, from 24 June to 25 September, it takes stock of the activities carried out
throughout the course of the Mission’s mandate. It also covers provisional work
undertaken by the Mission to prepare the ground for the future Verification Mission,
as requested by the Council in its resolution 2366 (2017).

II. Major developments
2.
The reporting period was marked, above all, by the culmination of the
ceasefire, the cessation of hostilities and the process for the laying dow n of arms
that has unfolded since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, 10 months earlier, in November 2016, and
the transformation of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s
Army (FARC-EP) from a military organization into a new political party. The period
also witnessed the start of the reintegration phase for former members of the
FARC-EP.
3.
The transformation of the FARC-EP into the People’s Alternative Revolutionary
Force signifies the transition of the FARC-EP into civilian life. More than 1,200
FARC-EP delegates took part in the founding congress, which was held in Bogota
from 27 August to 1 September. The leader of FARC-EP, Rodrigo Londoño, also
known as Timoleón Jiménez, was named head of the new party, and a national
political council of 15 members was elected. The members expressed their readiness,
in the context of the presidential elections to be held in 2018, to join a coalition
government that would support the implementation of the Final Agreement.
4.
Another step towards the reintegration of FARC-EP was taken on 15 August
2017 when the group submitted a final inventory of its property and assets, as
required in the Final Agreement. On 24 August, the Government establi shed a
transitional interministerial commission to review the inventory and oversee its
management. Members of the People’s Alternative Revolutionary Force will be
appointed to ensure the handover of the material listed in the inventory, which,
under the Final Agreement, is to be used for reparations for victims of the armed
conflict.

17-16445 (E)

280917

*1716445*

S/2017/801

Major legislation approved under “fast track” procedures
5.
By the end of the reporting period, three important peace implementation laws
had been adopted by Congress, one of which is pending reconciliation, and seven
draft laws were pending consideration. The laws were passed under the so -called
“fast track” procedures that allow for expedited congressional approval and will
expire at the end of 2017. On 9 August, Congress adopted legislation to establish a
subdirectorate of the National Protection Unit to provide security to members of the
former FARC-EP and its successor political party under a mixed protection scheme
with the national police. On 15 August, Congress adopted reforms to the National
Royalty System, which provide for the earmarking of seven per cent of all royalties
from natural resource concessions collected by municipal governments to support
the implementation of the Final Agreement over the next 20 years. Finally, on
28 August, the Chamber of Representatives adopted legislation on the monopoly of
force, including a constitutional prohibition of illegal armed civilian groups of any
type. The law will now be reconciled with a version previously adopted by t he
Senate.
6.
Other draft laws pending in Congress have implications for the legislative and
presidential elections of 2018, including a draft law on political reform and a draft
law regulating the creation of 16 special transitory peace electoral districts for
social and civic representatives in areas affected by the conflict.
7.
The statutory law establishing a special jurisdiction for peace to address
crimes committed during the armed conflict is currently under consideration. On
29 August, the Attorney General publicly expressed concern that, as a result of
delays, the work of that jurisdiction, which is to play a part in the reintegration
process, may not begin until April or May 2018.
8.
Finally, four pieces of legislation related to various dimensions of rural
development and land tenure are pending consideration by Congress. These include
legislation on a multipurpose land registry for rural areas, access to land within
forest reserves, the creation of a national system for agricultural and fishery
innovation and the regulation of land development a public programme supporting
land productivity and infrastructure.
9.
On 10 July, the President issued the last of three decrees granting amnesty to a
total of 6,005 FARC-EP members who had completed the laying down of arms and
been accredited by the Colombian Office of the High Commissioner for Peace.
Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement
10. During the reporting period, the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement continued to work to
address challenges to the implementation of the Final Agreement. Following the
road map agreement of 29 May 2017, minor adjustments were required during the
reporting period. The parties to the agreement decided, inter alia, to postpone by
two weeks, that is until 15 August, the transformation of the zones and points where
the laying down of arms would take place into territorial areas for training and
reintegration, where former combatants would initiate their reintegration. On
29 August, the Government appointed two new representatives to the Commission,
Interior Minister Guillermo Rivera and the newly appointed High Commissioner for
Peace Rodrigo Rivera Salazar. The latter succeeded Sergio Jaramillo, who played a
central role in the peace process since the beginnin g of the negotiations with
FARC-EP.

2/16

17-16445

S/2017/801

11. The Special High-level Forum for Women was established on 29 July and,
together with the Special High-level Forum for Ethnic Peoples established on
15 March, is to serve as an interlocutor and advisor to the Commission to bring the
perspectives and contributions of women and ethnic peoples into the peace
implementation process. Both bodies have strongly called for greater engagement
with the Commission to fulfil their obligations under the Final Agreement.
Temporary bilateral ceasefire between the Government of Colombia and the
National Liberation Army
12. On 4 September, the Government of Colombia and the National Liberation
Army announced, within the framework of the peace talks held in Quito, that they
had agreed to a bilateral and temporary ceasefire to take effect from 1 October 2017
to 12 January 2018, as well as several humanitarian measures. The announc ement
was made just before the visit to Colombia from 6 to 10 September of Pope Francis,
who called for reconciliation among all Colombians. The parties also announced the
establishment of a monitoring and verification mechanism that would involve the
Government, the National Liberation Army, the United Nations and the Catholic
Church. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Colombia has been
in consultations with both parties on the modalities of the potential support of the
United Nations for this process, on the basis of which the Secretary-General will
make recommendations as soon as possible for consideration by the Council.

III. Mission tasks
A.

Activities relating to the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and
coordination of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
13. Throughout the Mission’s mandate, the tripartite Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism, comprised of observers from the United Nations, the Government of
Colombia and FARC-EP, proved to be an invaluable confidence-building tool at all
levels. The Mission, as its coordinator, focused its monitoring responsibilities on the
zones and points mentioned above, the security zones and the surrounding areas
where the armed forces are deployed.
14. Since the beginning of its activities, the Mechanism has received 491 requests
for the verification of incidents, and 473 incidents have been verified . Of those,
331 were deemed outside the mandate of the Mechanism, while the remaining
142 incidents comprised 78 cases of non-compliance with ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities protocols due to misinterpretations or a lack of coordination, 54 minor
violations and 10 serious violations. Most violations were related to movements of
FARC-EP members, incursions by the public security forces into the security zones
of the zones or points, and irregularities in the security controls on access to the
zones and points. No serious violations were recorded during the reporting period.

B.

Laying down of arms
Laying down of individual arms
15. During the reporting period, the Mission completed the individual certification
of FARC-EP members who had laid down arms at the zones and points. This
individual certification was a key component of the process that enab led FARC-EP
members to complete their transition towards legality and fully participate in the
reintegration phase. The storing in the Mission’s containers of arms brought into the
camps by FARC-EP members was completed on 27 June 2017.

17-16445

3/16

S/2017/801

16. All unstable material in the zones and points was destroyed and all collected
ammunition was incinerated between 1 and 28 July. Technical guidance and
instruction videos were disseminated to observers at local team sites to ensure that
those actions were carried out safely and effectively.
17. Between 31 July and 15 August, containers were removed from all 26 camps
through a series of land and air-land operations and transported to a central
warehouse outside of Bogota. The transportation of the containers was carried ou t
by convoys escorted by the national police and the armed forces.
18. On 15 August, the removal of containers at the camp of Pondores (La Guajira
Department) marked the conclusion of the process and was celebrated in a
ceremony attended by President Juan Manuel Santos and the FARC-EP leadership.
This event initiated the transformation of each of the zones and points into
territorial areas for training and reintegration. Subsequently, former combatants
were granted freedom of movement into and out of their camps.
19. On 16 August, the Mission began to disable all armaments at the central
warehouse.
Verification of the disposal of arms caches
20. During the reporting period, the pace of operations to verify the disposal of
arms caches accelerated as the deadline of 1 September neared. Those operations
were conducted by the Mission with FARC-EP, and logistical and security
assistance from the armed forces and the police. On 31 August, at the request of the
Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement, the deadline was extended for an additional two weeks, that
is until 15 September. Since that date, the Colombian armed forces have been in
charge of disposing of remaining caches, with the support of former FARC-EP
members.
21. Two security incidents occurred during arms cache verification operations. On
6 August, in the area of El Pedregal, Cauca Department, an attack allegedly
committed by FARC-EP dissidents resulted in the wounding of one member of the
police escort. On 14 August, a member of the armed forces was killed when he
stepped on a landmine while his unit was securing the perimeter for an arms cache
verification operation in the municipality of Novita, Chocó Department.
22. Over the course of the Mission’s mandate, FARC-EP provided information on
more than 1,000 arms caches. By the completion of operations, on 15 September,
the Mission had undertaken a total of 182 operations in coordination with FARC-EP
to remove arms and destroy explosives from 750 arms caches.
23. On 22 September, the Mission informed the Government of Colombia about
the completion of its activities relating to the laying down of arms by FARC -EP,
including the disposal of arms collected in the zones and points, the materia l
extracted from arms caches and all unstable material. In the course of the process
for the laying down of arms, the Mission collected a total of 8,994 arms, 1,765,862
ammunition rounds, 38,255 kg of explosives, 11,015 grenades, 3,528 antipersonnel
mines, 46,288 electric detonation caps, 4,370 mortar rounds and 51.911 metres of
detonating cord and fuses.

4/16

17-16445

S/2017/801

C.

Monitoring of the provision of goods and services to Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s Army camps
24. Both parties requested that the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism assess
progress in establishing FARC-EP camps and in providing logistical support and
health care. The Mechanism also supported and facilitated the implementation of
some reintegration activities led by private and public entities in the zones and
points, including training initiatives under the National Vocational Training Service,
the issuance of identity documents by the National Registry and other activities
carried out by universities and non-governmental organizations.
25. The Mechanism continued to monitor the delivery of supplies to FARC -EP
camps, including food, clothing, hygiene items and cleaning products.
Improvements were seen during the reporting period, especially with rega rd to the
supply of food. The ties with local communities continue to be strengthened in
keeping with agreements regarding the purchase of food from local producers. In
some cases, as a result of the successful implementation of some productive and
agricultural projects by FARC-EP members in the camps, food was purchased from
FARC-EP producers. The provision of food and other products by the Government
has been extended until 15 October, and the provision of health care until
30 November. The provision of health care at camp level continues to suffer from
the fact that it cannot handle the more serious and chronic conditions.

D.

Gender mainstreaming and engagement with women’s groups
26. Throughout its mandate, the Mission had strong and consistent enga gement
with women’s groups at the national, regional and local levels, and it worked
closely with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women (UN-Women) on gender issues. The Mission also worked with the
Mechanism to ensure a gender-sensitive approach in the activities of the
Mechanism. Under the Mechanism gender directive, tripartite gender teams were
established in regional offices and local team sites. These teams work with the
civilian population on gender issues and facilitate their engagement with the
Mechanism.
27. During the reporting period, ongoing dialogue with women representatives
from FARC-EP, the Women’s Special High-level Forum that supports the
Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement and other women’s networks provided important inputs for
the planning of the Verification Mission and recommendations on how best to
integrate a gender approach in verification tasks.

E.

Activities related to the liaison and coordination functions
28. Throughout its mandate, the Mission consistently engaged with a broad array
of counterparts, including national, regional and local authorities and the
international community, as well as civil society organizations, women’s networks,
ethnic group representatives, religious leaders and academia members.
29. During the reporting period, the Mission focused its liaison and engagement
activities on organizing briefings and exchanges on the completion of its mandate,
the evolution of the peace process and the mandate of the new Verification Mission,
as well as on the different perspectives on reintegration and security guarantees.
Civil society organizations have highlighted their concerns about threats against
community and social leaders, human rights defenders and FARC -EP members.

17-16445

5/16

S/2017/801

Private sector representatives have conveyed their interest in collaborating with the
Government in support of the reintegration of former combatants. The Special High level Forum on Ethnic Peoples stressed the importance of bringing a communitysensitive perspective to efforts to advance peace, security, reintegration and
reconciliation.
Coordination with the United Nations country team
30. While the Mission was not integrated with the United Nations country team,
there was a very good level of coordination throughout the course of the Mission’s
mandate. During the start-up phase, the Mission relied heavily on the existing
capacity of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to undert ake
procurement activities on behalf of the Mission, under cooperation arrangements
consistent with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. UNDP
provided temporary office accommodations for several months pending the
identification of Mission headquarters in Bogota. The Mission also drew on existing
capacity of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Bogota to facilitate the
provision of travel services. When the Mission began expanding to the regional and
local levels, the country team counterparts provided invaluable support in terms of
logistics, expertise and engagement with local actors. As the United Nations
Mission in Colombia transitions into the Verification Mission, regular coordination
with the country team is taking place at the national, regional and local levels,
including through participation in the local coordination teams established by the
country team.
31. During the reporting period, the Mission also co-led with the Office of the
Resident Coordinator an integrated planning process that led to the
recommendations on the new Verification Mission (see S/2017/745). As a result of
this planning process, a core group was established to ensure a coordinated
approach in areas of mutual interest (i.e., information management, local
coordination and risk analysis) as well as two joint Mission -country team working
groups focused on both aspects of the new Verification Mission’s mandate, namely,
reintegration and security guarantees. The Mission and the country team are
currently undertaking efforts to co-locate regional and subregional offices of the
Verification Mission, where feasible, with a view to increasing efficiency.
32. On 27 June, following a formal request from President Juan Manuel Santos,
the Secretary-General declared Colombia eligible to access financing from the
Peacebuilding Fund, which will offer funding opportunities over the next 18 months
for comprehensive stabilization interventions in the territories affected by the
conflict, support for victims of forced displacement and the political and
socioeconomic integration of former combatants.

IV. Provisional verification activities carried out pursuant to
resolution 2366 (2017)
33. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2366 (2017), the Mission began on
10 July the verification of commitments relating to the reintegration of former
FARC-EP members and security guarantees for the group and for conflict -affected
communities that will be the focus of the work of the Verification Mission that will
start on 26 September. These activities have been developed by the Mission’s
current 9 regional and 26 local headquarters.

6/16

17-16445

S/2017/801

A.

Security guarantees
34. Prior to the start of initial verification activities on 10 July, the following
national structures were put in place as part of the commitment to establishing an
integrated security system: the creation on 9 December 2016 of the Technical
Committee on Security and Protection, with the participation of members of the
Government and the FARC-EP; the adoption on 23 February of legislation setting
up a national protection unit to provide security to FARC -EP members; and the
creation of the Subdirectorate of the National Protection Unit and the Security and
Protection Corps. At the time of reporting, 210 former FARC -EP members had
completed the mandatory training to become part of the National Protection Unit
that will be formed of up to 1,200 FARC-EP personnel, along with members of the
national police.
35. A key focus of efforts in the period since 10 July has been the strengthening of
the deployment of Colombian police and armed forces around the 26 territorial
areas for training and reintegration, where most of the former combatants live, and
to nearby communities. This reconfiguration of the State’s security pres ence was
initiated on 15 August as the final arms were removed from the 26 zones and points.
36. With regard to the police, the basic unit of the rural mounted police has
established posts in all 26 territorial areas, with an average of 33 police officers at
each of those locations. All posts have at least one female officer responsible for
gender-related issues and gender-based violence. The unit is also consulting with
former combatants and communities about the establishment of immediate attention
police centres near each of the territorial areas. In addition, the police has begun
implementing the “Communities Safe and at Peace” programme, aimed at
strengthening trust and dialogue with communities, local organizations and former
combatants.
37. With regard to military presence, the battalions of terrestrial operations are
positioned in the proximity of all 26 territorial areas. An average of 350 soldiers are
positioned at each location, in keeping with parameters announced under Plan
Victoria, the main territorial stabilization operation of the Ministry of Defence.
Given the forthcoming termination of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism,
the armed forces have designed an inter-institutional concept, known as “Blue
Tents” which seeks to bring public security entities under the same roof at the local
level and improve coordination with communities, civil authorities and former
combatants, mainly on security issues. The Mission verified that these coordination
mechanisms had begun activities in several territorial areas in the Antioquia, Cesar,
Guaviare and Meta Departments. The establishment of Blue Tents in the remaining
areas is pending.
38. The response to these deployments from both communities and former
combatants has been positive, as have efforts to establish regular channels for
dialogue. At the same time, the communities have made it clear that their
understanding of security includes not just protection but also basic social services,
which they see as a necessary complement to the actions of se curity forces.
39. With regard to other security-related commitments under the Final Agreement,
during the reporting period, the Subcommission of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees undertook activities focused on the following areas: finalizin g
the Commission’s workplan and its internal regulations; analysing the pattern of
attacks against human rights defenders and social leaders; and better defining its
approach to criminal groups, especially those successors of paramilitary groups. It
should be noted that the Subcommission has engaged with civil society during this
process.

17-16445

7/16

S/2017/801

40. On 25 July, the committee responsible for the selection of the Director of the
Special Investigation Unit under the Office of the Attorney General called for
applications for that position. It is expected that the committee will present on
14 November three candidates for the Attorney General’s consideration. The Special
Investigation Unit is to play a major role in efforts to dismantle organizations
responsible for attacks on human rights defenders, social movements, political
movements and those taking part in the implementation of the peace process.
41. In June, an elite police corps was created to serve, together with the Special
Investigation Unit, as first responders to criminal incidents covered under the Final
Agreement. The elite corps, which is reported to have currently 1,088 members, has
thus far focused on combating the Gulf Cartel criminal organization and on
supporting the investigations of cases of attacks on human rights defenders and
social leaders.
42. The National Commission on Security Guarantees continues to monitor and
examine allegations of attacks on human rights defenders and social leaders. The
persistence of these cases requires prompt and effective action by State institutions
to identify and punish those responsible, as well as a comprehensive and careful
analysis to determine the underlying causes of violence and its impact on
communities and their political participation.
43. Similarly, during the reporting period, the Mission received repor ts from the
Office of the Attorney General, the police and human rights organizations about
eight cases of homicide of former FARC-EP members and their relatives (seven
former members and one relative). Going back further, since the former FARC -EP
entered the zones in January 2017, the Mission has received reports from the
aforementioned entities of 25 cases of homicide against former FARC -EP
combatants (13) and their relatives (12). Among the former, five had recently
received amnesty, five had been living within the zones and three had been living
outside the zones. The majority (eight) of the former members belonged to militia
structures of the FARC-EP. At the time of reporting, all cases were under
investigation and three had resulted in the capture of suspects, who were pending
prosecution. In one case, the perpetrator was convicted through the special
indigenous jurisdiction. Most perpetrators, however, had not been arrested and the
motivations for most of those crimes remained to be established.
44. Threats to the security of communities, organizations and former combatants
appear to come primarily from persisting armed groups, including FARC -EP
dissidents, and the effects of illegal economic activities. Even though no direct
threat posed by these groups to former combatants has been identified in most
territorial areas for training and reintegration, security entities are concerned about
the risks that they may present once the political and socioeconomic reintegration
process is more advanced, especially if political and social activities are perceived
by those groups as a threat. In this context, an exercise involving assessments of
collective risks for former combatants, the identification of individual high -risk
cases and recommendations for protection arrangements has been carried out in
20 of the 26 territorial areas.

B.

Resolution of legal situation
45. A prerequisite for the reintegration of FARC-EP members is the resolution of
their legal situation. As set forth in the road map of 29 May 20 17, the parties agreed
in the framework of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification
of the Implementation of the Final Agreement that the Government should take all
measures necessary to ensure that, by the completion of the process for the laying

8/16

17-16445

S/2017/801

down of arms, all members of the FARC-EP in prison would be either freed or
granted conditional release, a responsibility that lies with the judicial branch, and all
members of FARC-EP in the zones and points would be granted amnesty and arrest
warrants against them would be lifted. This has proved to be more challenging than
initially envisaged.
46. Following meetings with political and judicial actors to discuss possible
avenues to facilitate rapid compliance with those commitments, the Missio n issued
a public statement on 13 July in which it expressed concern over the continuing
imprisonment of FARC-EP members despite the adoption of an amnesty law (Law
No. 1820 of 2016) and related decrees. Working with both parties, the Mission
further initiated an active verification of compliance with commitments.
47. Among the measures taken by the Government, the following should be
highlighted: Decree 1252 of 2017 to facilitate and accelerate judicial decisions in
application of the amnesty law; Decree 285 of 2017 designating 709 FARC-EP
members as “peace advocates” able to undertake peace-related tasks outside prison
despite ongoing judicial proceedings against them under the amnesty law; and
Decree 1274 of 2017, which grants conditional release to FARC -EP members who
had been charged or sentenced with serious crimes but had not served more than
5 years of prison time and had been transferred to alternative detention facilities
during the previous phase, and which also lifts all arrest warrants against FA RC-EP
members, including those issued for extradition purposes. The Government
reported, that as at 8 September 2017, a total number of 2,590 FARC -EP members
had been released from prison, of an estimated total of 3,000 to 3,400.
48. Constructive discussions continue to take place between the Government and
FARC-EP with a view to ensuring full implementation of all measures. Critical
issues that should be addressed include, among others, the prevention of arrest and
detention of FARC-EP members, the conclusion of pending judicial proceedings (in
particular those relating to the amnesty law), the release of all designated peace
advocates and of those under consideration for this designation, as well as the
resolution of extradition requests and individual cases of special resident peace
visas for foreign members of FARC-EP.

C.

Reintegration
49. At the present time, the reintegration of the members of FARC -EP is
undoubtedly the most critical task within the overall peace consolidation agenda.
The grave problems caused by armed dissidence in several parts of the country or
the attempts by armed groups and illegal actors to lure former combatants with the
prospect of high benefits serve as a reminder of what could be the implications of
failure. Time is of the essence as, 10 months after the signing of the Final
Agreement, and while the laying down of arms is celebrated as a great achievement,
the mindset of many former FARC-EP members in the territorial areas for training
and reintegration remains one of uncertainty, or even anxiety, as to what the future
holds. Over the past several months, preparation has taken place in several areas,
and a number of actions have been undertaken. Today, as government support for
the territorial areas with regard to food, health and other services is scheduled to
come to an end, uncertainty must give way to confidence and anxiety to a positive
outlook, in particular with regard to the productive future of those FARC members
with a farmer’s background who aim at reintegration in the rural areas. Furthermore,
the reintegration of former FARC-EP members is bound to have an impact on
another dimension of the restoration of peace in Colombia: the peace process
between the Government and the National Liberation Army.

17-16445

9/16

S/2017/801

Political reintegration
50. The law of May 2017 that contains the provisions for political reintegration is
still under review by the Constitutional Court. As mentioned above, the founding
congress of FARC as a political party defined the main elements of its polit ical
platform and met the organizational requisites for its registration as a political party
by the National Electoral Council. Twenty-three per cent of the 111 elected
members of the party’s directorate are women.
51. In June, the policy and research institute Centre for Political Thought and
Dialogue was established with support from the United Nations Multi -Partner Trust
Fund. The Centre provides technical support to the new FARC political party in the
context of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement and the National Reintegration Council, as
well as technical support to the six provisional FARC spokespersons in Congress
(who do not have the right to vote).
Socioeconomic reintegration
52. The National Reintegration Council has met regularly but is yet to fulfil its
central responsibility: the definition of an overall strategy for the reintegration
process. The absence of a strategy and implementation plan for socioeconomic
reintegration is a serious challenge. The restructured Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization, which has carried out an early reintegration plan, will have an
important role in the implementation of socioeconomic reintegration. As such, it
requires resources and capacities in line with its tasks. The Agency’s Technical Unit
in charge of the reintegration of FARC members, with the direct participation of
former combatants, is still to be created and its director to be appointed.
53. The provision of basic living conditions to the former combatants in the
territorial areas for training and reintegration is a major aspect of their reintegration.
Reintegration efforts with a community-based focus were to begin upon the
conversion of the zones and points to those territorial areas on 15 August. The
management of the areas remains the responsibility of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Peace until 1 October and will then shift to the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization. Owing to logistical delays over the past eight
months, only seven of the 26 FARC-EP camps have been fully built. Therefore, one
of the main operational challenges is completing the camps, in addition to ensuring
continuity of services, especially health services, into the reintegrat ion phase.
Health care is a particularly sensitive issue given the fact that, as has been observed
in guerrilla groups undergoing reintegration, a high number of former combatants
suffer from chronic conditions. There are 17 particularly serious cases that require
specialized attention. The Agency, together with FARC, is trying to attend those
cases but faces logistical challenges. In addition, the programme that focuses on
high-cost health care and the treatment of injuries suffered by FARC -EP members
during the conflict, which is provided under Decree 899 of 2017, has not yet been
implemented.
54. During the reporting period, the Agency focused its efforts on the
implementation of early reintegration plans that include access to health,
psychosocial and pension services, education and vocational training, cultural and
sports activities and fostering community engagement.
55. With regard to financial support, during the reporting period, the Government
began the process of opening bank accounts for former FARC-EP members in the
Agrarian Bank of Colombia. Bank accounts are a prerequisite for the Government to
be able to transfer payments (basic income, a one-off normalization allowance and

10/16

17-16445

S/2017/801

economic support for productive projects) to which former combatants a re eligible
over a period of 24 months. The Agency reported that 9,491 of the 11,445 persons
accredited by the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace had opened bank
accounts. The Mission received reports of difficulties in completing required
documentation and accreditation. On 30 August, payments began to eligible
members for their basic income and one-off normalization allowance.
56. One of the important challenges faced by the National Reintegration Council
will be to work with former FARC-EP members and conflict-affected communities
to define a viable model of economic reintegration. The reporting period has been
marked by the start of a limited number of actions at the national and local levels.
On 6 July, the results of a socioeconomic census of FARC-EP members were
submitted to the National Reintegration Council by the National University. They
drew upon a survey of 10,015 former FARC-EP members, of whom 2,267 were
women. Some of the preliminary findings are that 66 per cent of former combatants
came from rural areas; 77 per cent reported having no housing; 60 per cent
expressed interest in collective agricultural activities, while 39 per cent indicated a
preference for working in construction and housing; and 7.5 per cent of women of
reproductive age were pregnant. A significant percentage of the respondents
indicated that they were of ethnic origin (18 per cent considered themselves
indigenous and 12 per cent Afrodescendent) pointing to the need for effective
coordination with ethnic authorities and mechanisms.
57. On 4 July, Ecomun, a joint social and economic cooperative organization for
former FARC-EP members, was launched, although it has had limited activity to
date owing to delays in defining a strategy for the economic reintegration of its
members. One of the main achievements of Ecomun has been the successful training
of 4,947 former FARC-EP members in “solidarity economy” (cooperative models)
at the territorial areas for training and reintegration. The road map of 29 May 2017
provided for the establishment of a working group for the formulation, within
60 days, of viable productive projects to be implemented by Ecomun or other
organizations. The working group was established but has not presented its
conclusions to the National Reintegration Council. For its part, the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization has visited 12 territorial areas for training and
reintegration and designed seven projects. In addition, UNDP is working with the
National Reintegration Council to support the deployment of experts to facilitate the
formulation of sustainable productive projects. So far, only a few productive
projects have been presented to the National Reintegration Council, mostly
supported by the international community, namely, a capacity-building project
funded by Caritas Norway and the Acuacop cooperative, and environmental
protection programmes for members of the former FAR C-EP and the conflictaffected communities in Miravalle (Antioquia Department) and Mesetas and
Macarena (Meta Department), supported by the Ministry of Environment, the
Norwegian Refugee Council, UNDP and the Colombian Foundation of Former
Combatants and Peace Promotors (FUCEPAZ).
58. A mine action project implemented by a humanitarian demining organization
composed of former FARC members (Humanicemos), supported by the
Government’s agency on mine action (the Department for Comprehensive Action
against Antipersonnel Mines) and the Mine Action Service of the United Nations,
and with funding from the European Union, is aimed at employing 1,000 former
FARC-EP members.
59. The Mission can also report examples of economic initiatives launched by
former FARC-EP members themselves. In Colinas (Guaviare Department), former
FARC-EP members have started a project with food crops as well as livestock. Apart
from the construction of greenhouses, which was funded by a non-governmental
17-16445

11/16

S/2017/801

organization, the remainder of the initiative has been self-funded. In Agua Bonita
(Caquetá Department), five projects have been identified: fish farming, bakery,
carpentry shop, shoe shop and an agricultural initiative. In La Reforma (Meta
Department), projects are under way to grow sacha inchi seeds, with a view to
exporting the oil produced therefrom.
60. One of the key challenges for the sustainability of economic reintegration is
access to land, which has not been clearly established in the Final Agreement. An
appropriate and swift mechanism for land titling should be urgently established to
ensure the viability of productive projects for former FARC -EP members and
communities. It is also important to follow up on the commitment in the road map
agreement that refers to a land inventory (which may include property listed in the
inventory of FARC-EP assets) that will be available to former FARC-EP members
and communities for productive projects.
61. While female former combatants have participated in the available
reintegration programmes, the implementation of those projects does not clearly
address the specific situation of women yet. Local initiatives by women’s
organizations have sought to include female former combatants, as in Pondores
(Guajira Department), where the Association of Women Coffee Growers from Perijá
has opened opportunities for female former combatants to get involved in the
Association and its projects.
62. Thirty-four minors were removed from FARC-EP camps on 15 and 16 August
with the support of the International Committee of the Red Cross. From September
2016 to August 2017, 122 minors formerly associated with the FARC -EP (66 girls
and 56 boys) began the reintegration process, which implied their registration as
victims, their inclusion in the special programme for reintegration known as “A
Different Path of Life” led by the Office of the Presidential Council for Human
Rights and their being granted access to the administrative programme of rights
restitution. The effective implementation of the programme is still incipi ent and
specific details about its scope, timeline, costs, funding and modalities for transition
to the adult programme have not been publicly shared. Efforts are being made by
the Office of the Presidential Council for Human Rights to address the issue of
minors who exited the camps during early phases of the process for the laying down
of arms. The Government arranged for continued care for 118 minors, including
through temporary care institutions (22), family reunification (44), foster families
(5) and temporary care centres (19 minors remain in the centres managed by the
International Organization for Migration and the United Nations Children ’s Fund).
In addition, 10 minors opted to return to the territorial areas for training and
reintegration and another 18 who have reached 18 years of age are transitioning to
the adult programme. Efforts to support minors living in the territorial areas are
ongoing. Nevertheless, comprehensive access to protection, health care, education
and recreational activities remains a challenge. The reintegration programmes for
families with young children are also pending.
63. A health profiling exercise was conducted in the zones and points by the
Ministry of Health. Health services in those areas were initially provided throug h
mobile basic health posts and mobile teams and limited to basic health services.
Logistical difficulties and a lack of supplies were some of the challenges faced in
the implementation of health programmes.
64. Some 9,755 persons have been affiliated with the social security system,
which is a partial but significant step in improving access to health care. The
Mission reports that a more modest estimate of 3,840 former combatants have been
affiliated with the national pension fund, owing to limited info rmation in the local
areas regarding the affiliation process and its benefits.
12/16

17-16445

S/2017/801

V. Mission structures
A.

International observers
65. As at 10 September, the Mission had 428 observers deployed from 19 countries,
of an authorized ceiling of 450, 49 of whom (11 per cent) were women.
66. With a view to ensuring a seamless transition to the Verification Mission, the
Mission has requested that a number of observers just below the ceiling of
120 authorized in resolution 2377 (2017) remain on the ground until the end of the
tour of duty to serve with the Verification Mission. Remaining observers will be
repatriated in a staggered manner starting on 25 September. Observers to be
repatriated will remain operational until the end of the Mission’s mandate, on
25 September, after which, pending their checkout, they will focus on administrative
handover tasks.
67. On 18 August, a Chilean observer died of a sudden health condition. The
Mission paid tribute to his dedication and service.

B.

Coordination and substantive personnel
68. The Mission has recruited a total of 96 international civilian staff, that i s,
86 per cent of the authorized strength, 78 national staff out of an authorized strength
of 100 and 53 United Nations Volunteers, equivalent to 93 per cent of the authorized
strength. In August 2017, women comprised 48 per cent of the civilian staff of the
Mission.

C.

Mission support
69. With regard to the operations of the tripartite Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism, the Government of Colombia and the United Nations agreed on a cost sharing arrangement whereby the cost of support would be allocated between the
United Nations and the Government in accordance with applicable Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2307 (2016).
70. The Mission and the Government of Colombia are in the final stages of
negotiation of the pending letters of assist for the pr ovision of premises, transport
services and communications and of the memorandum of understanding governing
cost-sharing arrangements in order to complete pending transactions from the
Mission in Colombia.
71. During the reporting period, Mission Support focused on three dimensions of
the process for the laying down of arms: the provision of air support and land
transportation for operations to dispose of arms caches; the provision of aviation
and movement control support to transport arms and ammunition to Bogota safely,
and the provision of logistical and technical support for disabling arms collected
through the process for the laying down of arms.
72. A second focus during the period has been to ensure the continuity of
operations as the Mission transitions from its current status, with its considerable
reliance on government-provided services, to that of the Verification Mission, which
will depend fully on United Nations support arrangements. Mission Support is
working to establish Mission contracts through direct negotiations with existing
vendors to ensure continuity in ground transport support and is developing options
for office and staff accommodations to ensure continuity of operations at the
26 local sites after 25 September, when governmental support is expected to end. At

17-16445

13/16

S/2017/801

some of the local sites that are distant from population centres, the Mission is
working to identify solutions for challenging conditions, including potable water,
the availability of goods and services and access to health facilities.

D.

Conduct and discipline
73. During the reporting period, the Mission continued to focus its conduct and
discipline efforts on prevention measures, such as enhanced induction training
sessions, the conduction of refresher training sessions and monitoring visits by the
Conduct and Discipline Team to regional offices and local sites. The Mission
initiated the mapping of government actors involved in victim assistance, including
their local presence in the regions where Mission personnel are deployed.
74. Two allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were reported over the course
of the Mission’s mandate. One was found to be unsubstantiated, while the other is
currently under review at Headquarters. Both cases were also reported to the Office
of the Attorney General. After its own investigations, the Office recently closed both
cases and declined to press charges.

E.

Safety and security
75. On 5 July, the employee of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime who
had been held hostage for more than two months by members of a dissident
FARC-EP front in Guaviare Department was released unharmed. However, given
continuing security concerns, the previously adopted restrictions on non -essential,
unescorted movements of United Nations personnel continued to apply in areas of
Cauca, Guaviare, Meta and Caquetá Departments. The security risk assessment
developed for the Mission predicts that residual risk levels in relation to most
identified threats (kidnapping, attack by spoilers, crossfire and violent
demonstrations) vary between low and medium. From a security management
perspective, the activities planned for the Mission were considered viable insofar as
the relevant risk management measures were fully implemented. Landmines
continued to pose considerable risk in some areas.
76. Throughout its mandate, the Mission had a unified security structure with
safety and security coordination and advice being provided jointly by the
Department of Safety and Security to the Mission and the country team. This
approach evolved over the course of the mandate as the concept was refined both at
Headquarters and on the ground. Given that the unified security structure has proved
useful, it is advisable that it be continued for the forthcoming Mission and that its
potential for maximizing efficiency in similar situations be analysed.

VI. Observations
77. The United Nations Mission in Colombia will conclude its mandate on
25 September, having accomplished the two tasks entrusted to it by the Security
Council. Its role in coordinating the tripartite Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism for the cease-fire and the cessation of hostilities and its specific role
with respect to overseeing the laying down of arms have undoubtedly contributed to
the successful implementation of the corresponding provisi ons of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
through which more than five decades of conflict between the FARC -EP and the
State of Colombia have been brought to a close. The strong united support of the
Security Council and the international community, the dedication and hard work of
14/16

17-16445

S/2017/801

the Mission’s personnel and, above all, the firm political will of both parties have
made these initial accomplishments possible. My observations will focus on the
lessons learned from the Mission, which may be useful for the United Nations and
in the future.
78. I would like to draw attention to the commitment to and trust in the process
shown by the Security Council from the outset, as it responded to the wish of the
Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP for a United Nations peace operation to
provide support to their peace process. The Organization has been able in this case
to offer a response that was quick, flexible and tailored to the particularities of the
Colombian situation. The Council had the foresight to invest in the peace process at
an early stage, lending its vote of confidence when a final settlement was still not
assured, thus greatly facilitating timely preparations that were an important element
for the successful implementation of the mandate. It is worth recalling that, on
25 January 2016, when it adopted resolution 2261 (2016) establishing the Mission
and authorizing the Secretary-General to begin preparations on the ground, the two
parties were still several months away from concluding their final ceasefire and
eight months from the signing of a final peace agreement. The use of a two -stage
mandating process involving preparations followed by a more detailed mandate
when all information was available, which has also been adopted for the Verification
Mission, proved to be an efficient practice. I commend the Council for this
approach, as well as for providing the Mission with a clear, time -bound and
achievable mandate.
79. The full operational insertion of a United Nations peace operation within a
tripartite mechanism including the two parties to a peace agreement is undoubtedly
one of the innovative elements of our engagement with Colombia. The opportunities
and challenges that it entailed should be analysed for its potential applicability in
other peace processes. During the negotiations of the ceasefire agreement, the
parties invested significant efforts in building confidence between one another. The
same approach was used in the implementation phase, which contributed largely to
the success of the operation. The strong adherence to the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities agreement is at least in part due to the effective functioning of the
Mechanism. On balance, the Mission benefited greatly from its partnership with the
two parties, which facilitated to a large extent the management of a complex
mandate in difficult and remote terrain, without impinging on the Mission’s
independence, which was critical to the credibility of the verification process.
80. Support arrangements were unprecedented in United Nations peace operations
in that the functioning of the tripartite Mechanism, as well as significant aspects of
the establishment and maintenance of the field deployment, were subject to costsharing arrangements with the Government of Colombia, as approved by the
Security Council in its resolution 2307 (2016). This required the introduction of
innovative approaches in delivering necessary services to the Mission and the
Mechanism with the Government acting as primary provider of goods and services
for the latter. The establishment of the respective framework agreements with the
Government of Colombia required in-depth discussions that extended until the final
days of the Mission. At the same time, the Mission’s start-up benefited from the
authorization of standing administrative measures governing human resources
management and the procurement of goods and services.
81. Although the Mission was primarily composed of observers from military and
police backgrounds performing tasks related to ceasefire monitoring, the laying
down of arms and the coordination of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism,
its civilian component performed critical liaison, outreach and public information
tasks that enabled the Mission to engage closely with government counterparts,
local communities and civil society. Outreach by the Mission to all sectors of
17-16445

15/16

S/2017/801

Colombian society contributed to fostering consensus in support of the Mission’s
presence and the relevance of the implementation of the ceasefire and the laying
down of arms, despite continued debate within society with respect to other
elements of the Final Agreement. It was important, over the course of the Mission’s
mandate, to ensure adequate coordination and communication between its civilian
and observer components, including through information-sharing, common
situational analysis and joint outreach to stakeholders.
82. As previously noted, the United Nations country team provided invaluable
operating capabilities for the establishment of the Mission and continued to support
its work throughout the Mission’s mandate. I am confident that the very good
relations between the Mission and the country team, which itself has important
responsibilities with regard to supporting the implementation of the peace
agreements, will strengthen further under the forthcoming Verification Mission.
This experience can provide a useful example for how peace operations can work
together with a country team even though they are not structurally integrated.
83. I would like to express my gratitude to the observer -contributing countries, in
particular those from the Community of Latin American and C aribbean States. The
strong support of the region for the peace process, as well as the broad range of
countries contributing with observers, enhanced the credibility and effectiveness of
the Mission. I would also like to acknowledge the two guarantors of the peace
process, Cuba and Norway, and the two accompanying countries, Chile and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
84. I would like to express once again my recognition and gratitude to all past and
present observers and civilian personnel of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, as well as to my Special Representative for Colombia, Jean Arnault, for
their dedication to the cause of peace in Colombia. The requests from the parties for
additional United Nations verification, especially through the f orthcoming
Verification Mission, are a sign of the confidence generated by the Mission through
the seriousness and impartiality of its work.
85. The peace process in Colombia continues to be a source of good news and
hope for the country and for the world. The achievements of the parties could set an
example for other peace processes elsewhere in the world, and deserve the utmost
credit and recognition. The consolidation of peace, however, will require sustained
commitment by all parties. The mandate of the Verification Mission and the
responsibilities entrusted to the United Nations system in Colombia in the Final
Peace Agreement provide an opportunity to stay the course in supporting this
Colombian-led peace process.

16/16

17-16445
