outline of an overall settlement. They agree with the
Secretary-General's judgement that before such a meeting
could be held, the two sides should be within agreement
range on all the issues. They urgently appeal to ail concerned to spare no efforts to achieve this goal.

again draws attention to the i.:hronic financing problem of the
Force,
Reaffirming again the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 30 May 1990,m in which the members of
the Council emphasized that United Nations peace-keeping
operations must be launched and maintained on a sound and
secure financial basis,

"The members of the Council further endorse the
Secretary-General's intention to have his aides rnect with
all concerned during the months of July and August to try
to work out a set of ideas that would bring the two sides
within agreement range on each of the eight headings of
the outline. The members of the Council request the
Secretary-General to pursue these consultations urgently
and to assist this process by making suggestions.

Stressing the importance of an early agreement on a
resolution of the Cyprus problem,
1. Concludes that a method of financing of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cypnts is nceded which will
put the Force on a sound and secure financial basis;

"The members of the Council request the SecretaryGeneral to provide a full report to the Council by the end
of August on the substance of the ideas that were discussed and the responses of ail concerned and to provide
his assessment of the situation, particularly with regard to
whether the conditions are conducive to a successful
outcome of a high-level international meeting."

Also concludes that the question of the costs of the
Force needs to be studied further, with the aim of both
reducing and clearly defining the costs for which the United
Nations should be responsibk;
2.

3. Requests the Secretary-General to hold consultations
with members of the Council, troop-contributing countries and
others concerned on the question of costs, taking into account
both the report of the United Nations Secretariat review team
on the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus of 7
December 1990114 and the report of the Group of Friends of
the President of the Security Council of 31 May 1991, and to
report to the Council by 1 October 1991, and undertakes to
decide, in the light of this report and by the time of the next
extension of the mandate of the Force on or be fore 15 December 1991, on measures to be taken to put the Force onto a
sound and secure financial basis.

At its 3013th meeting, on 11 October 1991, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The situation in C..yprus: report nf
the Secretary-General on his mission of good offices in Cyprus
(S/23121)". 27

Resolution 716 (1991)
of 11 October 1991

Adopted wianimously al the 299.îrd
mttlin1,

The Security Council.
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of

Decisions

8 October 1991 on his mission of good offices in Cyprus! 17

On 28 June 1991, following consultations of the Security
Council, the President of the Council issued the following
statement on behalf of its mcrnbeni-: 116

Noting with satisfaction the progress made in preparing a
set of ideas as the basis for arriving at an agreed overall
framework agreement on Cyprus,

"The members of the Security Council have considered the Secretary-General's report on his mission of
good offices in Cyprus. They are unanimous in reiterating
their full support of bis current efforts.

Noting with concem the difficulties encountered in completing this work,

Regretting that it was not possible to convene the high-level
international meeting foreseen in the statement made by the
President of the Security Council on 28 June 1991, 116

"The members of the ('_,0uncil recall that they had
urged ail concemed to cooperate with the SecretaryGeneral and to continue the discussions with a view to
resolving without delay the outstanding issues. They regret
that, despite the Secretary-General's efforts, the necessary
progress has not yet becn made on these outstanding
issues.

1. Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts during
the past few months, and endorses bis report and observation~;

"The members of the Council endorse the SecretaryGeneral's view that a high-level international meeting, if
properly prepared and of adequate duration, could give bis
efforts the necessary impetus and achieve an agreed

3. Reaffirms also its position on the Cyprus question,
expressed most recently in resolution 649 (1990) of 12 March
1990 and in line with the high-level agreements of 1977111 and
1979112 between the parties in Cyprus, that the fundamental
principles of a Cyprus settlement are the sovereignty, indepen-

2.

29

Reaffirms its previous resolutions on Cyprus;

Cyprus. lbe membcrs of the Councii agreed to keep this
issue under urgent review."

dence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic
of Cyprus, the exclusion of union in whole or in part with any
other country and of any fonn of partition or secession and the
establishment of a new constitutional arrangement for Cyprus
that would ensure the well-being and security of the Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities in a hi-communal
and hi-zonal fcderation;

At its 3022nd meeting. on 12 December 1991. the Coun.:il
decided to invite the representatives of Canada, Cyprus. Greece
and Turkey to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled ''The situation in Cyprus: report of the Secretary-·
General on the United Nations operations in Cyprus (S(232<i:1
and Add.1)".r

4. Reaffums further that its position on the solution to the
Cyprus prohlem is based on one State of Cyprus comprising
two politically equal communities as defined by the SecretaiyGeneral in the eleventh paragraph of annex I to bis report of
8 March 1990;1!8

At the same meetmg, the Council also decided to cxtend
an invitation to Mr. Osman Ertug undcr ruic 39 ol lht: prov•sional rules of procedure.

5. Calls upon the parties to adhere fully to these principles and to negotiate within the framework of them without
introducing concepts that are at variance with them;

Resolution 723 (1991)

or 12 December 1991

6. Reaffirms that the Secretary-General 's mission of good
offices is with the two communities whose participation in the
process is on an equal footing;

The Security Council,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations operation in Cyprus of 30 November and lZ
December 1991,120

7. Endorses the Secretary-General's intention to resume
discussions in early Novembcr with the two parties in Cyprus
and Greece and Turkey to complete the set of ideas on an
overall framework agreement;

Also taking note of the recommendation by the Secretary General that the Security Council extend the stationing of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cypms for a furthcr
period of six months.

8. Considers that convening a high-level international
meeting chaired hy the Secretary-General in which the two
communities and Greece and Turkey would participate
represents an effective mechanism for concluding an overall
framework agreement on Cyprus;

Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that in
view of the prevailing conditions in the island it is neces.<;ary to
keep the Force in Cyprus beyond 15 December 1991,

9. Requests the leaders of the two communities and
Greece and Turkey to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General and bis representatives so that the high-level international
meeting can be convened before the end of this year;

Reaffirming the provisions of rcsolution 18ô ( 1964) of 4
March 1964 and othe:r relevant resolutions,
1. Extends once more the stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force established under resolution 186 (1964) for a further period ending on 15 June 1992:

10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council in November 1991 whether sufficient progress
bas been made to convene the high-level international meeting
and, should conditions not be ripe, to convey to the Council the
set of ideas as they will have evolved by that time with bis
assessment of the situation.

2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his mission
of good offices, to keep the Security Council infonned of the
progress made and to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution by 31 May 1992;

Adopted unanimously al the 3013th
rntttin&

3. Ca/Lr upon ail the partit>,s concerned to continue to
cooperate with the Force on the basis of the present mandate.

Declslons

Adopted unanimously "' the .?()22:nd
m«tin&

On 12 Deœmber 1991, following consultations of the
Security C,0uncil, the President of the Council made the
following statement on behalf of the members of the Council
to the media, in connection with the item entitled "1be
situation in Cyprus": 119

Decisions

At its 3024th meeting, on 23 December 1991, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The situation in Cyprus: report of
the Secretary-General on bis mission of good offices in Cyprus
(S/23300)". 27

"ln the light of the discussion at the informai consultations of mem bers of the Security Council, it was concluded
that the necessary agreement did not currently exist in the
Council for a decision, to be adopted on a change in the
financing of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in

At the same meeting, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council: 121
30
