90

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

2844 (XXVI). Freedom of information; human
rights and scientific and technological developments; elimination of all forms of religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Considering that there is not enough time for the
consideration of all the items on the agenda of the
Third Committee,
Bearing in mind the need for a full discussion of all
the items,
Decides to consider at its twenty-seventh session the
items entitled "Freedom of information", "Human
rights and scientific and technological developments"
and "Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance".
2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
2852 (XXVI). Respect for human
armed conflicts

rights in

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its determination to continue all efforts
to eliminate the threat or use of force :in international
relations, in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations, and to bring about general and complete disarmament under effective international control, and
reaffirming its desire to secure full observance of human
rights applicable in all armed conflicts pending the
earliest possible termination of such conflicts,
Reaffirming that, in order effectively to guarantee
human rights, all States should devote their efforts to
averting the unleashing of aggressive wars and armed
conflicts that violate the Charter and the provisions of
the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the successive resolutions that have been
adopted by the United Nations relating to human rights
in armed conflicts, in particular General Assembly resolutions 2652 (XXV) of 3 December 1970, 2674
(XXV) and 2678 (XXV) of 9 December 1970 and
2707 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, and taking into
account relevant resolutions of international conferences
of the Red Cross,
Deeply concerned over the terrible suffering that
armed conflicts continue to inflict upon combatants and
civilians, particularly through the use of cruel means
and methods of warfare and through inadequate restraints in defining military objectives,
Desiring to ensure the effective application of all
existing rules relating to human rights in armed conflicts, as well as the development of these rules, and
aware that progress in this regard will depend upon the
political readiness and willingness of Member States,
Conscious that, although negotiations are going on
in the fiel~ of disarmament concerning general and
complete disarmament and the limitation and eliminatioi:i of n_uclear, biological a?d chemical weapons, those
dehberat10ns do not deal with the question of prohibiting or restricting the use of other methods of warfare
that are cruel, such as napalm, or that indiscriminately
affect civilians and combatants,

Noting the comments by Governments28 on the reports of the Secretary-General on respect for human
rights in armed conflicts,29
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral30 on the comprehensive discussions undertaken
at the first session of the Conference of Government
Experts on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, which was held at Geneva from 24 May to
12 June 1971 at the invitation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross,
Having taken cognizance of the report prepared by
the International Committee of the Red Cross on the
work of the Conference of Government Experts,81
Welcoming the decision of the International Committee of the Red Cross to convene in 1972 a second
session of the Conference of Government Experts with
broader participation to include all the States parties to
the Geneva Conventions of 194932 and to circulate in
advance of that session a series of draft protocols,
Stressing the importance of further close co-operation
between the United Nations and the International
Committee of the Red Cross,
Determined to continue its efforts to achieve better
application of existing rules relating to armed conflicts,
as well as the reaffirmation and development of these
rules,
. 1. Calls again upon all parties to any armed conflict to observe the rules laid down :in the Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907,38 the Geneva Protocol
of 1925,34 the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other
humanitarian rules applicable :in armed conflicts and
invites those States which have not yet done ;o to
adhere to those instruments;
2. Reaffirms that persons participating in resistance
movements and freedom fighters in southern Africa
and in territories under colonial and alien domination
~d f<;>reign occupation W?O _are struggling for their
liberation and self-determmation should, in case of
arrest, be treated as prisoners of war in accordance
with the principles of the Hague Convention of 1907
and the Geneva Conventions of 1949;
3. Invites the International Committee of the Red
Cr<;>ss to continue the work that was begun with the
~ss1stance of government experts in 1971 and, taking
mto account all relevant United Nations resolutions
on human rights :in armed conflicts, to devote special
attention, among the questions to be taken up to the
following:
'
(a) The need to ensure better application of existing
rules relating to armed conflicts, particularly the Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, the Geneva Protocol
of 1925 and the Geneva Conventions of 1949, including
the need for strengthening the system of protecting
Powers contained in such instruments;
28 A/83 D

and Add.1-3.
w A/7720 and A/8052.
30 A/8370 and Add.I.
31 Report on the Work of the Conference of Government
Experts on the Reaffirmation and Development of International
Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts (Geneva
August 1971).
'
32 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970973.
33 Car_negie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague
Conventwns and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York
Oxford University Press, 19 l 5).
'
:H League of N,1tions, Treaty Series vol. XCIV 1929 No
2138.
'
'
'
.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

( b) The need for a reaffirmation and development
of relevant rules, as well as other measures to improve
the protection of the civilian population during armed
conflicts, including legal restraints and restrictions on
certain methods of warfare and weapons that have
proved particularly perilous to civilians, and also
arrangements for humanitarian relief;
(c) The need to evolve norms designed to increase
the protection of persons struggling against colonial
and alien domination, foreign occupation and racist
regimes;
(d) The need for development of the rules concerning the status, protection and humane treatment of
combatants in international and non-international armed
conflicts and the question of guerrilla warfare;
( e) The need for additional rules regarding the
protection of the wounded and the sick;
4. Expresses the hope that the second session of the
Conference of Government Experts on the Reaffirmation
and Development of International Humanitarian Law
Applicable in Armed Conflicts will result in specific
conclusions and recommendations for action at the
government level;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in line with paragraph 126 of his report on respect for human rights
in armed conflicts submitted to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth session, 35 to prepare as soon as possible, with the help of qualified governmental consultant experts, a report on napalm and other incendiary weapons and all aspects of their possible use;
6. Further calls upon all States to disseminate
widely information and to provide instruction concerning human rights in armed conflicts and to take all the
necessary measures to ensure full observance by their
own armed forces of humanitarian rules applicable in
armed conflicts;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the
study and teaching of principles of respect for human
rights applicable in armed conflicts by the means at
his disposal;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on the
results of the second session of the Conference of
Government Experts and any other relevant developments;
. 9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session ·an item entiled "Human
rights in armed conflicts" and to consider it in all
its aspects.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2853 (XXVI). Respect for human rights in
armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2674 (XXV), 2675 (XXV),
2676 (XXV) and 2677 (XXV) of 9 December 1970,
Noting also that the twenty-first International Conference of the Red Cross, held at Istanbul in 1969
adopted resolution XIII concerning the reaffirmatio~
and development of the laws and customs applicable
in armed conflicts, 36
35 A/8052.
36 See

A/7720, annex I, sect. D.

91

Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on respect for human rights in armed conflicts, 37 concerning in particular the results of the first
session of the Conference of Government Experts on
the Reaffirmation and Development of International
Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts,
which was held at Geneva from 24 May to 12 June
1971 at the invitation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, as well as the report of the International Committee on the work of the Conference, 38
Emphasizing that effective protection for human
rights in situations of armed conflict depends primarily
on universal respect for humanitarian rules,
Recognizing that existing humanitarian rules relating
to armed conflicts do not in all respects meet the need
of contemporary situations and that it is therefore
necessary to strengthen the procedure for implementing
these rules and to develop their substance,
Welcoming the decision of the International Committee of the Red Cross to convene a second session
of the Conference of Government Experts with the
task of reaching agreement on the wording of various
texts to facilitate discussion at a future diplomatic
conference, and noting that all States parties to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 39 have been invited to
participate,
Affirming that the successful development of humanitarian rules applicable in armed conflicts requires the
~egotiation of instruments which can be effectively
implemented and which command the widest possible
support,
Emphasizing the importance of continued close collaboration between the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross,
1. Reiterates its call upon all parties to any armed
conflict to observe the rules laid down in the Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, 40 the Geneva Protocol
of 1925, 41 the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other
humanitarian rules applicable in armed conflicts, and
invites those States which have not yet done so to
adhere to those instruments;
2. Welcomes the progress made by the Conference
of Government Experts on the Reaffirmation and
Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, as shown in its report,
with regard to the following questions:
(a) Protection of the wounded and the sick;
( b) Protection of victims of non-international armed
conflicts;
( c) Rules applicable in guerrilla warfare;
(d) Protection of civilian population against dangers
of hostilities;
( e) Strengthening of the guarantees afforded by
international humanitarian law for non-military civil
defence organizations;
:n A/8370 and Add.I.
38 Report

on the Work of the Conference of Government
Experts on the Reaffermation and Development of International
Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts (Geneva,
August 1971).
39 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950) Nos. 970973.
'
4 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace The Hague
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 '(New York
Oxford University Press, 1915).
'
41 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, 1929, No.
2138.

°
