United Nations

S/PV.4823

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4823

rd meeting
Friday, 12 September 2003, 11.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Emyr Jones Parry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mrs. D’Achon
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Sow
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Gatilov
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Atieh
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-49755 (E)

*0349755*

S/PV.4823

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Italy and Serbia and
Montenegro, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Šahović
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table. Mr. Nesho (Albania) and Mr.
Spatafora (Italy) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In order to optimize the use of
our time, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the Council table. When a speaker is taking the
floor, the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker
on the list at the table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hédi Annabi,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I would like to appeal to all those who intend to
speak — and it is a very formidable list —for as much

2

brevity as possible, please. And if colleagues have
already made points, it would be hugely appreciated,
not just by the Chair but by other colleagues, if we
could show agreement with what has been said and
forego the urge to repeat it. I say that because it is the
intention of the presidency, in response to a formal
request that we have received, to convene this
afternoon at 3 p.m. at the ambassadorial level in formal
consultations on the situation in the Middle East. Given
the agenda we have today — this is no disrespect
whatever to this item — I think a measure of brevity
would help us all.
I now invite Mr. Annabi, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, to brief the
Council on the current situation with respect to the
item on the agenda.
Mr. Annabi: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving us the opportunity to brief the Council on
developments in Kosovo over the past two months.
During this period, Mr. Holkeri took up his
responsibilities as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Upon his arrival in Priština, Mr.
Holkeri held a first round of meetings with
representatives of the Kosovo Provisional Institutions
and local political leaders from all communities. Mr.
Holkeri also had meetings with the political leadership
in Belgrade.
The Special Representative has reaffirmed the
commitment of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to the
“standards before status” policy framework and its
focus on progress towards achieving the benchmarks
for implementation of this policy. Mr. Holkeri is also
preparing an operational plan for the implementation of
the benchmarks, which is being drawn up jointly by
UNMIK and the Kosovo Provisional Institutions.
Mr. Holkeri has strongly emphasized the
importance of initiating direct and constructive
dialogue on practical matters of mutual interest
between Priština and Belgrade. During his meetings
with representatives of the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions and the political leadership in Belgrade,
Mr. Holkeri sought their respective views on issues
relating to the proposed dialogue. He consistently
underlined during those discussions that the dialogue
should focus on concrete issues which serve the needs
of the people and are in the interests of all sides.
Preparations for this dialogue are under way, and Mr.

S/PV.4823

Holkeri is planning to propose modalities for the
dialogue in the coming weeks.
With regard to the security situation, the period
since July has been characterized by a number of
violent attacks and shootings, which have occurred
throughout Kosovo, primarily targeting the Kosovo
Serb community, as well as UNMIK law enforcement
authorities.
As we informed the Council on 13 August, two
Kosovo Serb youths were killed and four injured in a
shooting incident aimed at those youths, who were
swimming in a river near the village of Gorazdevac in
the Peć region. On 18 August, a Kosovo Serb male,
who had been shot in the head on 11 August, died of
his wounds. Two Kosovo Serbs were also injured in a
shooting on 26 August at the returns site of Bica, near
Klina in the Peć region. On 31 August, four Kosovo
Serbs were injured and one killed in an explosive
attack in the village of Cernica in the Gnjilane region.
UNMIK Police and KFOR have increased security in
these areas following the incidents and are continuing
to investigate those crimes.
All Kosovo political leaders made statements
condemning the attacks and inviting the public to help
find the perpetrators. The Special Representative, Mr.
Holkeri, called upon them to show greater resolve in
calling for an end to violence and in using their
authority to support all efforts to bring the perpetrators
to justice. The Special Representative has also
appealed to the general public to do all it can to assist
the law enforcement authorities in efforts to apprehend
those responsible for the incidents.
Those violent incidents have further raised
feelings of insecurity among Kosovo Serbs, and there
have been signs of an increase in inter-ethnic tension.
Although protests against the incidents in Kosovo Serb
communities have largely been peaceful, there have
been instances of intimidation and harassment in both
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb communities. In
addition, many regular inter-ethnic meetings and multiethnic events have been cancelled or boycotted by
Kosovo Serb and/or Kosovo Albanian representatives
out of fear for their security. The past two months have
also seen an increase in violent incidents directed
against UNMIK law enforcement personnel and
property. On 3 August, an UNMIK international police
officer was murdered in a sniper attack in the northern
part of Kosovo. On 6 September, an off-duty Kosovo

Police Service (KPS) officer was also murdered near
Djakovica. On 10 September, another KPS officer was
shot and injured in Priština, and a person who was with
him was killed.
Property used by the police and judiciary,
including an UNMIK police station, UNMIK vehicles
and the Priština district court, were damaged in
explosions and other attacks. No one has claimed
responsibility for any of these attacks. The majority of
local politicians and representatives of the Provisional
Institutions have made statements condemning the
incidents.
Some of those attacks came after the conviction,
on 16 July, of four former Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) members for war crimes committed primarily
against fellow Kosovo Albanians during 1998 and
1999. The decision was the first conviction of former
KLA members for war crimes. The initial negative
reaction among the general public and local media
coverage subsided quickly.
On 4 September, inmates of the Dubrava Prison,
which is Kosovo’s largest detention facility, occupied a
prison block in protest against living conditions, and
refused to return to their cells, despite reassurances
from UNMIK officials that their complaints would be
addressed and that no disciplinary action would be
taken against them. Following the prison guards’
attempt to enter the occupied block, the prisoners set
fire to their mattresses. Five prisoners died and a
further 16 were injured in the ensuing fire. A police
investigation into the incident was launched
immediately, and an independent inquiry will look into
its causes and provide recommendations.
As regards political developments, owing to the
summer recess the period has seen a lull in legislative
and Government activity in Priština. The Kosovo
Assembly reconvened on 4 September. Since July, the
Government has focused on legislative development
and the security situation. It has not taken up the
initiation of direct dialogue with Belgrade.
On 27 August, the Serbian Parliament endorsed a
“declaration on Kosovo and Metohija”, and on 5
September the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro
adopted a “resolution on Kosovo and Metohija”.
Kosovo Albanian leaders were critical of these
documents, particularly the references to Kosovo’s
status. Kosovo Albanian leaders have also stated that
such moves have strained chances of direct dialogue

3

S/PV.4823

with Belgrade. On 3 September the Kosovo
Government publicly expressed its concern over the
adoption of the Serbian declaration, and stated its
intention to build an independent State.
With regard to returns and inter-ethnic relations,
although the level of returns remains low, minority
returns continue to exceed those in 2002. In the past
two months, some promised funding from several
major donors was received, and work on returns
projects began. In addition, almost 150 cases have been
referred to the Rapid Response Returns Facility, which
is a joint project by UNMIK and the United Nations
Development
Programme
providing
housing
reconstruction assistance for individual returnees. The
security situation has, however, heightened the level of
fear within the Serb community, leading to delays in
returns efforts and the possibility that more returns
might be postponed until next spring.

Turning to local self-government, political
infighting — primarily between Kosovo Albanian
parties — in a number of municipalities continued to
negatively affect the ability of local authorities to
deliver effective local government. Also, financing for
minority communities from municipal budgets remains
poor and, as of the end of June, only six of Kosovo’s
26 mixed municipalities had met their required fairshare financing levels in the areas of municipal
administration, health and education. UNMIK is
working with the Kosovo Ministry of Finance and
Economy on developing modalities to address this
outstanding problem.
In Mitrovica UNMIK has focused on promoting
inter-ethnic activities and dialogue. However, Kosovo
Serb members of the northern Mitrovica advisory
board have not yet started participating officially in the
meetings.

Kosovo’s political leaders have expressed support
for returns, including — as previously reported —
through an open letter published on 2 July in Kosovo’s
major dailies in which they encouraged displaced
persons of all ethnicities to return. On 10 July, the
Kosovo Assembly also held a session dedicated to
minority returns and adopted a resolution backing
returns and emphasizing the need for Kosovo’s
Government to support return and reintegration
activities. On 21 August, Kosovo Prime Minister
Rexhepi committed to funding 7 million euros for
return activities from the 2002 Kosovo Consolidated
Budget surplus funds, and emphasized that this
contribution by the Provisional Institutions was
intended to demonstrate the Government’s commitment
to minority communities in the wake of the recent
security incidents.

With regard to the economy, bids for the two
successive sets of tenders for the privatization of
socially owned enterprises were opened by the Kosovo
Trust Agency on 14 July and 2 September. A total of
24 enterprises have now been tendered for
privatization, and the amount in bids received has
reached over 29 million euros. On 6 September, the
first three contracts for the privatization of socially
owned enterprises were signed. On 1 July, the second
meeting of the Kosovo stabilization and association
process tracking mechanism took place in Priština.
During the meeting, European Commission experts,
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions discussed
aspects of justice and home affairs, media policy,
telecommunications and transport policy, and made
recommendations
to
ensure
conformity
with
established European Union norms and standards.

Kosovo President Rugova and Prime Minister
Rexhepi have also travelled to returns sites to show
their public support for the returns process. However,
statements and concrete support for returns at the
central level have not, by and large, been replicated at
the municipal level. Cooperation on returns projects
has been productive in a number of municipalities, but
the actions of some municipal officials in the areas
affected by violence against Kosovo Serbs have not
been conducive to reconciliation.

UNMIK and KFOR have continued to take action
against suspected extremist elements in the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC). An enquiry is ongoing in
order to identify those members of the KPC with
possible links to extremist organizations and criminal
groups. Following interviews with 50 members of the
KPC, a total of 18 officers have been recommended for
dismissal. One of the 18 has already resigned and a
second has been dismissed for a separate disciplinary
offence. The head of the KPC has suspended a further
seven of those on the list, referring the cases to
UNMIK police for further investigation.

4

S/PV.4823

In conclusion, I wish to say that, under Mr.
Holkeri’s leadership, UNMIK will remain committed to
fully implementing Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and to working with all interlocutors to achieve
progress on the benchmarks within the “standards
before status” policy framework. A priority at this time
is to initiate the dialogue on practical matters of mutual
concern between Priština and Belgrade. Through that
dialogue practical benefits can be realized for the
people of Kosovo, with a view to developing an
atmosphere of mutual trust and confidence. Mr. Holkeri
is actively engaged in pursuing this matter in
consultation with all parties concerned. At the same
time, he is trying to manage the competing interests
and unilateral pronouncements of parties concerned,
which are not always conducive to the initiation of that
dialogue. We also remain concerned about the security
situation in Kosovo. In that connection, we shall
continue to emphasize the need for everyone to do their
part in stopping the violence. The Council’s continued
and active support has been, and will continue to be,
crucial in realizing those objectives.
The President: I have 18 speakers on my list. I
would like to suggest to colleagues to aim to conclude
by 1 p.m. That would actually be quite a sensible
objective. If that were acceptable, the logical
consequence would allow three minutes, on average,
per intervention. I state those two facts, and I will now
go through the list. But I shall live in hope.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I will start right away.
First of all, I thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing.
During last month’s meeting on this subject we
welcomed Mr. Holkeri’s assumption of the post of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo. He has taken over his responsibilities at what
no doubt is a difficult and crucial time, given the recent
murders in Gorazdevac and increasing ethnic tensions
in Kosovo.
In the interest of time, I shall just confine my
comments to the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
role that it should play in Kosovo.
UNMIK is a unique mission in many respects.
While it is a peacekeeping mission, administration,
capacity-building and development are among the vital
components
of
its
mandate.
Given
those
responsibilities and its finite resources and capacities,
UNMIK therefore needs to develop a clearly focused,

but realistic, policy agenda. In developing any policy
initiative, UNMIK must consult local government
officials and gain their confidence. No such initiatives
are likely to succeed fully without the ownership of
Kosovar officials.
In that regard, some of the issues UNMIK must
urgently address include security and the rule of law.
There is also a need to reinvigorate the Transfer
Council and to utilize it to incorporate officials from
the Provisional Institutions in areas of UNMIK’s
reserved authority. UNMIK should also allow Kosovo
Government officials to manage some of the budgetary
and financial responsibilities, in line with chapter 5 of
the Constitutional Framework. In addition to giving
greater autonomy to the Provisional Institutions,
UNMIK must also work proactively to promote the
socio-economic development and reconstruction of
Kosovo. In the long run, all political achievements in
Kosovo can easily be undermined by inadequate
economic recovery.
The comments I have just made are aimed at
enabling UNMIK to improve its performance. At the
same time, we will continue to urge UNMIK to make
whatever progress that can be made in terms of
building confidence between different communities,
the return of refugees and the protection of minorities.
We also encourage UNMIK to continue to work for
greater dialogue, at least initially on administrative
matters between Belgrade and Priština. We hope that,
in due course, those and other measures will create the
necessary environment to begin progress on the
difficult, yet important, issue of status.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Assistant SecretaryGeneral Hédi Annabi for his substantive briefing on the
situation in Kosovo. Russia’s views on the processes
under way in the province are well known, and very
much agree with the assessments voiced by Mr.
Annabi.
We believe that, despite certain advances that
have, to a great extent, been achieved by virtue of
international efforts, the situation in the province
continues to be a complex one. Implementation is
lacking with regard to key requirements of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), particularly with
respect to the situation of Kosovo’s non-Albanian
inhabitants and the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. There is neither reliable nor

5

S/PV.4823

equitable safety for all of the province’s population.
There is an absence of fundamental freedoms and
rights and inter-ethnic tolerance. Only weak efforts are
under way to combat local and cross-border crime and
corruption.

ensure the essential basic democratic conditions in
Kosovo and the establishment of appropriate
mechanisms to that end. The implementation of these
obligations must be under continuous international
oversight.

Regrettably, over the last month Kosovo has once
again been engulfed by a crime wave that has clear
ethnic underpinnings. The most blatant of those acts
was the armed attack of 13 August against Serbian
school children in Gorazdevac. Participants in the
meeting of the Contact Group held in Moscow on 4
September issued a statement condemning that barbaric
act as well as other incidents in Kosovo that have
produced victims among the civilian population. Such
acts of violence have no justification under any
circumstances. Murder is the instrument of terrorism,
and those who perpetrate such crimes are murderers.
That must be said straight out.

The achievement of these goals will be furthered
by the prompt launching, with constructive
international assistance, of a direct dialogue between
Belgrade and Priština on technical issues of mutual
interest. We believe that the primary mediation role in
this process must be played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in close
cooperation with the Contact Group and the European
Union.

We cannot stand by idly as terrorists attempt to
destabilize the situation in individual countries and
entire regions. With regard to Kosovo, there is no
doubt that this has to do with yet another manifestation
of terrorism that, given the realities in Kosovo, is
particularly dangerous, as it increases tensions in an
already complex inter-ethnic relationship. Such
incidents could provoke a chain reaction with
extremely negative consequences for a settlement in
the province.
We note the steps taken by the international
presences aimed at apprehending the criminals and
bringing them to trial. We are grateful to the head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Holkeri, for his prompt
reactions to events. We are certain that the leaders of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
leading Kosovo politicians will provide active
assistance to the investigations and reaffirm in practice
their commitment to their declared goal of building a
multi-ethnic, democratic society in the province.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral faces complex challenges in restoring the
multi-ethnic nature of the province. We support the
priorities he has identified, including normalizing the
situation in the province, ensuring the rule of law,
resolving problems related to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, and economic recovery.
Of key importance are the implementation of the
principle of standards before status, which seeks to

6

We urge UNMIK to assume a more active and
consistent position in countering any manifestations of
inter-ethnic intolerance and crime, to stem the growth
of radical movements in the province and to
consolidate legality there. The meeting in Moscow of
the Contact Group, with the involvement of
Mr. Holkeri, confirmed the convergence of approaches
of all the essential international participants in the
settlement towards the order and substance of measures
to be taken in this field. We note in particular the
clearly established consensus view that any discussion
on the future status of Kosovo would be premature at
this juncture and that any attempt to prejudice the
resolution of this issue would be unacceptable.
For its part, Russia intends actively to continue
participating in overall efforts to seek a just, balanced
and lasting solution to the Kosovo problem.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Mr. Annabi for his very factual and
comprehensive briefing and to reiterate my country’s
full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri. We again call on all
parties to cooperate with him in his extremely complex
and difficult task.
As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully supports the statement to be made
shortly on behalf of the Union by the Ambassador of
Italy. As a country of the region, located in close
proximity to Kosovo, Bulgaria wishes to make a few
additional comments.
Bulgaria once again categorically condemns the
acts of violence referred to earlier by Mr. Annabi, in
which innocent people, including a police officer, were

S/PV.4823

killed. We convey our condolences to India. Bulgaria
believes that all such acts are acts of ethnic violence
and that attacks on the representatives of international
institutions in the province merely undermine the
efforts of local and international actors working for
Kosovo’s future and to normalize life for all its
inhabitants. Bulgaria again recalls that such acts can in
no way improve the positions of parties to negotiations,
merely delay the normalization process and serve the
interests only of the very few who thrive on disorder
and organized crime. Violence is surely not in the
interests of the legitimate political representatives in
Kosovo, much less those of ordinary people.
That is why we believe that the full cooperation
of the Kosovo Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment with police investigations and the
prosecution of the perpetrators of these acts of violence
will provide evidence of their readiness to shoulder the
burden of the genuine management of the province’s
affairs. In this respect, we would recall that Bulgaria
remains very interested in the investigation of the
murder of Valentin Krumov, a Bulgarian international
civil servant killed in Priština in 1999.
Bulgaria continues to follow with interest and
concern these acts of ethnic intolerance, which hamper
reconciliation among the ethnic communities and the
return of refugees to their homes. We believe that the
international presence in Kosovo, especially that of the
United Nations, must categorically demonstrate to all
local actors, regardless of their ethnic origin, that such
behaviour and the inspiration of violence are
unacceptable and will not be tolerated by the
international community.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
will be brief, as you requested, Sir, but I do want to
make a couple of points.
First, obviously we deplore and condemn the
violence and attacks that have taken place in the last
couple of months. I am afraid that this reminds all of us
again of the primacy of establishing the rule of law in
Kosovo. This is something that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
working hard to achieve and which I hope we all will
support.
We believe that the way forward in general is to
focus on proceeding with the standards before status
approach. This appears to us to be well poised to go
ahead. We encourage UNMIK and those involved to

move ahead with it. The achievement of the standards
that have been set out is essential to a better life for all
Kosovars as we move forward and the United States,
for its part, will continue to offer technical expertise to
support that process.
We also urge the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to convene officials from Belgrade
and Priština as soon as possible in order to begin a
dialogue on practical matters. We think this is
important. These talks should be held primarily at the
level of technical experts and deal with practical issues
of mutual concern, such as energy and transportation.
I would also like to note that unilateral comments
or declarations by neighbouring Governments or
parties inside Kosovo about Kosovo’s future are
premature and unhelpful. Attempts to prejudge final
status only distract from the important work at hand of
implementing the standards and beginning the direct
dialogue on practical matters. That is where the focus
should be, we believe. We hope that all leaders of the
region will focus on helping Mr. Holkeri as he sets
about his very important and complicated new tasks.
That certainly is the intention of my Government.
Mrs. D’Achon (France) (spoke in French): I also
thank Mr. Hédi Annabi for his very thorough briefing.
France renews its firm condemnation of the acts of
violence carried out in Kosovo this past month. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
certain delegations have categorized those acts as
terrorist and their perpetrators as terrorists. Those
crimes must not erode our determination to make
progress in implementing Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), with the assistance of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and all concerned parties.
We must also continue the fight against organized
crime. It is becoming a major scourge, and it
constitutes a threat not only to the security of all the
inhabitants of Kosovo, but also to regional stability and
Europe as a whole.
The firm commitment of the self-governing
provisional authorities of Kosovo is crucial to thwart
the power of that type of crime. We will judge their
ability to exercise their entrusted responsibilities in
keeping with specific results.
The renewed violence also means that we need to
remain vigilant in terms of the amount of international

7

S/PV.4823

force for security deployed in Kosovo. KFOR must
continue to have sufficient means to meet its mission. I
would recall here that France continues to be one of the
leading troop contributors in Kosovo and that its
soldiers are deployed in very exposed areas.
In that tense context, we reaffirm our full trust in
and support for the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to continue implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). We are convinced that the
“standards before status” formula continues to be fully
valid. As Mr. Annabi has stated, Mr. Holkeri will
shortly make proposals to make those standards more
operational. We have full confidence in him to define,
together with the self-governing provisional authorities
of Kosovo, the best way to advance, without delay, in
areas such as the rule of law, public order, respect for
minorities and the return of refugees and displaced
persons.
Finally, we have full confidence in Mr. Holkeri to
define the modalities by which there will at long last be
established between Priština and Belgrade a direct,
sustained dialogue on practical issues of common
interests. We believe that that direct dialogue should
help to specifically improve daily lives in Kosovo for
all its inhabitants.
Mr. Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation does not want to miss this opportunity to
address members of the Council to express our deepest
sorrow at the death of a great friend of Mexico, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Mrs. Anna
Lindh. It is a deplorable loss, and we join in what other
members of the Council have said.
We also thank Mr. Hédi Annabi for his briefing,
analysing the latest developments in and prospects for
consolidating peace in Kosovo.
Scarcely three weeks ago, the Council examined
the topic that we are addressing today. On that
occasion, we met as the result of a criminal act aimed
against the principle establishing multi-ethnicity as the
formula for coexistence within the province. On 26
August, near Klina in the Peć region, another armed
attack was carried out against the Serbian minority. On
31 August, there were two explosions in the town of
Cernica, leaving one person dead and three wounded.
My delegation condemns once again those types of acts
and wishes to share its deep concern that those
atrocities are recurring themes that we encounter every
time that we discuss Kosovo.

8

For that reason, we wish to say that, in Mexico’s
opinion, the road to a prosperous and tolerant Kosovo,
where law and respect for human rights prevail, is the
road that the extremist groups do not want to take.
Therefore, those types of acts that promote hatred and
anarchy must be stopped.
The international community formed an
outstanding strategic alliance with respect to Kosovo.
Substantial human and financial resources and political
will have been invested in the effort of reconstruction
and reconciliation. That effort must be maintained, and
we must achieve the objective set by the Security
Council.
Therefore, the Council must not confine itself to
condemning acts of violence. We must confront the
causes that bring them about, as a first step, in order to
implement later concrete strategies to prevent their
recurrence in the future. Mexico considers that the
strategy
must
be
comprehensive,
addressing
simultaneously questions of education, security,
development and the administration of justice.
In the area of education, activities and
programmes must be promoted at all levels that foster
mutual understanding of cultures, religions and
customs and mutual feedback between ethnic groups as
a basis for cultural understanding and coexistence. The
normalization of life in the province is the
responsibility of all Kosovars. There cannot be genuine
coexistence while there is mistrust.
Regardless of ethnic origin or religious beliefs,
all Kosovars are jointly responsible for forging that
inclusive future. Accordingly, we must even more
decisively support the promotion of the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to their
homes under secure and normal conditions.
It is also necessary that the self-governing
provisional institutions earn the trust and respect of the
entire population, and the only way to do that is to
work in accordance with the law, with transparency and
a sense of equity and justice. In that context, Mexico
has viewed as positive measures the recent suspension
of seven members from the Kosovo Protection Corps
and the disciplinary action against eight others on
suspicions of links to organized crime and extremist
groups.
Mexico notes with satisfaction the efforts
undertaken by Mr. Harri Holkeri, Head of the United

S/PV.4823

Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), to initiate soon the Belgrade-Priština
dialogue on practical issues. Forging a mechanism for
direct dialogue will undoubtedly depend on progress
being made in political, social and economic items for
mutual understanding among all inhabitants of the
province.

to us that the situation is still not stable. Measures such
as strengthening police and judicial structures are a
priority. The reorganization and transformation of the
Kosovo Protection Corps into a multi-ethnic body
specializing in emergency interventions is also in
keeping with that obligation.

In conclusion, I wish to say that the illicit traffic
in weapons and the volume of such weapons among the
population of Kosovo is a source of concern and should
become a cause of major attention by the Council.
Mexico believes that the traffic in and the possession
of weapons should be restricted to the full extent
possible, since their very existence can promote social
violence. We therefore welcome the third programme
of arms amnesty, organized by the United Nations,
which will be held in September.

Furthermore, my delegation notes that, in the
framework of improving the current situation
prevailing in Kosovo, other elements of key importance
must be taken into consideration. Those are, inter alia,
the dialogue between Priština and Belgrade; the
regional approach; cooperation among UNMIK,
Kosovo’s elected officials and the Serbia and
Montenegro authorities; extending UNMIK’s authority
throughout the province and, finally, mobilizing the
resources essential for Kosovo’s harmonious
development.

In Mexico’s view, to the extent that there exists in
Kosovo a will for dialogue, there will be a future and
irrational acts will be relegated to the past.

We urge the parties to do their utmost to facilitate
the opening of the negotiations planned for this fall
between Belgrade and Priština.

Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Mr. Annabi, whose detailed and
comprehensive briefing will help us in our exchange of
views on the development of the situation in Kosovo.

Direct dialogue between the Serbian and
Albanian communities must not remain wishful
thinking; it must become a reality on the ground and be
the driving force for peaceful development of the
Balkans region.

Four years after the temporary freezing of
Kosovo’s status, the record of the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in that province appears mixed,
despite Mr. Holkeri’s praiseworthy dedication. We
must welcome the progress made at the political and
administrative levels, but the recovery of the economy,
the return of refugees and the restitution of property, as
well as the establishment of the rule of law and the
problem of security, remain sources of concern.
At the economic level, despite the improvement
of the legislative and administrative framework, greater
attention must be devoted to job creation and to
promoting regional exchanges.
With regard to the return of refugees, the
restitution of property and the issue of disappeared
persons, we call for a strengthening of ongoing efforts
aimed at the proper functioning of established
mechanisms. In addition, the absence of dialogue
among communities and the increase in inter-ethnic
violence, crime and insecurity affect the long-sought
restoration of the rule of law. The murders of civilians
this summer, which we condemn and deplore, indicate

I cannot conclude without emphasizing the
paramount role that the various Kosovar components
must play in the quest for solutions to the problems of
the province. The effectiveness of the international
community’s support — which remains necessary —
depends on that.
Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Like
previous speakers, I shall be brief. At the outset, I
thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing, which informed us
of Mr. Holkeri’s activities in Kosovo. At our last
meeting on this item we expressed our satisfaction at
the assignment of Mr. Holkeri, who had an outstanding
term as President of the General Assembly a number of
years ago. We trust that the contacts Mr. Holkeri has
established with a broad range of local political
officials in Kosovo will bear the fruit wished for by
everyone, in conformity with resolution 1244 (1999).
We believe that Kosovo today is at a crucial
stage. On the one hand, we note significant progress in
achieving a substantial degree of autonomy, especially
the gradual transfer of authority and of non-reserved
responsibilities, in keeping with chapter 5 of the

9

S/PV.4823

Constitutional Framework. That process must continue.
However, a series of deplorable acts of violence — all
occurring during the period in question — resulting in
deaths and injuries would seem to continue to tarnish
the process. We condemn those acts of violence in the
most emphatic terms.
In addition to voicing our concern at those violent
incidents and at crimes against minorities, we should
like to say that in our view they must not and cannot
derail the peace process. All manifestations of
ethnically motivated violence, harassment and
discrimination run counter to the achievement of a
multi-ethnic Kosovo and violate the spirit of resolution
1244 (1999). We acknowledge the measures undertaken
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to find and bring to justice the
perpetrators of those acts. We firmly believe that
without the significant and sustainable return of
internally displaced persons and refugees, the building
of a multi-ethnic democratic society capable of
integrating all of Kosovo’s inhabitants is impossible.
We agree with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of a plan to
operationalize the points of reference within the
framework of the “standards before status” policy, and,
in relation to Kosovo’s final status, we call on the
parties to avoid any implicit or explicit form of
provocation.
Finally, we urge the parties to deepen and
broaden the dialogue. We welcome Mr. Holkeri’s
statements concerning closer dialogue between
Belgrade and Priština. Without that dialogue — or
without dialogue between UNMIK and the Kosovo
Assembly — the achievement of concrete results with
respect to the major challenges is a distant prospect.
I hope I have kept within three minutes, Mr.
President.
Ms. Menéndez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Many
thanks to Mr. Annabi. Italy will speak shortly on behalf
of the European Union, so I shall confine myself to
making three points.
First, less than a month ago, we met here and
condemned the terrorist crime against Kosovo Serb
children. Regrettably, we note that ethnic and political
acts of violence have not ceased. We hope that the
perpetrators will be prosecuted and convicted. The
crimes committed cannot go unpunished. Kosovo’s

10

future depends on the establishment of security.
Security is important for economic recovery, but it is
also essential for building a democratic and tolerant
society and for the process of the return of Kosovo’s
citizens of non-Albanian origin. In that connection, we
hope that the open letter inviting displaced persons to
return to Kosovo will translate into a reality.
Secondly, we hope that Mr. Holkeri enjoys
success at the head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). He has
our full support, but obviously he must also have the
support and cooperation of the Priština and Belgrade
authorities. We reiterate once again that we fully agree
with the policy promoted by UNMIK, in conformity
with the “standards before status” principle.
Thirdly and finally, we find the public statements
of the political leaders to be very disturbing. Positions
that are contrary to resolution 1244 (1999) cannot in
any way be allowed to be publicly and constantly
promoted. We condemn any attempt to create monoethnic institutions, and we call for the dismantling of
any still-functioning parallel administrative structures.
We must actively encourage participation in the
Assembly and the Transfer Council by Kosovars of
non-Albanian origin.
Spain hopes to see the appeal made in
Thessaloniki for dialogue between Belgrade and
Priština become a reality. The leaders of both parties
must stop placing preconditions on that dialogue and
must begin it as soon as possible.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): First of all, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and to thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing,
which provided us with an update on the situation in
Kosovo.
We regret that the meaningful progress achieved
at the institutional level by the political process in
Kosovo, with the gradual transfer of competencies to
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, is not
matched by similar progress in the security sphere. The
complex situation still faced by Kosovo is a matter of
some concern.
My delegation strongly condemns the recent acts
of violence. As briefed by Mr. Annabi this morning,
the murder of children and the daily intimidation of
vulnerable persons are an attack against the crucial
process of democratic reforms. Those acts must not be

S/PV.4823

allowed to undermine the peace process and the efforts
to build a multi-ethnic and democratic society in
Kosovo. We appeal for an immediate end to violence.
We would like to underline that it is the
responsibility of Kosovo leaders to decisively curb
ethnic violence. We urge them to work with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) with a view to improving the security
situation in Kosovo, particularly through the
strengthening of local police and by adopting measures
to fight organized crime.
We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Contact Group to stop the cycle of violence. In that
regard, we deem it very important to push forward the
disarmament of the population, taking advantage of the
synergies provided by the amnesty programme recently
started by UNMIK, which allows the citizens of
Kosovo who possess illegal weapons to surrender them
to law enforcement authorities. It is clear that the
proliferation of weapons fosters violence, organized
crime and terrorism.
It is important to continue to strengthen the rule
of law, to support the return of refugees, to push
forward on respect for minority rights and to press on
with economic development. Those goals should
continue to serve as priorities and should be promoted
by all parties in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework in order to
build a multi-ethnic and tolerant community with a
solid economic foundation and functioning democratic
institutions.
My delegation also expresses its hope that the
parties will deepen their commitment to democratic
values and the rule of law; that the meaningful,
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Priština on
practical matters of mutual interest takes place and will
be further expanded to include political issues; and that
concrete results are achieved without much delay.
To conclude, we wish to reiterate our full support
for the “standards before status” policy. Its postulated
targets are essential to the political process designed to
determine Kosovo’s future in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), establishing a multi-ethnic and
democratic society.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First, let me thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for his

concise and very useful briefing. I should also like to
point out that I associate myself with the statement that
will be made by the Italian presidency of the European
Union at a later stage in this meeting.
The series of violent incidents over the past
weeks highlights the urgency of dialogue and
reconciliation in Kosovo. We should not allow the
actions of a few extremists and criminals to divert us
from the task of creating a stable, peaceful and
democratic Kosovo.
The leaders in the region have condemned the
violence and say that they want to be responsible
partners of the international community and join the
European institutions as soon as possible. But they
have so far failed to take many of the difficult steps
necessary to realize their ambitions, above all the full
implementation of the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).
We are disappointed that the recent declaration on
Kosovo passed by the Parliament of Serbia laid the
blame for the failure to implement resolution 1244
(1999) solely on the side of the ethnic Albanians.
Clearly, both sides have failed to meet their
obligations. For example, the creation of illegal parallel
structures in northern Kosovo and in Serbian enclaves
elsewhere has been a major impediment to
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). Moreover, it was
disappointing that the parliamentary declaration said
nothing about the interests and needs of the ethnic
Albanians, who make up the overwhelming majority of
the residents of Kosovo.
On the other hand, we urge the representatives of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Kosovo to continue to speak out against violence, to do
more to promote ethnic tolerance and to encourage the
acceptance of the rule of law. That is the only way to
create a more favourable climate for refugee returns.
Ending violence and ethnic intimidation is the most
important element of progress. Another critical element
is the need for direct dialogue between Priština and
Belgrade about how they can best cooperate on
practical issues. We hope that this dialogue will begin
soon. This does not mean the talks about the final
status of Kosovo, which can take place only when
standards of democratic practice and ethnic tolerance
have been achieved.
We have high expectations for the programme of
action of the new Special Representative of the

11

S/PV.4823

Secretary-General, and we fully support his priorities.
In that connection, we are eager to receive the
operationalized benchmarks and work plan, which will
lay out the concrete tasks to be achieved over the
coming months.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation would also like to thank Mr. Annabi for his
briefing containing up-to-date and very useful
information. On 18 August 2003, the Security Council,
in complete unanimity, condemned the unjustifiable
and often lethal incidents described by Mr. Annabi.
The Council firmly called for finding the perpetrators
and bringing them to justice so that they can be held
accountable for their crimes. I welcome the
mobilization that seems to be growing among the
population today, to help the police in their
investigations.
I also recall that on 3 July 2003, Mr. Steiner
presented to the Council the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on Kosovo (S/2003/675). It was an
exhaustive assessment of the efforts of the United
Nations to normalize the situation in the province. That
assessment, although largely positive, did include some
reasons for concern due to certain problems that
Mr. Steiner underlined in his introductory briefing on
that day. Those problems have grown since then, as we
noted in Mr. Annabi’s statement today. My delegation
believes that those problems stem from the persistence
of intolerance, hatred and instinctual reactions based on
identity, which fuel partisan rivalry, injustice, violence
and, as a result, insecurity.
The population of Kosovo dreams of peace and a
reconciled society of solidarity that shares a common
vision of happiness. As well, as the Council observed
on the ground last month, the population is aware of
the international community’s firm commitment and of
the enormous sacrifices its men and women make out
of goodwill. Those men and women work with the
population day by day with determination to ensure the
stabilization and reconstruction of Kosovo and the
reconciliation of the entire population. Establishing a
safe environment that has been disarmed and demined,
ensuring protection and freedom of movement,
facilitating the return of refugees and displaced
persons, creating conditions for a lasting settlement of
the problem — I could go on, but Council members are
well aware that these issues are the tasks set forth in
resolution 1244 (1999). All of those objectives disturb

12

the extremists on all sides, who are pleased only when
the situation is confused and out of control.
It is the United Nations that has established
conditions that have given rise to, or strengthened, the
hopes and dreams of the Kosovars. Over and above the
duties imposed on it by the Charter, the Organization
has a specific moral commitment to successfully
conclude its mission in Kosovo. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, has stated that the incidents in question will
only strengthen our resolve to establish the rule of law
for the people of Kosovo.
In this regard, the Special Representative needs
the firm support of the United Nations if he is to be
successful in addressing the priorities for 2003 that his
predecessor, Mr. Steiner, set out and that the Council
welcomed. Kosovo is at a delicate stage and the
Security Council, with the customary support of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and his Special
Representative, must tailor its strategy and the
modalities of its implementation by ensuring that its
activities in the province are focused on the long term.
We must therefore ensure that we know what the
people of Kosovo truly want and find appropriate
solutions that will enable us, without acting hastily, to
resolve the problem of the final status of Kosovo.
My delegation would like to reaffirm its
commitment to the principle of “standards before
status” and to the virtues of direct dialogue among all
the parties concerned. In this regard, we agree with Mr.
Holkeri that such dialogue should be focused on
specific issues, and we look forward to the proposals
for modalities for that dialogue. My delegation also
reaffirms its commitment to a multi-ethnic and
multicultural Kosovo nourished by the human values of
tolerance and harmony and watered by the source of
democratic values and respect for human rights.
My delegation appeals to all the elements of
Kosovo society and all other political actors in the
subregion to pool their efforts with those of UNMIK so
as to prevent the further stirring up of negative
emotions and to work to restore peace, security and
prosperity for all.
In conclusion, I would like to say how much my
country appreciates the impressive job being done on
the ground by Mr. Holkeri and his entire team. I
reaffirm the support of Cameroon for their efforts to
implement resolution 1244 (1999).

S/PV.4823

Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to thank Mr. Hédi
Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his detailed and useful briefing on the
most recent developments in the situation in Kosovo.
My delegation believes that, despite the relative
stability of the situation in Kosovo, the security
situation must be further strengthened if we are to
prevent a repetition of the events of last month that led
to the killing of a number of Serbs in Kosovo. Such
events could, in turn, lead to ethnically motivated acts
of violence, which would undermine all the progress
made thus far.
My delegation reiterates the importance of the
rule of law and the protection of the rights of ethnic
minorities in Kosovo, as well as the need to combat
organized crime and smuggling and to prevent illicit
trafficking in arms and drugs.
My delegation also reiterates the importance of
the safe return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes and property in Kosovo so that
they can contribute to the economic reconstruction of
the province. The concerted efforts of all of the people
of Kosovo will be required if they are to leave their
problems behind.
My delegation encourages continued dialogue
between Belgrade and Priština with a view to dealing
with the practical matters pertaining to the stabilization
of the situation in Kosovo and the facilitation of the
political process. We welcome the efforts of Mr.
Holkeri in this regard.
We support the principle of “standards before
status”. We welcome Mr. Holkeri’s reaffirmation that
he will pursue his work in accordance with that
principle with a view to building in Kosovo a multiethnic society that is capable of coping with future
challenges.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo.
We express our readiness to cooperate with him and
with the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in order to achieve security and
stability in the province.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his briefing. The Chinese

delegation has been closely observing the development
of the situation in Kosovo. We are deeply concerned
about the frequent occurrence of incidents of terrorism
and violence recently, which have caused a serious
deterioration in the security situation. We urge the
parties concerned to find out the truth as soon as
possible and bring to justice the perpetrators of those
acts.
We call on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, KFOR and the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions to make further efforts
to strengthen law and order, combat organized crime
and ensure the security of all ethnic groups in Kosovo,
especially the Serbs. That is the only way to create the
necessary conditions for the achievement of such goals
as the return of refugees and economic development.
China believes that the fundamental resolution of
the question of Kosovo will require consultation and
dialogue between Belgrade and Priština with a view to
reaching agreement on practical matters, such as the
return of refugees and the rights of minorities and
missing persons, and thereby establishing a foundation
for the ultimate settlement of the question of the status
of Kosovo. Such achievements would also be
conducive to the peace and stability of the entire
Balkan region.
To that end, we hope that the two parties
concerned will, on the basis of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), initiate constructive dialogue
as soon as possible on those questions and, with the
help of the international community, achieve concrete
results.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.
I should like to make six points. First, I associate
myself with the comments to be made soon by the
Italian presidency of the European Union. Secondly,
we encourage the very early launch of the BelgradePriština dialogue and look forward to practical
proposals from the Special Representative, who enjoys
our full support. Thirdly, normalization is the best way
forward. There is too much political rhetoric on both
sides. Unilateral attempts to pre-empt the status issue
are not helpful; resolution 1244 (1999) is the way
forward.

13

S/PV.4823

Fourthly, the immediate priority is standards. I
associate myself with those who say that it must very
clearly be “standards before status”. It is important in
that respect to establish benchmarks. Fifthly, as we
gear up for those discussions between Priština and
Belgrade, the security situation must be a priority.
Strengthening the rule of law and building the
indigenous capacity of the Kosovo Police Service are
vital if we are going to increase the role of, and
enforce, law and order.
My last point is simply to say that tackling
corruption, extremism and organized crime is a crucial
element in building up the multi-ethnic, prosperous
Kosovo that we seek. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has got a lot of
work in hand on that issue, but it is quite striking that
the internal market in organized crime in that part of
the world is much more effective than is the internal
market in legitimate goods and services. That situation
has to be reversed if the region is to attain its goal of
approaching Euro-Atlantic standards.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I have three speakers still on my list. The next
speaker is the representative of Serbia and Montenegro,
to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Šahović (Serbia and Montenegro): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of September, as well as to thank you for
convening this meeting. I would also like to thank Mr.
Annabi for his briefing.
In recent months the Security Council has held a
series of discussions that have mostly been devoted to
the escalation of violence and ethnically motivated
crimes in Kosovo and Metohija. The need for that was
obvious. In July, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) reported an
increased number of incidents, stating that the Serbian
population was the primary target of intimidation.
Regrettably, we witnessed even worse crimes in
August, including a bomb attack in the village of
Cernica on 31 August that killed Milomir Stakic and
wounded four other civilians. We view the further
deterioration of the security situation with extreme
concern, particularly bearing in mind the fact that
neither the perpetrators of the Gorazdevac atrocity of
13 August, the killers of the Serb fisherman Dragan
Tonic, who was killed on 11 August in Skulanovo, nor

14

the Cernica bombers, have been apprehended. We also
regret that those responsible for the 3 August murder of
UNMIK police officer Satish Menon have not been
found.
The new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral,
Mr.
Harri
Holkeri,
assumed
his
responsibilities and clearly difficult tasks against that
background. He has yet to settle in Priština, but we can
already discern his resolve to confront the existing
problems. We welcome Mr. Holkeri’s priorities to
establish the rule of law, ensure basic rights and
freedoms, fight organized crime, build multi-ethnic
institutions and enhance economic development as
basic preconditions for lasting stability in the province.
In particular, my Government welcomes the new
Special Representative’s commitment to promptly
address the security situation, especially violence
against the Serb community. We share his view that the
motive for the latest attacks was to send the message
that multi-ethnicity would not be allowed to take hold
in the province. We support Mr. Holkeri’s position that
the international community must be resolute in its
stand that it will not be intimated from fulfilling the
mandate of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
It is encouraging that the international community
has demonstrated, at several high-level meetings during
the last few days, a common dedication to ending the
cycle of violence and extremism. In that regard, we are
looking forward to concrete measures against the
Albanian National Army (ANA), which in April was
proclaimed by UNMIK to be a terrorist organization, as
well as to the findings of the special UNMIK/KFOR
board set up last spring to coordinate action against
suspected extremist infiltration in the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC).
It is our sincere hope that that decisiveness with
regard to improving the security situation will boost
the thus far highly unsatisfactory pace in the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. Perhaps it
was on the basis of renewed hope for minority
protection that the 200 remaining Serbs in Cernica —
the venue of the aforementioned attack on
31 August — decided to stay in the province. However,
we fear that, if crimes and terrorist acts continue with
impunity, any future decision by the Serb community
to leave Kosovo and Metohija permanently may be
irreversible.

S/PV.4823

My Government welcomes the renewed
engagement of the Contact Group on the issue of
Kosovo and Metohija. We find particularly important
the Contact Group’s confirmation in Moscow of the
relevance of the principle of “standards before status”
and of the need to make the benchmarks concept
operational, as well as the emphasis on continuous
international control of the implementation of related
requirements. Serbia and Montenegro is looking
forward to the Contact Group’s further activities. In
that context, we wish to establish regular dialogue with
the Group in order to continue to contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) as well as,
more broadly, to the stabilization of the region.

The European Union reiterates its strong
condemnation of the brutal killings and violence that
took place in Kosovo during August and September
against a United Nations police officer and against
Kosovars of both Serbian and Albanian ethnicity. In
expressing our deepest condolences to the families of
the victims and to the Government of India, we are also
confident that no efforts are being spared to arrest the
perpetrators and bring them to justice. The European
Union believes that everybody in Kosovo must
understand that the time for violence is over and that
such deplorable incidents can only undermine the
image of Kosovo in Europe and in the international
community.

The Security Council, the Contact Group and
Special Representative Holkeri are calling for an early
start of dialogue between Belgrade and Priština. Serbia
and Montenegro stands fully ready to engage
constructively in all discussions of importance to the
daily lives of all citizens of Kosovo and Metohija,
regardless of their ethnicity. We expect that the talks,
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), will
help to improve the security situation in the province,
enhance human and minority rights and, consequently,
step up the returns process. Mr. Holkeri’s role in those
talks is extremely important, as is the support of the
Contact Group and the European Union in this process.

We therefore welcome the arrival in Kosovo of
the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Harri Holkeri. We would like to reaffirm
our strong support for him in the challenging task of
ensuring full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), which continues to be the
cornerstone of the international community’s
commitment to Kosovo.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize that Serbia
and Montenegro has recently reconfirmed at the
highest parliamentary level its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and its
fundamental aim of building a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo and Metohija, one in which all inhabitants can
have a peaceful and normal life based on substantial
autonomy and meaningful self-government.
The President: The next speaker under rule 37 is
the representative of Italy and of the Italian presidency.
I give him the floor.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, and the European Free
Trade Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, have declared that they align
themselves with this statement.

In that regard, we very much appreciate the
briefing given to the Council by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Hédi Annabi. He has given us a very clear-cut
picture of where we stand and of the way forward.
We also would like to urge all concerned in
Kosovo and in the region to cooperate in a constructive
manner with the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on fully implementing resolution
1244 (1999) while refraining from unilateral acts and
statements that risk jeopardizing the goal of a stable,
multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo.
The European Union fully supports the United
Nations weapons amnesty programme launched on 1
September by Mr. Holkeri and shares his views that
“the people of Kosovo should seize this opportunity to
help themselves while helping Kosovo” and that “the
values of tolerance and democracy are the foundation
of a free society”.
Kosovo must comply with international and
European standards as soon as possible. That goal can
be achieved only through the active cooperation of all
the stakeholders in Kosovo and the region. We
therefore urge the leadership in Belgrade and Priština
to launch without further delay a direct dialogue on
practical issues of mutual interest. That is a

15

S/PV.4823

prerequisite to building mutual confidence, as was
announced at the European Union’s Western Balkans
summit held at Thessaloniki on 21 June.
The European Union will ensure that Kosovo’s
European prospects are not held back by the final
status issue. Before addressing that issue, however, a
democratic, multi-ethnic and multicultural Kosovo
guaranteeing full respect for the rule of law and for
human and minority rights will have to be built. To that
end, the European Union reiterates its support for the
“standards before status” strategy, which now needs to
become operational.
The European Union is also firmly committed to
supporting Kosovo’s economic
recovery
and
development, including the privatization process, as an
indispensable measure for ensuring the normalization
and development of society. At the same time, we
would like to see progress on decentralization and on
the return process, where there is still an urgent need
for concrete measures to be taken by the competent
authorities, both at the central and local levels.
The President: I call on the representative of
Albania.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): At the outset, Sir, allow me
to express our delegation’s appreciation for your
commitment to the problems of our region and to
commend your work as the President of the Security
Council for the month of September.
Let me also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for his comprehensive briefing today.
The issue of Kosovo has been broadly discussed
in the Security Council. This reflects the commitment
and the seriousness of the international community in
implementing Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
and ensuring a sustainable democratic future for
Kosovo.
The attention that the Kosovo issue has attracted
constitutes a positive factor that has accelerated the
rhythm of significant transformations towards a multiethnic, democratic society. While evaluating the
current situation in Kosovo, as a result of considerable
transformations due to the commendable work of the
United Nations and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, we are confident in
saying that substantial progress has been achieved.
This conclusion has been realistically highlighted by

16

the members of the Security Council and reflected in
the reports of the Secretary-General as well.
It is important to put special emphasis on the
establishment and functioning of the new Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, which are a clear
indication of growing political maturity and
responsibility. There is an improved inter-ethnic
environment as well, as has been demonstrated, for
instance, by the appeal of the Kosovar leaders to all
displaced persons to return to Kosovo and to
participate in the democratic processes and in the
responsibility to rebuild together a new, multi-ethnic,
free and democratic society.
The latest incidents in Kosovo are tragic and
intolerable. They should be explicitly condemned and
considered to be acts of an agonizing violent past that
cannot halt the democratic processes and the
irreversible new realities. However, these incidents
cannot be condemned either by denying the substantial
progress in Kosovo or by using it for political, electoral
and nationalist interests. That would impede the
beginning of the necessary dialogue between Priština
and Belgrade, to the accomplishment of which the
whole international community is committed.
Today, Kosovo needs confidence-building
measures and not a conflict-feeding process. Finding
itself between opportunities and difficulties, problems
and solutions, Kosovo requires all of us to become part
of the solution and the progress. The far-sighted policy
of the European Union to include Kosovo as an
inseparable part of the regional reality, drawn up at the
Thessaloniki summit, creates real grounds for its rapid
integration, first, into the regional community, and then
into the European family.
The improvement of stability and progress
suggests the need for the Kosovar leadership to take
part in the discussions of this body on Kosovo so that it
may share responsibilities and be fully committed to
the implementation of Security Council decisions.
The
Albanian
Government
has
always
appreciated the important work of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and is thankful for the extraordinary results achieved in
a relatively short period of time. The Albanian
Government commends the appointment of Mr. Harri
Holkeri as Special Representative and will support his
activity. My Government strongly believes that his
mission will be carried out successfully and contribute

S/PV.4823

to the further development of Kosovo and the
implementation of the necessary standards before
status.
Albania has encouraged the political leaders in
Kosovo and Belgrade to give concrete expression to
their commitment to initiate a dialogue on technical
issues. My Government considers unacceptable and
unhelpful every effort that goes beyond the stabilizing
framework of the dialogue and increases the spirit of
conflict in the region.
The dialogue between the two parties and the
collaboration of mutual interests towards economic
development and regional integration will bring an
understanding of new realities. People can be ruled not
by the mentality of territories, but by that of respect for
their right to self-determination, freedom and
democracy — ideas that shape modern Europe today.

I thank my colleagues for their contributions,
especially Assistant Secretary-General Annabi — not
just for his contribution, but also for what it represents
in terms of the work that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo does.
We have all shown today, I think, our clear
support for the Special Representative. Resolution
1244 (1999) remains the basis of policy and there has
been a clear emphasis on standards before status. As
for dialogue, most speakers have endorsed what is
taking place and expressed the imperative of tackling
the security situation and of stabilizing things. The
recent attacks have been condemned by just about
everybody.
We have thus concluded the Security Council’s
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

The President: There are no more speakers on
my list.

17
