Resolutions adopted on the report11 of the Second Committee

ment, especially in the techniques of economic planning
and development;
( b) To provide, on request, through the Economic
Commission for Africa and its institute of economic
development and planning when it is established, the
advisory services and other technical assistance required for the preparation of national and regional development plans ;
4. Requests the Economic Commission for Africa,
acting through its Executive Secretary and with the
fullest assistance of the Secretary-General :
(a) To convene as soon as possible, in consultation
with the appropriate institutions and organs and under
the auspices of the Standing Committee on Trade of
the Economic Commission far Africa, a meeting of
African countries to examine their policies on international trade and to work out immediate and common solutions regarding the disposal of their principal
products on externa! markets;
( b) To prepare a further and up-to-date study of
the impacts, on a short-term basis as well as in thc
long run, of the European economic groupings on the
trade and economic development of the associated as
well as the non-associated African countries;
(e) To study further, in consultation with the Governments of African countries and appropriate institutions:
(i) The measures required for increasing the volume of domestic savings in the African countries;
( ii) The measures necessary for accelerating the
flow of foreign public and prívate capital to
African countries and to report on these meaures to the Economic and Social Council at
its thirty-fourth session;
5. Urges the importance of establishing regional
economic development banks far Africa taking into
account the study called for in resolution 27 (III) of
the Economic Commission for Africa, and requests the
Secretary-General to consult with the appropriate institutions, particularly the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, on the immediate steps
necessary far the early establishment oí these regional
development banks ;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to
strengthen the authority and increase the substantive
and operational functions of the Economic Commission
for Africa and to provide it with the requisite personnel
and other resources in keeping with the policy of decentralization, as reaffirmed in General Assembly resolution 1709 (XVI) oí 19 December 1961;
7. Invites the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-fourth session to examine the progress achieved

25

in the implementation oí the present resolution and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventeenth session.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1719 (XVI). Pop~lation growth and economic
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1217 (XII) of 14 December
1957 and Economic and Social Council resolution 820
(XXXI) of 28 April 1961,
Recommends that the ítem entitled "Population
growth and economic development" should be included
in the agenda of its seventeenth session.in view oí the
fact that a draft resolution on this item 211 was distributed to the Second Committee on 1 December 1961
but could not be considered because of lack of time.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1720 (XVI). Permanent sovereignty over natural
resources
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1314 (XIII) of 12 December
1958,
Desiring to promete the strengthening of permanent
sovereignty of peoples and nations over their natural
wealth and resources,
l. Expresses its thanks for the revised study on the
status of permanent sovereignty over natural wealth
and resources, prepared by the United Nations Secretariat ;26
2. Requests that arrangements be made speedily far
the printing of that study, together with the report of
the Commission on. Permanent Sovereignty over
Natural Resources, 27 so that these documents may be
available to al! who wish to consult them far the useful
information they contain;
3. Decides that the United Nations work on permanent sovereignty over natural wealth and resources
shall be continued and recommends that priority be
given for the discussion of this matter in the Second
Committee at its next session.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
fllQjficial Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth SessioK,
Annexes, agenda itero 84 docuroent A/5059, para. 4.
•Aj AC.97 /5/Rev.1 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1.
"'Ojficial Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-second Session, Annexes, agenda itero 9, document
E/3511.
