S/PV.9343

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9343rd meeting

Thursday, 8 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Almarar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
League of Arab States
Letter dated 5 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/407)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16322 (E)
*2316322*

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

and regional cooperation to maintain peace and
security ever more difficult. In such a fraught context,
it is heartening that the relationship between the
United Nations and the League remains robust. As the
Secretary-General reminds us in his report (S/2023/331),
cooperation with the League of Arab States, consistent
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
serves to enhance collective security. In the report, the
Secretary-General reviews the areas of cooperation and
engagement of our two organizations across the region.
Today I would like to highlight the issues of common
concern and some additional developments since the
report was prepared.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
League of Arab States
Letter dated 5 June 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/407)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Egypt to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States; and Ms. Omnia El Omrani, Youth Envoy for
the President of the twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/407, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative
of the United Arab Emirates to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I am pleased to have the opportunity
to address the Security Council on our cooperation
with the League of Arab States. And I am honoured to
be speaking alongside His Excellency Mr. Aboul Gheit,
Secretary-General of the League.
In recent years, multilateralism has come under
great strain. Trust in institutions and processes has been
sorely tested, most recently by the uneven response to
the coronavirus disease crisis. Defiance of international
law and the norms that bind us is making international
2/24

08/06/2023

With regard to the Sudan, where fighting is
devastating the lives of civilians and destroying the
country’s future, the Jeddah agreement brokered on
20 May by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
States gave rise to much hope. Unfortunately, the
parties have failed to implement it. Furthermore, the
Sudanese Armed Forces announced the suspension of
their participation in the talks, citing the Rapid Support
Forces’ violations of the ceasefire. It is critical that the
parties remain committed to the ceasefire agreement,
but that will not be enough. We need a permanent
cessation of hostilities and eventually a resumption
of the political process. In that regard, we commend
the League, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the Sudan’s other
partners for their efforts to support peace in the Sudan.
It is essential to coordinate our various efforts if we
are to maximize our impact in support of the Sudanese
people. The role of the region will be key to ending
the conflict.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
keeps deteriorating. Last month we witnessed yet
another devastating escalation in Gaza, with tragic
loss of life on both sides and further damage to fragile
infrastructure. Tensions also continue to simmer, and
indeed to regularly boil over, in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Unilateral actions,
including settlement expansion and violence against
Israeli and Palestinian civilians, continue to undermine
our collective efforts to realize a two-State solution.
The acute financial and institutional challenges facing
the Palestinian Authority and the lack of progress on
advancing intra-Palestinian unity and the holding of
general elections must all be addressed. I also want
to echo the Secretary-General’s call to ensure full
funding for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. The
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Agency plays a critical role for Palestinian refugees
and regional stability. The World Food Programme
also needs immediate financial support to continue
vital assistance to Palestinians. We share a common
goal with the League, which is a two-State solution
that realizes the legitimate national aspirations of
Palestinians and Israelis, in line with international law
and United Nations resolutions. That is the only path to
sustainable peace between the two peoples.
We followed the outcomes of the 19 May League
of Arab States Summit closely, noting that many of
the resolutions that were adopted highlighted issues
of mutual interest, as well as our ongoing cooperation
in numerous areas. Among other decisions, we
welcomed the Summit’s resolution on developments
in Libya, which is a demonstration of the League’s
engagement on the issue, including as a member of the
Libya quartet, together with the United Nations. We
especially commend the League’s expression of support
for the ongoing United Nations efforts to find a political
solution for Libya. In the coming weeks and months,
the international community will need to remain united
behind ensuring the holding of elections in Libya by
the end of 2023. Libyans want to elect their leaders,
restore legitimacy to their institutions and halt the cycle
of endless political transitions. They have already had
to wait too long to do so.
With regard to Syria, we take note of Arab meetings
in Amman and Jeddah and the resolution adopted at
the Jeddah summit, which reflected the importance of
resolution 2254 (2015), the only internationally agreed
road map for resolving the Syrian conflict. If the renewed
regional attention on Syria is translated into action,
we could see momentum build towards a negotiated
political settlement of the conflict. Addressing the fate
of the detained, the disappeared and the missing is
essential to moving closer to sustainable peace. We call
on all parties to take meaningful steps to that end. We
urge Member States to support the establishment of an
institution dedicated to the missing.
Regarding refugees, protection concerns need
to be addressed more visibly, transparently and
systematically. We will continue to work with all, as the
United Nations facilitates a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned
political process, but we cannot do that alone. We need
the support of all key actors, in particular the member
States of the League.
The Arab region faces a range of urgent challenges
related to peace and security, development and climate

S/PV.9343

change. But the region also possesses immense
potential, particularly in its young women and men.
Sixty per cent of the population is under 30 years old.
Together, we continue to encourage Member States to
engage with and invest in Arab youth. That is not only
the right thing to do, but it is also the sensible thing to
do for the region’s future.
Earlier this year, we supported the League in the
development of an Arab regional youth, peace and
security strategy. That involved a consultative process
that enabled the voices of more than 300 young people
from 13 countries to be heard, achieving a level of
outreach and public engagement unimaginable not so
long ago. We are now looking at the ways the United
Nations can support the implementation of that strategy.
We encourage the League’s member States to use it to
guide regional, subregional and national implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015) and other relevant aspects of
the youth, peace and security agenda. As highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report, we also continue
supporting, through the United Nations Liaison Office
to the League of Arab States and in close cooperation
with UN-Women, the League’s efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), the Arab Women Mediators
Network and the action plan for women and peace and
security in the Arab region.
Those are but a few examples of how our ongoing
cooperation deepens and expands to address new and
emerging priorities, including through the United
Nations Liaison Office to the League of Arab States.
The Office continues to strengthen our communication
and cooperation, while facilitating regular contact
between United Nations special envoys and the League.
And, as always, we stand ready to work closely with
the League on various mediation efforts in the region,
through joint, coordinated and focused action.
Next year, we will organize our sixteenth United
Nations — League of Arab States General Cooperation
Meeting to review our biennial framework, take
stock of our accomplishments and open new avenues
for cooperation. That meeting will bring together all
departments, agencies, funds and programmes of
our two systems, acknowledging the significance of
the peace-humanitarian-development nexus. We are
committed to meeting our common challenges and
seizing the opportunities before us, in the Arab world
and beyond. Together, we can achieve what neither
organization could achieve on its own.

23-163223/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Aboul Gheit.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to sincerely congratulate the United Arab
Emirates for presiding over the Security Council this
month. I would also like to express my deep appreciation
for its role in its capacity as the Arab member of the
Council. In particular, I would like to commend the
initiative taken by the United Arab Emirates to hold
this meeting, for the second time under its presidency,
to foster relations between the League of Arab States
and the Security Council.
Relations between the Security Council and the
Arab issues date back to the inception of the United
Nations, especially as regards the Palestinian question,
which is critically important to the League of Arab
States. However, regrettably, the past decade, in
particular, has witnessed numerous highly complex
issues and dossiers in the Arab region, which found
their way to the Security Council to be resolved. It is
undeniable that the world is now at a critical juncture
as, for the first time in decades, we are on the brink
of a nuclear confrontation, not to mention increasing
tensions among the major Powers, ensuing polarization
and heightened international tensions.
Meanwhile, synergy and collective action have
been reduced in order to confront the conventional
and unconventional challenges faced by humankind,
in particular counter-terrorism, climate change and the
disruption caused by technological advances, especially
those related to the development and unrestricted use
thus far of artificial intelligence, in addition to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and other
weapons. The prevailing tensions in the international
order diminish any opportunities to address regional
conflicts. It also comes at the expense of global attention
that should be paid to humanitarian and relief aid that
goes to regions that suffer escalating crises. That
is why I call upon all Council members to pay more
attention to conflict zones across the world and not let
the Ukrainian crisis or any other crisis affect overall
international commitments related specifically to the
humanitarian issues in regions that experience acute
humanitarian crises. Attention should be given to the
millions of refugees and displaced people in our region,
namely, in Yemen, Syria, Somalia and the Sudan.
4/24

08/06/2023

Palestinians in the occupied territories suffer
the impact of long-lasting occupation, along with
heightened oppression and violence on the part of the
Israeli Government. With its positions and practices and
the extreme ideologies espoused by some of its figures,
the Israeli Government reflects an unprecedented shift
to the right. It is a Government that chooses annexation
and settlement-building instead of peace. Every
single day, that Government implements policies and
practices that are completely against international law,
thereby undermining any future prospects for the twoState solution.
The most dangerous thing that the Palestinian
people suffer from today is a deep sentiment of despair as
they have lost all hope in the ability of the international
community to advance the political settlement process.
Over the past few months, we have witnessed an
exceptional increase in violence. Regrettably, the
desire to please extremists and elements of the extreme
right within the Israeli society compels the current
Government to act in a way that is very concerning to
all of us because one provocative incident, such as those
that have occurred repeatedly under the sponsorship of
some Israeli ministers, whereby settlers have stormed
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, could lead to a serious of
reactions with unknown results. Therefore, I call from
this rostrum for reconsidering the two-State solution,
as that is the only path, as per the League of Arab
States — I repeat, the only path — to lasting peace.
That solution was agreed to by the international
community and established in the resolutions adopted
by the Security Council and the General Assembly. That
solution is also at the core of the Arab Peace Initiative,
to which the League of Arab States still adheres. It is
the only way to achieving regional peace on the basis
of an end to the occupation and the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, along 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
For nearly two months, the Sudan has been
witnessing a situation that is unprecedented in its
contemporary history, as Khartoum, the capital, has
become a battlefield between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Rapid Support Forces, leading to hundreds
of civilians killed and thousands injured, thousands of
families fleeing, the widespread destruction of State
institutions and infrastructure, and the looting of public
and private property on an unprecedented scale. The
League of Arab States acknowledges the seriousness
of the situation for both the Sudan and its neighbours.
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We are actively working in coordination with regional
organizations, especially the African Union, towards
achieving the common goal, which is a total cessation of
military operations, which would allow some stability
conducive to resuming political action that meets the
aspirations of the Sudanese people. We all bear in mind
the importance of maintaining the unity and stability of
the Sudan without threatening its territorial integrity or
weakening the unity of its national institutions.
We, as Arabs, hope that the return of Syria to the
League of Arab States will serve as an important step
towards addressing its protracted crisis. Perhaps that step
will prompt a more active and influential Arab role in
achieving an indispensable political settlement in Syria
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). A political
solution continues to be the main means for restoring
stability to Syria and preserving its sovereignty over the
entirety of its national territory. The protracted crisis in
Syria has resulted in many negative aspects, including
millions of Syrians becoming refugees and displaced
persons, most of them living in extremely difficult
conditions. Their presence in some host countries
has culminated in a pressing problem that should not
be ignored. We hope that the neighbouring countries,
especially the Arab countries, in cooperation with the
Government of Syria, will be able to reach a solution
for the voluntary and dignified return of the Syrian
refugees by creating an environment conducive to that
return. In that regard, we underscore the important role
of the international community at the next stage.
In Yemen, the truce that was achieved, despite the
Houthis’ insistence on refusing to formally extend it,
has already contributed to de-escalating the conflict.
Positive signs such as the mutual release of prisoners
have also contributed to de-escalation. However, the
situation in Yemen is still tragic, after nearly a decade
of civil conflict, and we all know that the country is
suffering from the gravest humanitarian crisis in our
world today, with millions of its people in need of
humanitarian assistance. Nevertheless, a political
solution to the crisis continues to be achievable,
especially if sufficient pressure is exerted on the
Houthi side.
The agreement that was signed between the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Iran in March also opens
important new prospects that should be optimized in
order to achieve the required de-escalation and maybe
even a settlement in Yemen. Fostering regional security
in the Arab region, especially in the Arab Gulf region

S/PV.9343

and Bab Al-Mandab, requires, in the first place, a
commitment by all the parties to refrain from using or
threatening to use force and a commitment to one of the
basic principles on which the international order and
the Charter of the United Nations is based, which is
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
In Libya, we support the efforts made to reach
comprehensive reconciliation in the country, and we
hope that all the parties will overcome the obstacles that
prevent the holding of elections, given that elections
constitute the only path towards a sustainable solution
to the ongoing crisis in the country and the very
serious divisions within Libyan institutions. We also
hope that the positive developments in the region will
positively reflect on Libya. We call on the international
community to continue to accompany the Libyans until
they achieve security. We commend the efforts of all
Arab countries that sincerely aim to help their Libyan
brothers to overcome the current impasse.
The League of Arab States believes that engaging
young people in peace efforts and decision-making
bolsters the sustainability of peace and development
efforts, prevents conflicts and resolve them. In
that regard, resolution 2250 (2015) is of paramount
importance, as it coincides with the priorities and
specific concerns of the Arab States, especially in the
light of the current geopolitical situation, the impact
of protracted conflicts in some Arab countries and
the emergence of the phenomenon of extremism and
violence globally.
In continuation of the joint efforts between the
League of Arab States and the Security Council to
support the participation of Arab women in the various
stages of peace achievement, we launched the Arab
Women Peace Mediators Network, which serves as a
serious and ambitious initiative to translate and support
the efforts made by Arab women in peace mediation at
the national, regional and international levels and enable
experienced Arab women to participate in conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Despite the enormous scale of challenges facing
the region, the League of Arab States continues to be
an active and key partner in multilateral action in the
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
We have synergized our common efforts to address a
number of global challenges, including health crises,
armed conflicts, terrorism and violent extremism, food
security, water security, desertification, climate change,
disaster risk reduction and other serious challenges.

23-163225/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In that regard, I would like to point out that working
on all those fronts requires us to develop the strategic
basis for cooperation, including sectorial cooperation,
between our two organizations, the League of Arab
States and the United Nations, to improve the standard
of living of the Arab peoples and mitigate the effects of
those challenges on them.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance that the League of Arab States attaches to
its strategic partnership with the Security Council. We
are certain of the importance of cooperation between
our two organizations to support peace and security in
the Middle East in order to transform it from a region
of conflicts and crises into one of security and stability
whose peoples enjoy the peace, prosperity and wellbeing they deserve.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Aboul
Gheit for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. El Omrani.
Ms. El Omrani (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity to represent the perspective of
young people from the Arab region during this highlevel meeting on enhancing cooperation between the
Security Council and the League of Arab States to
promote regional stability.
More than 60 per cent of the population in the
Arab region are young people under the age of 30,
making it one of the youngest regions in the world.
It is also considered one of the regions most affected
by humanitarian, environmental and health crises and
their impact on various aspects of life, the quality of
education and the provision of decent work, as well as
the increase in the unemployment rate, especially among
young people, which has exceeded 28 per cent in the
Arab region. Those challenges further exacerbate the
difficulties faced by the majority of Arab young people.
Unequal access to information, education, decent work
and health care has intensified the social, economic
and health impacts of current geopolitical challenges
and ongoing conflicts on young people. The safety
and harmony of some societies in our Arab region are
threatened by the spread of fanaticism and hate speech.
The negative effects of climate change, conflict and
economic pressures have also increased mistrust and
uncertainty about the future among young people.
As the Arab region is one of those in the world most
affected by climate change and conflicts, approximately
6/24

08/06/2023

54 million people in the region are suffering from acute
food insecurity. Similarly, one in every five children
lacks access to safe drinking water, which leads to
further diseases and vulnerability in the Arab region,
which is currently facing water scarcity. Additionally,
emerging infectious diseases such as the coronavirus
disease are expected to be more prevalent and severe
owing to the rising temperatures. Climate change
is also affecting the mental health of young people
owing to the extreme uncertainty associated with that
phenomenon. Moreover, some reports indicate that the
mass displacement of millions of people in the region
is caused by either climate change, armed conflict or a
combination of both.
Nevertheless, young people are striving to confront
such global challenges with action, innovation and
perseverance, to build a world of peace and security
for future generations. Recognizing the magnitude of
the challenges faced by young people, Egypt has set an
example to follow by taking tangible measures to listen
to and empower young people, harnessing their role
and emphasizing the importance of intergenerational
equality. In that context, we note the appointment of
the first official Youth Envoy for the twenty-seventh
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP
27). I was honoured to hold that position, which
marks a decisive turning point for meaningful and
effective youth engagement at the highest levels in
decision-making with regard to climate change.
Egypt has also established the first specialized
youth office affiliated with the United Nations, which
was approved last year. The new youth office can build
capacities and support the establishment of a strategy
for youth and peace and security in Arab countries.
Egypt also participated in the elaboration of the Human
Rights Council resolution on youth and human rights.
Egypt also hosted four sessions of the World Youth
Forum — one of the largest global platforms for youth
dialogue. Those examples, among others, illustrate the
active commitment to holding meaningful dialogue
with and ensuring the inclusion and participation of
youth perspectives in the planning and implementation
of public policies.
At the regional level, the League of Arab States
is working to empower young people to harness their
potential in implementing the youth, peace and security
agenda, in addition to addressing the common challenges
facing young people in the Arab region. Furthermore,
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the Arab League plays a fundamental role in promoting
further comprehensive youth peacebuilding processes
and implementing them at the country level by investing
in youth, which is synonymous with investing in peace.
(spoke in English)
As a young Arab woman, I am here to evoke a
sense of urgency to address the systemic inequalities
and intergenerational injustices — something that my
generation is desperately calling for. Young people are
more aware than ever of the significance of further
participation and its relevance to them, their societies
and their futures. As we explore ways here today to
expand the joint efforts between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States to promote peace and
security, I would like to underline two specific aspects.
First, we must reorient institutional structures to
include young people, not as add-ons, but as natural
stakeholders in formal roles such as youth advisory
groups and youth councils. Young people are a diverse
constituency who have uniquely critical perspectives
and skills that should not be marginalized. Peace and
security policies should be grounded in the needs
and insights of the most vulnerable youth, including
young women, refugees and internally displaced
youth. That requires the establishment of sustainable
and intergenerational mechanisms, not only for the
participation of youth, but also for the emergence of
youth-led solutions and implementation pathways, as
currently demonstrated by the United Arab Emirates’
COP 28 presidency and the Climate Champions
Youth Fellowship.
Secondly,
innovative
investments
and
accountability systems are essential to provide
equitable and accessible opportunities for young people
to contribute to shaping and implementing the regional
strategy for peace and security. The United Nations
can play an integral role in advancing transparency and
inclusivity by urging Member States and institutions to
deliver for and with young people. That is the only way
in which to foster trust and elevate youth agency across
all fronts of peacebuilding, governance consolidation
and social inclusion. That entails consulting youthled organizations and groups and embedding their
proposals in the design, implementation and evaluation
of all matters related to peace and security.
Those calls for action represent pressing needs,
commonly raised by young people in the region, to
respond to the unprecedented challenges of the world

S/PV.9343

we live in today. The young people of the region know
that they are entitled to a better future. We must work
together across silos and across generations to build
the stable and secure future that young people want
and deserve.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. El
Omrani for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates.
I would like to begin by thanking His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, for his briefing and his
significant role in promoting cooperation between
the Arab League and other regional and international
organizations, most notably the United Nations. I also
thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her valuable
briefing and welcome the report issued by the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/331) in line with the presidential
statement adopted by the Security Council during the
United Arab Emirates’ previous presidency, in March
2022 (S/PRST/2022/1). I also wish to sincerely thank
Ms. Omnia El Omrani for her insightful presentation,
which highlighted the aspirations of Arab youth — a
topic of great importance to the United Arab Emirates.
In the light of today’s briefings and the growing
cooperation between the two organizations, I would like
to focus my statement on the most prominent aspects
that require an increase in efforts between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States in the coming
period. Since the Council last convened on this topic
(see S/PV.9001), the Arab region has witnessed a rise in
diplomatic and political activities aimed at overcoming
conflict, settling differences and embarking on a new
era of stability and prosperity.
Today our Arab countries are moving towards
greater rapprochement and integration throughout the
region, while strengthening cooperation with partners
in the East and West. They have also made valiant
efforts towards improving relations with neighbouring
States in the region and making important mediation
efforts to resolve ongoing conflicts in Palestine,
Yemen, the Sudan and Libya. In that context, we
express our appreciation in particular for the efforts
led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, along with the
United States, to facilitate talks between the Sudanese
parties. Moreover, the reinstatement of Syria in the
League of Arab States has provided an opportunity

23-163227/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

for strengthening the Arab role in resolving the Syrian
crisis while also complementing the role of the United
Nations in that regard.
In the light of those advancements, we hope that
the United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
will persist in supporting and encouraging those
Arab initiatives and endeavours to build a robust and
balanced regional order that achieves stability and lays
a solid foundation for comprehensive development
in the region. Those positive and rapid changes pave
the way for significant breakthroughs in a number of
conflicts through practical and realistic solutions.
We therefore call for strengthening the institutional
relationship between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States in order to confront those shared
challenges. That includes enhancing the work of the
Liaison Office to the League of Arab States, which plays
an important role in this domain. We also applaud the
existing collaboration between the Secretary-Generals
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States on
the Sudan and Libya files, and we encourage expanding
that cooperation to encompass other regional issues.
It is also critical for the two organizations to
strengthen their cooperation and coordination in the
area of counter-terrorism. In that regard, we welcome
the new plan for implementing the Arab counterterrorism strategy, which aligns with the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We also
welcome the exchange of visits and information among
the specialized agencies of the two organizations, and
we call for continuing those efforts.
The Security Council’s mandate on conflict
prevention requires us to foster the values of tolerance
and human fraternity as well as to address the drivers
of conflict, including hate speech, racism, intolerance
and extremism. We will delve further into this topic
next week when the Council holds a high-level briefing
on human fraternity for the first time, which will
illustrate the role that those values play in achieving
global peace.
It is also important to continue supporting efforts
to empower and protect women and girls across the
Arab region and across all fields. Women are active
contributors to the region’s development, and the
United Arab Emirates has supported several initiatives
aimed at achieving that goal at both the regional and
international levels. For instance, in December 2022,
the United Arab Emirates hosted the official launching
8/24

08/06/2023

of the Arab Declaration to Combat All Forms of
Violence against Women and Girls. We also continue
our efforts at the national level to empower women, who
now occupy distinctive status across various fields.
Given that half of the Arab region’s population
is under the age of 25, the United Arab Emirates
supported the establishment of the Arab Youth Center,
which seeks to foster the capabilities of Arab youth,
while promoting innovation and creativity and, in turn,
nurturing a new generation of young Arab leaders. In
that context, we welcome the development of an Arab
regional strategy on youth, peace and security.
The growing number of urgent humanitarian crises
underscores the pressing need for expanding regional
and international cooperation and coordination, as
well as enhancing efficiency and effectiveness in aid
provision. This approach will help overcome challenges
that arise from inadequate coordination in humanitarian
response, and ensure benefiting from past experiences,
such as the recent earthquake that impacted Syria
and Türkiye.
Arab perspectives are crucial not only when
dealing with Arab crises but also when confronting
common global challenges, including the adverse
impacts of climate change, which has become an
existential threat to our world today, including our
region, which is grappling with severe droughts. This
reality has enhanced the commitment of Arab countries
to actively participate in international efforts to address
climate change. As my country prepares to host the
twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
we look forward to cooperating with all our partners to
make tangible strides towards ambitious climate action,
including through a holistic approach that focuses on
practical solutions and builds on the work done at the
twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties, held in Egypt.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
United Arab Emirates will continue to play its active
role throughout its Council membership and beyond
in order to support the Council’s work in reaching
decisions that can contribute to resolving outstanding
issues. The positive results from the efforts of the
League of Arab States and the United Nations in recent
years are a testament to the ability to make tangible
progress through joint cooperation. However, we must
also redouble our efforts to achieve peace and stability,
support development and foster economic prosperity in
the Arab region and beyond.
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the United Arab Emirates for the initiative of convening
this meeting and welcome His Excellency Mr. Khalifa
Shaheen Almarar, Minister of State of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, to
preside over this meeting in New York. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Secretary-General
Aboul Gheit and Ms. El Omrani for their briefings.
I welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Permanent Representative of Egypt, who spoke on
behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Recently, the Middle East has seen a series of
positive changes, with unity, cooperation, dialogue
and reconciliation gaining strong momentum. That
has injected new hope and positive energy into the
world, which has been mired in turmoil. Saudi Arabia
and Iran announced the restoration of diplomatic
relations through the Beijing dialogue, giving rise to
a wave of reconciliation in the Middle East. A historic
easing of relations has been achieved among multiple
countries, and several regional hot-button issues have
seen positive progress. After a 12-year hiatus, Syria has
returned to the League of Arab States, thereby making
the Arab League family whole once again. Those
examples fully demonstrates that breaking away from
bloc confrontation, easing tension and seeking peaceful
development are the popular aspirations and calls of the
countries and peoples in the region.
China appreciates the Arab League and the
countries of the region for their unremitting efforts
in that regard. The international community should
respond to the trend by playing a constructive
role in supporting the efforts of Arab countries to
independently explore development paths that are
in line with their national conditions and determine
their own future. All parties should support the Arab
League’s efforts to play a greater role in regional and
international affairs, thereby leading the Arab world to
bolster strategic independence, jointly forge peace and
stability, accelerate development and revitalization and
achieve unity and self-sufficiency.
The United Nations should further deepen
cooperation with the Arab League, in accordance
with the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. The relevant envoys and the special

S/PV.9343

representatives of the Secretary-General should
strengthen communication and coordination with
the Arab League in order to form a united front and
enhance synergy. The Security Council should listen
more to the views of the Arab League and the countries
of the region and support regional solutions to regional
disputes.
The Palestinian issue has always been at the core
of the Middle Eastern issue. The recurring tensions
between Palestine and Israel clearly demonstrate that
the long-standing stalemate in the peace process is
unsustainable. Piecemeal crisis management is difficult
to sustain, and a comprehensive and just solution is
irreplaceable. China appreciates the Arab League and
its members for their just position on the Palestinian
issue and supports their continued leadership role in
addressing the Palestinian issue.
The United Nations and the Security Council should
strengthen coordination with the Arab League, on the
basis of all relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative and other international consensus.
We must promote the two-State solution with a greater
sense of urgency and more robust measures in order to
help the Palestinian people realize their dream of an
independent State as soon as possible.
Syria’s return to the Arab League is not only a new
driving force for Arab unity and its self-sufficiency,
but also a new opportunity for a political solution to
the Syrian crisis. We hope that the relevant parties will
seize this opportunity, strengthen dialogue, actively
cooperate with the efforts of United Nations Special
Envoy Pedersen, gradually build mutual trust and
promote speedy progress in the political process in
order to achieve a comprehensive solution to the Syrian
issue at an early date.
The political process in Yemen is maintaining its
positive momentum, and all parties have remained in
close communication regarding the resumption of a
ceasefire, demonstrating prospects for a political and
negotiated resolution of the conflict. We appreciate
the proactive efforts made by countries of the region,
including Saudi Arabia and Oman, to alleviate the
situation in Yemen and achieve a permanent ceasefire.
We hope that all parties will prioritize the interests of the
Yemeni people, intensify dialogue and consultations,
set reasonable expectations, demonstrate appropriate
flexibility and expedite visible progress in the political
process in the country.

23-163229/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The friendship between China and Arab countries
has withstood the test of time. We have stood
together in national liberation struggles, achieved
win-win cooperation in the wave of global economic
globalization, and upheld principle and righteousness
amid the ups and downs in international affairs. From
this has grown a spirit of mutual assistance, equality,
shared benefit and cultural exchange between China
and the Arab nations.
At the end of last year, President Xi Jinping
attended the inaugural China-Arab States summit and
the first the China-Gulf Cooperation Council summit
where he held bilateral meetings with leaders from
approximately 20 Arab countries. Both China and
Arab countries have issued documents, including the
Riyadh declaration of the inaugural China-Arab States
summit, which consolidated the strategic consensus on
the development of bilateral relations on major regional
and international issues.
Cooperation between the two sides in such areas as
the Belt and Road Initiative, energy, food, investment
and green development has further deepened. We
will continue to stand together with Arab countries,
weather the storm together and promote the deepening
and solidification of China and Arab relationship with
a shared future for the new era. We are committed to
making positive contributions to the lasting peace,
unity, universal security and common prosperity of the
Middle Eastern region.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Secretary-General
Aboul Gheit and Ms. El Omrani for their briefings.
As we heard today, the League of Arab States has
an important role to play in preventing and resolving
security and humanitarian challenges in its region, and
Ms. El Omrani made a powerful case on the importance
of involving youth, including women and girls, in
addressing these challenges. In a year that has seen
the eruption of new conflicts and the entrenchment
of old ones, the constructive engagement of all actors,
including regional bodies, is more urgent than ever.
How, therefore, can we deepen that cooperation?
First, the Arab League can play a key role in
resolving conflicts in its region, for example, the
tragedy unfolding in the Sudan, where the Sudanese
people’s hopes for democracy and freedom have been
set back again. We look to the partnership between
the League of Arab States, the United Nations, the
10/24

08/06/2023

Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
African Union to support a permanent ceasefire and a
return to democratic transition.
Another example is Syria, where the conflict has
displaced millions and killed hundreds of thousands.
We share the objectives of our Arab partners: a stable
Syria that no longer exports instability to the region.
Syria’s readmission to the Arab League must be used to
press for Al-Assad to change his behaviour, including
clamping down on the drug Captagon, and putting
in place the conditions for refugees to return safely,
voluntarily and in a dignified manner. We are clear that
the United Nations-led political process remains the
only route to lasting and sustainable peace.
The United Kingdom also works closely with
Arab partners to counter Iran’s destabilizing activity
throughout the region. This includes our maritime
presence in the Gulf, which twice last year intercepted
speedboats laden with surface-to-air missiles and
engines for cruise missiles.
On the Middle East peace process, the United
Kingdom supports efforts, including by Jordan and
Egypt, to de-escalate tensions and maintain calm in
Jerusalem and the West Bank. Talks between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority must lay the groundwork
for a future political process that can deliver a twoState solution.
Russia’s war of aggression on Ukraine has led to a
devastating impact on food and energy prices in Arab
countries. President Zelenskyy’s address to Arab States
in Riyadh last month sent a powerful signal on the
global impact of this illegal war. We continue to work
with partners in the region towards bringing this illegal
war to an end.
Finally, with such a young population in the
Arab region, it is right that we look to the security
challenges of the future. We welcome the United Arab
Emirates presidency of the twenty-eighth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, and we
look forward to discussing the impact of climate
on security in the Security Council next week. We
hope that all Council members treat the issue of
climate security with the seriousness it deserves.
Regional leadership and ownership of solutions to
conflicts caused or exacerbated by climate change are
increasingly important.
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank His Excellency
Mr. Khalifa Shaheen Almarar, Minister of State at the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
United Arab Emirates, for convening today’s meeting.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Secretary-General Ahmed Aboul Gheit, and Ms. Omnia
El Omrani for their valuable briefings.
I recall that last year, under the previous United
Arab Emirates presidency of the Security Council, the
Council adopted a presidential statement that welcomed
the strong cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States and reiterated the Council’s
intention to deepen this relationship (S/PRST/2022/1).
Japan welcomes the initiative by the United Arab
Emirates to renew the Council’s consideration of this
important topic.
Prime Minister Kishida visited the Arab League
Secretariat in Cairo in April and exchanged views
with its Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Aboul
Gheit, on the regional and international situations
and discussed how to strengthen the international
order based on the rule of law. Global challenges are
becoming increasingly interrelated, as shown by
the Russian aggression against Ukraine, which has
affected not just Europe but the entire world. In many
countries, including in the Middle East, soaring food
and fuel prices have struck the lives of the vulnerable
the hardest. In this time of great geopolitical upheaval,
there has never been a better moment to consolidate the
United Nations-Arab League partnership under Chapter
VIII of the Charter. In last year’s presidential statement,
the Security Council recognized the importance of
cooperation in such areas as counter-terrorism, poverty
eradication, maritime security, conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
While regional organizations are best equipped to
effectively address regional challenges, there are many
complex issues that cannot be resolved by such entities
alone. For example, the humanitarian situation in Syria
continues to deteriorate, making the upcoming renewal
of the cross-border aid mechanism more vital than ever.
In the case of Yemen, the United Nations plays a crucial
role in resolving the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker
off the coast, which could prevent an environmental
catastrophe in the Red Sea and beyond.
Japan will continue to deepen its relations with the
Arab world. We are committed to the Middle East not
only through trade, investment and energy cooperation,
but also by ensuring that the principles of the United

S/PV.9343

Nations Charter are upheld, including respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s meeting. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, and Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo, for their briefings. We welcome in
particular the presence of Ms. Omnia El Omrani, who
has enriched our discussion. The Security Council and
the League do well to give a meaningful place to the
views, needs and transformative power of young people
in their deliberations.
Not only were the League of Arab States and the
United Nations founded in the same year, but they
also share a common mission, the promotion of peace
and security in the quest for solidarity and unity.
In accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, the League, like other regional
organizations, is therefore a very important partner for
the Council. Prevention, mediation and the building
of lasting peace require the participation of regional
communities in multilateral action, which was one of
the main conclusions of the Council’s open debate on
3 May (see S/PV.9315). As Yemeni peacemaker Muna
Luqman recently recalled, “there is a big gap between
the local needs and what is happening globally.” The
League can help bridge that gap by bringing the Council
and the populations of the League’s 22 member States
closer together, which is all the more necessary as
challenges persist in the region. I want to speak about
three such challenges.
With regard to Syria, Switzerland is following
current developments in the region with interest.
Accordingly, we welcome the willingness expressed at
recent meetings of the League of Arab States in Cairo and
Jeddah, and today by the League’s Secretary-General,
to work together to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2254
(2015), with a view to finding a just and comprehensive
solution to the conflict. We also welcome the attention
that the League of Arab States has given to pursuing
the continuation of the cross-border aid mechanism
endorsed by the Council. Turning to another area, we
must urgently find a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Meaningful dialogue leading towards a
negotiated two-State solution is needed to enable the
parties to escape the spiral of violence. Such a solution
would also be central to ensuring regional security. The

23-1632211/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

League of Arab States, which has evolved in the context
of the conflict, has an important role to play in that
regard, for example through the Arab Peace Initiative.
However, it is incumbent upon all stakeholders with
influence to commit to finding a solution that takes into
account the aspirations of young people in particular.
Finally, in Yemen, we have seen encouraging progress
in peace negotiations in recent months. It will
nevertheless be important to pursue efforts to conclude
a new truce agreement and take steps towards an
inclusive peace process.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States remains critical to overcoming the
challenges that concern us all, including climate change,
as we heard earlier this morning. The joint holding of a
conference in December 2022 on drought, food security
and climate resilience in Somalia demonstrated the
added value of that kind of collaboration. I would
like to emphasize another important point related to
public life in the Arab world, which is the full, equal,
meaningful and safe participation of women. That can
be encouraged by a variety of mechanisms under the
auspices of regional and international organizations.
Such efforts must be complemented by an environment
enabling women’s participation at the national level,
including legal frameworks that guarantee women’s
equal rights. Sustainable peace will either be built
with women, or it will never be built at all. Switzerland
supports efforts to achieve sustainable peace and
maintains close relations with the countries of the
region. We therefore look forward to the next meeting
on general cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, to be held in Geneva in 2024.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for bringing us
together today to discuss this important topic. I also
want to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing. The Security Council truly appreciates the
fact that Ms. El Omrani came to speak to us today. Her
leadership gives me tremendous hope for the future. I
also want to welcome Mr. Aboul Gheit, the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, to this dialogue
with the Security Council. The United States believes
strongly that the Arab League is vital to both regional
and international peace and security. By working with
United Nations entities, including those established by
the Security Council, we believe that the League can
meaningfully advance efforts towards stability. Today I
want to highlight the Arab League’s critical role across
five conflicts.
12/24

08/06/2023

First, in Yemen we see a window of opportunity
to achieve durable peace. We recognize the efforts of
Arab States to facilitate dialogue, and we encourage
Arab League members to coordinate closely with
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Grundberg as
we work to achieve a lasting resolution of the conflict.
Secondly, in the past few months in the Sudan we
have seen conflict upend the lives of the Sudanese
people. And I want to take this opportunity to express
our condolences regarding the 10 Democratic Republic
of Congo students who were killed recently. The
United States appreciates the Arab League’s efforts to
facilitate humanitarian access, a cessation of hostilities
and a resumption of an inclusive political process
in the Sudan. We echo Ms. DiCarlo’s comments on
the key role that the League plays in that regard. We
particularly welcome the Arab League’s participation
in the expanded mechanism for the Sudan, together
with the African Union, the United Nations, the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development
and others.
Thirdly, in Libya, we encourage the Arab League
to support the Libyan people’s call for long-overdue
elections. We should all back Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily’s push to establish
a framework and timeline for elections. We also
encourage the Arab League to support the withdrawal
of foreign fighters in Libya and their rehabilitation and
reintegration in their home countries.
Fourthly, with regard to the issue of Syria, it is no
secret that we disagree about Syria’s readmission to
the Arab League. Simply put, we do not believe that
Al-Assad has earned his place there, and the United
States will not normalize relations with the regime or lift
its sanctions until there is progress towards a political
solution. However, we have shared goals, and we want
to work with the Arab League to defend the human
rights of the Syrian people and address humanitarian
and security issues on the ground. The bottom line is
that the needs of the Syrian people should be front and
centre in any and all engagements with the regime. To
that end, the Arab League should press for progress
on the many Syria-related issues before the Council,
including good-faith participation in the political
process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and Syria’s
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
It is also critical that we urge the regime to accept a
12-month renewal in July of the Security Council’s
authorization of the cross-border aid mechanism. As we
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

have said before, we must ensure that all three current
border-crossings remain open.
That authorization would fulfil the Arab
League’s pursuit of guarantees of full and unhindered
humanitarian access, including cross-border access to
all areas of the country. It would also allow the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations the time
that they need to plan and coordinate the delivery of
assistance. We encourage the League to press the
Syrian regime to support such guarantees. Although
the Al-Assad regime claims that it is ready to work with
regional actors to receive refugees, we see no indication
that it is committed to ending its harassment, arbitrary
detention, torture and ill-treatment of returnees. We
must also press the Al-Assad regime to create the
conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of refugees. And countries that have generously hosted
millions of refugees must refrain from pushing them
to return prematurely. We will continue to press the
Al-Assad regime for the humane release of those
arbitrarily detained and for a full accounting of those
missing or who have died in Al-Assad’s prisons.
Lastly, we applaud the Arab League’s invitation to
Ukrainian President Zelenskyy to address the Summit
of the Arab League of States. We all know that Arab
States have felt the effects of Russia’s brutal full-scale
invasion of Ukraine. Russia has used food as a weapon
of war, and by doing so it has increased global food
prices and exacerbated food insecurity. And despite
its commitments under the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
Moscow continues to hinder ships’ ability to get food
out to the rest of the world. We encourage Arab States
to call out Moscow’s cynical efforts to undermine
the Initiative and urge them to stand with Ukraine
as it defends itself from Russian aggression. We also
encourage the Arab League States to join the rest of the
world in condemning Russia’s use of Iranian drones to
harm civilians in Ukraine.
The League of Arab States shoulders a weighty
responsibility. So many of these conflicts are deeply
complex and protracted, but I want the League of Arab
States to know that it has strong partners in the United
States and the United Nations. We are committed to
working with the League to find creative solutions to
today’s most pressing challenges. Let us build a more
secure, peaceful and prosperous future for all, and let
us do it together.

S/PV.9343

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Aboul Gheit and Ms. El Omrani for
their briefings.
We must contribute collectively to peace and
stability in the Arab world. There will be no lasting
peace in the region without a political settlement in
Syria. The regime must make concrete gestures so
that a genuine political process can be launched in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 2254
(2015). The League of Arab States made a sovereign
choice to readmit the Syrian regime. France believes
that the absence of clear conditions imposed on the
regime will not help the Syrian people or ensure
stability in the region. That is why the United Nations,
the Arab League, the members of the Council and the
States of the region should work together.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is
also worrisome and there is a real risk that the conflict
could become regionalized. France has consistently
defended the concept of a two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both. A credible political
process must be relaunched to enable a just and lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians. We are working
to that end within the Amman/Munich Group. We call
on the Arab League and its members to contribute their
full share to the budget of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The situation in Yemen is fragile, and we call
on all parties, including the Houthis, to negotiate
constructively to achieve a nationwide ceasefire and a
lasting and inclusive political solution. Security in the
region is similarly at stake. In Lebanon, the urgent steps
needed to put an end to the crisis are known — electing
a President without delay, forming a Government and
implementing reforms to put an end to the crisis.
France also remains committed to dialogue and
regional stability. The goal of the Baghdad Conference
and of our partnership with Iraq is to help organize
regional cooperation through concrete projects. That
will be the objective of the third summit to be held
this year.
In that complex regional context, strengthening
cooperation between the Arab League and the United
Nations remains crucial. France welcomes the positive
role played by the Arab League in contributing to a
sovereign, united, stable and democratic Libya. The
legitimacy of political institutions must be restored
through simultaneous presidential and parliamentary

23-1632213/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

elections throughout the country. We must provide
support to the mediation by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and continue efforts
and coordination to ensure a security environment
conducive to the holding of elections. Similarly, in the
Sudan, the Arab League can contribute to reaching
a settlement of the conflict, together with the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. France welcomes the
mediation efforts of Saudi Arabia and the United States
and calls on the parties to respect the commitments
made in Jeddah.
Only solutions aimed at lasting peace, enabling
the full participation of women and young people and
respecting the rights of all, will stabilize the region.
France also welcomes the strengthened cooperation
between the United Nations and the Arab League in the
fight against terrorism.
Lastly, we are seeing the impact of climate change
on security every day, and it is essential to strengthen
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
Arab League in that area as well. We call on the member
States of the Arab League to join the United Nations
Climate Security Mechanism.
The Arab League’s commitment to the various
United Nations mediation efforts in the region and on
the humanitarian front remains decisive. France stands
ready to make its contribution on all those issues.

08/06/2023

and other development challenges in their respective
regions is critical to resolving many of the crises that
are confronting us.
The intractable nature of some of the issues in the
Arab world on the agenda of the Security Council,
including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the Lebanese
crisis and the Yemeni conflict, justifies today’s meeting,
as it offers an opportunity to rethink our strategy and
approach in dealing decisively with the challenges.
Those conflicts continue to undermine the stability
and development potential of the region, with security
implications for the rest of the world. In that regard,
we need enhanced collective regional and international
efforts to find lasting solutions to the conflicts in the
Arab world. With a view to making a meaningful
impact in resolving the crises in the region, we express
our full support for the conscious incorporation of
local and regional concerns and perspectives into
every peacebuilding initiative. We believe that the
United Nations Liaison Office to the League of Arab
States, if properly equipped, will be instrumental in
spearheading that push for renewed coordination and
collaboration in addressing challenges confronting the
region. It is against that backdrop that I would like to
make the following points.

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): My delegation
welcomes your participation, Mr. President, and thanks
you for presiding over today’s important meeting on
cooperation between the United Nations and subregional
organizations, focusing on the League of Arab States.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and League of Arab States Secretary-General Ahmed
Aboul Gheit for their insightful briefings. We are also
grateful to Ms. El Omrani for her perspectives on
the subject.

First, we welcome the recent restoration of diplomatic
ties between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
Islamic Republic of Iran as a positive development, as
improved bilateral relations between the two countries
could be instrumental in the peaceful resolution of some
of the conflicts in the region. In particular, we note the
positive and detailed discussions currently engaged in
by the parties to the Yemeni conflict, with the support
of regional stakeholders. The United Nations and the
League of Arab States must seize this moment to get
the parties to reach a permanent ceasefire agreement
to create the conditions needed for resuming a Yemeniled, Yemeni-owned political process under the auspices
of the United Nations.

Close cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations remains indispensable
to addressing the peace and security challenges
confronting various parts of the world. It is not surprising
that Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
acknowledges the critical role of regional organizations
in the maintenance of peace and security in the world.
Harnessing the combined global experience of the
United Nations and the local knowledge of regional
organizations of the dynamics of the political, security

Secondly, the recent readmission of Syria into the
League of Arab States gives the League a strategic
stake in the quest for a solution to the Syrian conflict.
We fervently hope that the members of the League of
Arab States will leverage the reinvigorated bond of
fraternal relations to help end the country’s crisis. The
setting-up of a ministerial committee made up of the
Secretary-General of the League, Saudi Arabia, Jordan,
Iraq, Lebanon and Egypt is a step in the right direction,
and we call on the Syrian authorities to engage

14/24

23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9343

constructively with the committee to address the main
drivers of the conflict and pertinent issues of concern
to its Arab neighbours.

navigate the people of Lebanon out of their current
predicament through meaningful political, economic
and financial reforms.

Those renewed efforts should complement the
ongoing work of the United Nations in charting an
inclusive political path to a sustainable solution that
will address the concerns and grievances of all the
parties to the Syrian conflict, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). To that end, we encourage
the Committee to reach out to all parties, including
women, with a view to comprehensively addressing all
grievances fuelling the conflict.

We share the concerns of the civil society briefer on
the impact of climate change as a factor in exacerbating
conflict in the developing world. As the United Arab
Emirates is preparing to take on its presidency for the
twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, we need to remind ourselves of the
devastating effects of climate change and our collective
obligation to adopt mitigation strategies to deal with
the challenge.

Thirdly, we support strengthening trilateral
cooperation among the League of Arab States, the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations. Strengthening
cooperation among the three organizations is critical to
effectively deal with the challenges affecting countries
such as Libya, Somalia and the Sudan, considering
their dual membership of the AU and the League of
Arab States. In Libya, for instance, bolstering the
support of the three organizations for national dialogue
and reconciliation efforts and the holding of inclusive
elections in the country this year could help quicken the
pace of the resolution of the crisis.
As we reaffirm our support to African leadership
in the search for peace in the Sudan, we underscore
the need for coordination of the various roles played
by the United Nations, the AU, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the League of Arab States
to ensure coherence and effectiveness in the efforts to
secure a viable peace process and the resumption of the
transition to democracy in the country.
More important, there is a need to deepen
collaboration between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States to help revive the Middle East
peace process. We must not waver in our commitment
to advancing the peace process to give rise to a twoState solution based on the pre-1967 borders to give true
meaning to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people in a way that guarantees security for the State
of Israel.
As a troop-contributing country to the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, we remain
concerned that the socioeconomic and financial crisis
in the country continues to affect ordinary citizens
severely. The League and the United Nations need to
redouble efforts to assist the Lebanese people in putting
in place an effective political leadership to urgently

In conclusion, we remain resolute in our support
for deeper and more productive cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States to
address the region’s challenges.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing on
this important issue. We are also grateful for the
information presented by the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, and
by the Youth Envoy for the President of the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Ms. Omnia
El Omrani. We welcome the Permanent Representative
of the Arab Republic of Egypt.
Building synergies in the multilateral sphere is
an effective strategy to address the demands of the
different regions of the world.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is indispensable to supporting
the three fundamental pillars of this Organization:
the maintenance of peace and international security,
the promotion and protection of human rights
and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The United Nations has a history of working
collaboratively with the Organization of American
States, the African Union, the European Union, the
League of Arab States and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, among other regional and subregional
organizations, with the aim of achieving an international
order that prioritizes a culture of conflict prevention
and global solidarity.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States demonstrates the potential

23-1632215/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of that relationship in addressing the conflicts, threats
and risks in that region. The Arab League has an
unquestionable historical knowledge of the roots of the
conflicts, the regional dynamics and the identities of
the actors involved. For its part, the United Nations, has
the experience and technical capabilities to promote
global initiatives, negotiate them and implement them
successfully on the ground.
Both bodies share the view that conflicts should be
resolved peacefully, prioritizing dialogue, mediation
and justice and respecting the principles of sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity set out in
the Charter of the United Nations, in the products of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as
in the strategic plan of action of the Arab League.
The results achieved as a result of that strategic and
operational partnership in promoting peace, security
and stability in the Arab region are indisputable, and
we look forward to its strengthening in the short term.
In that regard, we underline the enormous efforts
undertaken by the League of Arab States in the face
of current challenges, such as the situations in Libya,
Syria, the Sudan, Yemen, Lebanon and Palestine, to
name a few. In the case of Yemen, for example, it is
clear that coordinating the individual mediation efforts
of the United Nations and the Arab League has made
it possible to enhance political negotiations, strengthen
bilateral relations, promote the joint fight against
terrorism and explore new development strategies.
Furthermore, in an effort to support the victims and
survivors of the 12 years of conflict in Syria and the
victims of the earthquakes that devastated that territory
in February, diplomatic and financial efforts have been
key to delivering assistance to those who depend on
humanitarian aid through cross-border crossings and
all possible modalities.
We hope that Syria’s return to the League of Arab
States will open a window of opportunity towards a
lasting ceasefire. The Amman declaration outlines
a road map that will allow Syria to emerge from the
crisis and to focus regional efforts on the most relevant
areas, such as the establishment of a transparent system
of transitional justice, which will make it possible to lay
the foundations for national and regional reconciliation.
My delegation believes that the principles contained
in both the Council’s women and peace and security
agenda and in the Arab Women’s Committee must be
consolidated to implement concrete actions to improve
16/24

08/06/2023

the situation of women and girls in the Arab region. We
believe that coordinated work could lead to greater and
more meaningful participation of women and young
people in mediation and peacebuilding processes.
Ecuador encourages enhanced coordination among
the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict,
United Nations specialized agencies and the monitoring
committee to stop violence against children of the
League of Arab States.
The foremost mission of multilateralism is
to promote preventive diplomacy and life-saving
cooperation. Therefore, we encourage the United
Nations and the League of Arab States to deepen
strategic coordination to enable early warnings of
violence, strengthen cooperation to combat terrorism
and contribute to building resilient, inclusive and
peaceful societies.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your participation, Sir, in
today’s meeting in your capacity as President of the
Security Council.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States Ahmed Aboul Gheit, sharing for their
assessments and considerations. We also thank
Ms. Omnia El Omrani for her briefing.
Russia has consistently and unfailingly advocated
greater cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States. The two organizations are the
same age and were established to promote peace and
security on a global and regional scale.
We recognize with regret that the situation in most
States of the Middle East and northern Africa remains
challenging, due primarily to the numerous pockets
of instability in the region. Tensions persist in Syria,
Libya, Yemen, the Sudan and Western Sahara. Efforts
are required to bolster stability in Lebanon and Iraq.
Urgent steps are needed to break the deadlock around
the region’s central issue — the Palestinian-Israeli
settlement. The complex socioeconomic situation in a
number of Arab States foments radical sentiments and
contributes to manifestations of extremism and terror.
In that context, further strengthening multilevel
engagement between the Arab League and the United
Nations remains a pressing need. Particularly important
are ensuring collective security, countering emerging
challenges and settling crises in the region, all within
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the framework of cooperation under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. We are convinced that
such cooperation would help resolve existing problems
and disputes peacefully, without external interference,
while respecting the interests of all parties involved
and on the basis of international law.
In order to strengthen cooperation, in 2019,
the United Nations opened a Liaison Office to the
League of Arab States in Cairo, at the Arab League’s
headquarters. We believe this channel should be used
effectively and welcome the holding of annual informal
meetings of the Security Council with members of the
Council of the Arab League, which enables discussion
on responses to current problems of the region and
possible joint efforts for their early prevention. We
also believe in the importance of maintaining active
dialogue between the Arab League and the Special
Representatives and Special Envoys of the United
Nations Secretary-General in the Arab region in order
to overcome crises and search for joint measures to
resolve them. Given the particularly tense situation
in a number of Arab African countries, we believe it
would be relevant to expand trilateral coordination
between the United Nations, the Arab League and the
African Union.
In that context, we reiterate that Russia traditionally
supports a more active engagement of the Arab League
in international formats for addressing regional
crises. In particular, we have consistently supported
the idea of involving Arab League representatives on
the work of the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators to resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
a proposal that has been blocked by our colleagues on
the Security Council.
At the same time, we believe that a long-term
sustainable resolution of the crises in the Middle East
and northern Africa is possible only through collective
agreements, with the active participation of Arab
countries and without the external imposition of readymade solutions. We therefore welcome the long-awaited
decision of the Arab League member States to welcome
Syria back into to the Arab family. For our part, in
our contacts with Arab capitals, we have consistently
called on them to restore full-fledged relations with
Damascus. We are convinced that such a step would
not only promote current efforts to consolidate stability
and security in the Middle East, but will also send an
important signal that Syria has been and remains a fullfledged member of the United Nations, the Arab League

S/PV.9343

and other associations, despite Western attempts to
isolate representatives of the Syrian Government.
Unfortunately, despite the objective reality, those
attempts continue. Damascus was once again not
invited, this time to the seventh Brussels Conference.
We trust that Arab States will increase support to
Syrians in order to help with post-conflict recovery in
their country, which is obstructed by the illegitimate
unilateral sanctions imposed against Damascus.
We believe that the decision of the Council of
the Arab League demonstrated the desire of the Arab
world to strengthen coordination in the interests
of resolving urgent regional and international
problems and reaffirmed its commitment to continue
pursuing an independent global policy based on their
fundamental interests.
In conclusion, we again reaffirm our readiness to
do our utmost to contribute to normalizing the situation,
both in our national capacity and collectively, including
through cooperation between the Arab League and the
United Nations. In that context, we recall the Russian
concept of collective security in the Persian Gulf,
which is aimed at rejecting confrontational approaches
and promoting a constructive unifying agenda. Our
initiative is an invitation to dialogue, in which the
Arab League and the United Nations can play an
important role.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo, the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States and Ms. El Omrani for their briefings.
Albania welcomes this high-level meeting on the
cooperation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States and thanks the United Arab Emirates for
organizing it. We also welcome the Emirati Minister of
State, who is presiding over this meeting.
We underline the value of ever-closer cooperation
between the United Nations and the Arab League
in addressing the many serious challenges in the
region. Joint efforts only increase the legitimacy
and effectiveness of peace initiatives and promote
sustainable solutions.
A world affected by multiple security and political
challenges needs effective multilateralism, strong
partnerships and new mechanisms for cooperation.
Regional organizations are the first in line to respond
to challenges affecting their area by promoting security
cooperation among their members.

23-1632217/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

08/06/2023

Millions of people across the Arab region continue
to suffer from old and recent conflicts, all of which
create an ever-growing demand for the United Nations
and the Arab League to leverage their combined strength
and respond to the most pressing needs, in particular,
in addressing humanitarian challenges resulting from
conflicts, terrorism and other security threats, natural
disasters, climate change and the refugee crisis.

approach and inclusivity. The only response to the
current deadlock that can meet the aspirations of the
Libyan people for democracy is the holding of free, fair
and transparent elections to restore legitimacy. Albania
welcomes the adoption of the resolution 2684 (2023),
on enforcing the arms embargo, which remains crucial
for advancing peace and security in the country and
the region.

The ongoing spiralling violence in the Sudan,
the troubling lack of perspective for a much-needed
political horizon in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
ongoing quagmire in Syria and the stalemate in Libya
represent only some of the enormous challenges that
urgently require solutions.

Syria was recently reintegrated in the League
of Arab States. We remain sceptical that the regime
will reciprocate the good intentions of the League by
responding promptly and in good faith to meet the
demands put forward by the League. I hope we are
wrong, but experience has shown that the stubbornness
of the regime to continue its stance of total denial,
while sitting on a mountain of crimes, with the hope of
escaping accountability, remains unchanged.

The Abraham Accords marked a significant shift in
the dynamics of the Middle East, and have contributed
to regional stability by fostering new relationships
and alliances, opening new avenues for diplomatic
engagement, dialogue, economic cooperation and
development and creating a more stable environment in
the region by countering common threats. We want to
believe that the Accords have the potential to positively
impact the Israeli-Palestinian peace process by creating
a more conducive environment for peace negotiations.
It should be fully exploited to reduce and end the
pervasive cycle of violence, which nowadays leaves
little place for anything else, much less real hope.
Only a solution with two States for two people, with
Jerusalem as shared capital, will bring lasting peace to
Israelis and Palestinians.
We are encouraged by the developments and
positive dynamics in Yemen. All parties must seize
the opportunity created by combined efforts from the
United Nations and its Special Envoy and the regional
actors, Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman, to work
for lasting peace through an inclusive Yemeni process.
We also praise the role of the Gulf Cooperation Council
in that regard. Every effort towards inclusive solutions
will help alleviate the humanitarian crises and pave the
way towards the economic recovery of the country.
We welcome the participation of President
Zelenksyy in the 2023 Arab League summit, held in
Jeddah, which represents a recognition of the worldwide
devastating consequences of the Russian aggression
against Ukraine, not least in relation to food security.
Libya remains at a crossroads. Albania supports
the efforts of Special Representative Bathily to enable
national elections in Libya through a comprehensive
18/24

But we should not forget the deliberate use of
sarin and chlorine gas against innocent civilians; the
deliberate targeting of civilians through indiscriminate
bombing, barrel bombs and the shelling of residential
areas; the widespread use of torture and extrajudicial
killings and more than 130,000 people whose
whereabouts remain unknown.
We remain convinced that the only way forward
to lasting peace in Syria is the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015) and a serious Syrian-led
transition towards a free, democratic and prosperous
Syria for all Syrians. The Arab League has an important
role to play, including in supporting efforts to maintain
open for as long as it is needed the three cross-border
points to maintain the critical lifeline for millions
in need.
Let me conclude by welcoming the particular focus
of the League of Arab States on combating all forms of
violence against women and girls, which goes hand in
hand with the need to strengthen the political, social and
economic empowerment of women. We further praise
the focus on young people, who have great potential
and are another important player in peacebuilding
efforts, but also in taking a stronger and leading role in
mitigating the climate crisis.
The experience of other areas and regions has shown
that harnessing the energy, creativity and ingenuity of
people without distinction is indispensable in order
to craft solutions that are responsive to the real needs
of people — solutions that meet their aspirations for
a dignified life, social and economic progress, human
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

rights, fostering democracy and achieving sustainable
development in the entire Arab world.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to
start by expressing our deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and your country for convening this
high-level briefing under the important theme of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. This is a timely moment,
which requires more collective action to overcome
global challenges.
I thank Under-Secretary General Rosemary
DiCarlo; Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit; and Youth Envoy for the
President of the twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, Ms. Omnia El Omrani, for their
insightful briefings.
Mozambique strongly supports and advocates
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. That is anchored
in Article 53 of the Charter of the United Nations, “The
Security Council shall, where appropriate, utilize such
regional arrangements or agencies” — regional and
subregional organizations — “for enforcement action
under its authority.”
In that regard, we highly commend the
collaboration and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
That cooperation is achieving tangible results in many
domains, including in the promotion of peace and
security. However, even more can be done to make full
use of the potential offered by regional organizations.
We therefore welcome the opportunity to discuss this
topic today.
Mozambique supports all efforts towards the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, on which I
would like to highlight the following.
First, a number of countries within the Arab world
are facing complex security challenges that require
increased cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States. Our own experience
in Mozambique testifies to the crucial role played
by regional organizations in addressing security
challenges due to their proximity to the conflictaffected areas, their ability to detect early warning
signs and their in-depth knowledge of regional conflict
trends and dynamics.

S/PV.9343

In working together, the United Nations and the
League of Arab States can give additional impetus to
the existing local, national and international efforts to
find peaceful and sustainable solutions to situations of
instability in Libya, Syria, Yemen, the Sudan, Somalia
and Palestine, among others. These meetings are
therefore a welcome opportunity to explore how we,
as a Council, and the international community more
broadly, can support both organizations to continue
to strengthen their cooperation and coordination to
promote peace and stability in the world.
There is no doubt that involving women in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts will lead
to more sustainable outcomes. It is fundamental to
promote the full participation of women and womenled organizations in peace efforts across the region,
including those supported by the United Nations.
Secondly, we believe that the League of Arab
States is well positioned to understand the root causes
of conflicts in the region of its jurisdiction and can
contribute significantly with appropriate solutions to
address them and drive forward sustainable development
along the peace-development-security nexus.
The experience of many countries in the Arab
region, such as our experience in Mozambique and
across Africa, demonstrates the undeniable link
between climate-related risks and conflict. We should
ensure that this issue remains high on the agenda and a
priority in our discussions.
Thirdly, 9 countries out of 22 members of the
League of Arab States are on the African continent.
As such, the African Union has a critical role to play
in enhancing cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States on the African files.
We believe that regional organizations, including the
African Union, are an effective way to gain a collective
understanding of security challenges in the respective
regions and to develop appropriate responses to
addressing them and securing a safer and more peaceful
future for generations to come.
Fourthly, we welcome the diplomatic rapprochement
between Arab States in recent times. The perspective of
an end to a long rift that has shaped the geopolitics in
the Middle East can benefit the region and the world at
large, as we are called to join our efforts to efficiently
address the global challenges of our time.
In conclusion, we commend the cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab

23-1632219/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

States, which adds value and strengthens our capacity
to address the root causes of conflict, violent extremism
conducive to terrorism, maritime insecurity, trafficking
in small arms and light weapons, transnational
organized crime and climate change, among other
current security challenges.
We hope that today’s fruitful discussion and the
proposals put forward by members will provide an
impetus for deepening that cooperation, which will
contribute to peace across the Arab region and around
the world.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative in convening this
important meeting on cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing. I welcome the participation at
this meeting of the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
and thank him for his enlightening briefing. I also
thank Ms. Omnia El Omrani for her briefing.
We welcomed with interest the letter dated
8 May 2023 from the Secretary-General (S/2023/331)
responding to the request for a brief report, covering
the period from 23 March 2022 to 7 May 2023, on
the implementation of presidential statement 2022/1
of 23 March 2022. This brief report highlights
active cooperation and a willingness to capitalize on
synergies, reflected, in particular in joint action by
the United Nations and the Arab League on important
issues relating to international peace and security. The
report underlines the decisive role played by regional
organizations because of their proximity to the realities
of crises. The result is a better understanding of
conflicts and their root causes, including the ability to
make the Organization’s efforts more specific, cohesive
and appropriate.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States has intensified over the years
and encompasses a wide range of issues from economic
development to the promotion and respect of human
rights and the strengthening of political inclusion, as
necessary. The secretariats of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States and the respective agencies,
funds and programmes of the two organizations hold
regular consultations and sectoral meetings.
There are many areas of common concern — Iraq,
Lebanon, the Middle East peace process, including
20/24

08/06/2023

the Palestinian question, Syria and Yemen. These are
all regions beset by security and humanitarian crises
that have a tragic impact on civilian populations, with
destabilizing effects and threats to peace and security
that are not only regional, but also international. Other
areas of concern include, more recently, the Sudan, and
prior to that, Libya.
Gabon promotes a regional narrative in responses to
crises, led by those who are first to suffer. The dynamic
of cooperation is all the more necessary given that in
a security context marked by multifaceted crises, the
scale of United Nations requests and the increasingly
regional nature of crises require the United Nations to
be better connected to the realities on the ground in
order to make its actions more effective.
In that respect, the recent summit of the League of
Arab States, held in Jeddah, with the participation of
Syria, was a model of the commitment of the countries
concerned to fully assume their responsibilities in
the quest for peace and stability. We hope that this
momentum will lead to lasting solutions for the major
challenges of the region, particularly the IsraeliPalestinian peace process, for which we reaffirm our
support for the two-State solution.
Almost half of the Arab population lives in Africa.
That sociological reality seals the shared destiny
between the League of Arab States and the African
Union, two regional organizations with cross-cutting
concerns regarding peace and security, the fight against
terrorism, drug trafficking, human trafficking and the
fight against climate change.
To that end, trilateral cooperation between the
United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union must be active and permanent in
preventing and resolving crises that threaten peace at
the regional and international levels. The participation
of Secretary-General António Guterres and SecretaryGeneral Aboul Gheit in the virtual summit organized
by the African Union on 20 April, on developments
in the Sudan, is a perfect illustration of that
trilateral interaction.
Allow me to touch on a few guidelines for ensuring
a more productive partnership between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States.
First, the partnership must be based on
complementarity and comparative advantages. In
addition to the advantage of having in-depth knowledge
of their area, regional and subregional organizations,
23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

through their regional mechanisms, can mobilize and
deploy rapidly on the ground. That requires stable and
predictable financial, logistical and technical support,
as well as capacity-building.
Secondly, cooperation must be based on better
coordination and communication. In the fight against
terrorism, transnational crime and the response to
humanitarian crises or natural disasters, which are all
complex and interdependent challenges requiring the
involvement of several players, it is essential to have
regular exchanges of information.
Thirdly, we need to establish consistent crisis
management or resolution mechanisms in which the
tasks and responsibilities of the various players are
clearly defined. That would enable the development
of agreed policies between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, with a view to
dealing effectively with crisis situations.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of enhancing synergy in the actions of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, specifically,
and more generally, that of regional and subregional
organizations. This is a decisive step towards fulfilling
our international commitments and our shared desire to
considerably improve collective security, in particular
through efforts to prevent conflicts and to maintain and
consolidate peace.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank His Excellency
Minister Khalifa Shaheen Almarar and express my
sincere thanks to the Under-Secretary-General, the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
and Ms. Omnia El Omrani for their briefings. I
also acknowledge the participation of the Egyptian
Permanent Representative in our meeting today.
Today’s meeting underlines the crucial role of
regional organizations in the maintenance of peace and
security through their extensive understanding of their
region and by fostering cooperation.
The League of Arab States remains a contributor
to stability and to facilitating dialogue in a region that
continues to face multiple challenges, including the
ongoing stalemate in the Middle East peace process,
protracted conflicts in Syria and Yemen, political
stalemates in Libya and Lebanon, coupled with the
instability and outbreak of hostilities we have seen
in other countries, such as Iraq and the Sudan. We
emphasize the need for long-lasting political solutions
to address these ongoing concerns.

S/PV.9343

To that end, Malta strongly encourages greater
coordination between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, including through exchanges
between Special Envoys and Representatives. We also
highlight the key role that the United Nations Liaison
Office to the League of Arab States, in Cairo, has to
play and the importance of the Council’s organization
of informal interactive dialogues to develop closer
coordination on regional issues of concern.
Millions of people in Syria, Yemen and the occupied
Palestinian territories remain in acute humanitarian
need as a result of conflict. To address that, the League
of Arab States can continue to strengthen its partnership
with the United Nations by expanding its mobilization
of resources for United Nations humanitarian response
plans, host regional emergency humanitarian hubs,
expand partnerships and facilitate the principled
delivery of humanitarian assistance wherever it is
needed. We look forward to seeing that demonstrated
again in July as we move towards the renewal of the
humanitarian cross-border mechanism in Syria.
The international community has witnessed
significant developments in the region over the past
months. The agreement reached between Iran and
Saudi Arabia to resume diplomatic ties is a positive
development that has the potential to advance peace and
stability throughout the Gulf and beyond. To further
reduce tensions, it is important that an agreement on
a return to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
is achieved.
In the light of the decision of the League of Arab
States to resume Syria’s participation in meetings, it
is critical to highlight that actions taken at the global
level, including those agreed upon by the Security
Council, must be supported by actions at the regional
level. In this case, a United Nations-facilitated political
process in line with resolution 2254 (2015) is the only
way forward.
The two organizations share a common goal of
promoting peaceful coexistence and advancing peace.
That can be achieved only through collaboration in the
areas of conflict prevention and resolution, preventive
diplomacy, peacekeeping and peacebuilding and
through building open and inclusive societies that
guarantee freedom of opinion and expression.
We will be able to build such societies only if both
the United Nations and the League of Arab States
promote and protect human rights. They must also

23-1632221/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation and
leadership of women at all levels of decision-making and
constructively engage with civil society organizations.
Joint initiatives that seek to advance those goals,
such as the support offered to the Arab Women
Mediators Network and the holding of training on
gender and elections, are to be commended.
It is correspondingly essential that we support
young people and empower them to serve as agents of
positive change. We must ensure that young people are
able to participate in regional peace and security efforts
and are provided access to opportunities. Failure on
that front makes young people more susceptible to
recruitment by terrorist organizations.
On that note, Malta underscores that regional
efforts to counter terrorism must always comply with
international law, in particular international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.

08/06/2023

being undertaken between the two organizations. The
Council also has an opportunity to reflect on how to
integrate, in the United Nations peace and security
framework, the authoritative stance taken by the League
of Arab States in relation to important developments in
the Arab world.
Last month, the Arab League unanimously decided
to reinstate the Syrian Arab Republic as a member of
the organization. We welcome that decision, which
signals the existence of new political dynamics in
relation to the Syrian conflict. We hope it will positively
affect ongoing efforts to bring peace and stability to
the region. That encouraging development should not
be overlooked by the United Nations mediation work
pursued under resolution 2254 (2015).

We must also be aware that the Arab world is
vulnerable to climate change. We are witnessing the
advance of desertification, an increase in droughts
and water insecurity. In that vein, we welcome
the cooperation between the two organizations in
addressing the effects of climate change on peace
and security.

We also acknowledge that, over the years, the Arab
League has greatly contributed to efforts towards a
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue. The 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative is one example, among others, of such
efforts. The League’s multiple initiatives have played
an important role in building consensus and have been
of great value to the discussions about the conflict in
this very Council. As we watch today the increasing
deterioration of security levels in the region, Brazil
shares the Arab League’s concern about the complete
absence of peace talks between Israel and Palestine.

Finally, I will conclude by reiterating the need
for the cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States to continue. Synergies on
countering new challenges and jointly preventing the
escalation of conflicts in the region need to be actively
pursued. It is only though that approach that we can
collectively address threats to international peace
and security.

Brazil also notes that the Arab League, together
with the African Union, are in a privileged position
to play an important role in support of the Libyan
political process. The fact that Libya is itself a member
of those two regional organizations only reinforces the
pre-eminence of their possible contribution in relation
to the Libyan file, which continues to require a truly
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political solution.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks the
United Arab Emirates for organizing this high-level
briefing. Effective collaboration between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States can only benefit
from an open and frank dialogue involving the two
organizations. We thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, as well the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States, for sharing their views with the Security
Council, on behalf of their respective organizations. I
also thank Ms. El Omrani for her participation.

That situation not only is at odds with the Charter of the
United Nations, but it has also contributed to putting
the multilateral system under stress.

Brazil recognizes the importance of this meeting
and welcomes the initiative of the United Arab
Emirates. Today the Council has an opportunity not
just to hear about the coordination efforts currently

We recognize, to use an expression from the concept
note of United Arab Emirates (S/2023/407, annex), the
comparative advantage of regional organizations in
supporting the maintenance of peace and security in

22/24

As we stated at last year’s meeting,
“[m]any of the conflicts in the Arab world were
created or exacerbated by forces outside the region,
while the interests and well-being of Arab peoples
are — most of the time — sidelined.” (S/PV.9001,
p. 16)

23-16322

08/06/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

their respective contexts. With regard to its own region,
there is no doubt that the Arab League is in a privileged
position to understand and address the root causes of
conflict and instability.
The collaboration between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States on capacity-building should
also bear in mind that regional comparative advantage.
Brazil welcomes the willingness of the United Nations
to continue enhancing the capacity of the Arab
League, including in prevention, counter-terrorism and
peacebuilding. Those efforts should be pursued based
on the needs and priorities as identified by the regional
organization itself and by its member States.
In that regard, Brazil commends the initiatives
and priorities set out by the Arab League related to the
promotion and protection of the rights of women and
youth in the region. We acknowledge and encourage the
support and partnership provided by the United Nations
upon request.
Brazil has historical ties with the Arab people,
a community with which, it shares deep human
and cultural connections, as well as a wide array of
common interests. The League of Arab States has
been a traditional partner of Brazil. Its first permanent
delegation in Brazil was opened in 1956, and since
then, Brazil’s relationship with the organization
and with each of its member countries has gained
increasing importance.
Throughout its existence, we have seen the Arab
League raise its voice in support of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Brazil recognizes and
values the League in that regard and strongly supports
its collaboration with the Council. We also commend
the League’s collaboration with other United Nations
organs and entities regarding activities outside the
realm of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like on behalf of the Group of Arab States
in New York to express to you, Mr. President, my sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council during the current month. I also
express appreciation to the delegation of the sisterly
United Arab Emirates for convening this meeting
and for its good representation of the Arab interests
in the Security Council. I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and

S/PV.9343

Peacebuilding Affairs; the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States and Ms. Omnia El Omrani,
Youth Envoy for the President of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, for their briefings.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States is of particular importance in light
of the current regional and international developments
which demand greater efforts to maintain international
peace and security, in line with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, with a view to achieving
collective security.
Cooperation between the two organizations is
also of particular importance in light of the current
international developments and the resulting global
economic crisis that led to high food prices and
the inability of countries to achieve food security.
Regrettably, the ability of donor countries to direct the
necessary funding for humanitarian activities has also
declined, which has adversely affected Arab countries,
especially those suffering from crises that require
support to alleviate humanitarian suffering.
In addition, Arab countries face chronic economic
and social challenges, especially in the areas of climate
change, water scarcity and the threat to water security.
The Arab countries seek to face all those challenges
through hosting the twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in the city of Sharm El-Sheikh in
2022. The Conference yielded important outcomes in
connection with the aspirations of developing countries,
most notably the historic decision to establish the loss
and damage fund. Dubai, in turn, will host the twentyeighth Conference of the Parties in 2023, as the Arab
Group looks forward to the adoption of resolutions that
will help address the negative repercussions of climate
change. The Group commends the close cooperation
between the Egyptian and Emirati presidencies to ensure
a smooth transition between them and appreciates all
relevant initiatives, especially the sisterly Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia’s Middle East Green Initiative.
From that standpoint, the Arab countries, through
the League of Arab States, have been keen to cooperate
with the United Nations in many areas, as reflected
in the 8 May letter from the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to the President of the Security Council
(S/2023/331). The Arab Group affirms that it supports
close cooperation between the two organizations with a
view to achieving the objectives to which we all aspire.

23-1632223/24

S/PV.9343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

08/06/2023

It is no secret that the continuing crises in the
Arab region are draining its limited resources, which
must be directed towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and the aspirations of the
peoples of the region. While the current international
developments have occupied a part of the efforts of the
United Nations over the past two years, especially in
the Security Council, the Arab Group looks forward
to the Council continuing to prioritize the security and
stability of the Middle East on its agenda.

Thirdly, we must intensify consultations between
the two sides, whether at the level of the SecretariesGeneral of both organizations or among the permanent
representatives of the Security Council and the Council
of the League of Arab States, in addition to holding the
annual meeting between the members of the Security
Council and representatives of the Arab Summit Troika
and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States on the sidelines of the meetings of the high-level
segment of the General Assembly.

For its part, the Arab Group affirms the readiness of
Arab States to play an active role in achieving security,
peace and stability in the region, in keeping with the
principle of Arab solutions to Arab crises, decisions of
international legitimacy, Security Council resolutions
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
especially respect for the sovereignty and unity of Arab
States, their regional integration and non-interference
in their internal affairs.

Fourthly, we must continue coordination and
consultation between the League of Arab States and the
envoys of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
to the region on the issues on the agenda of the Council
of the League of Arab States.

In that context, the Arab Group looks forward to
the continuation and intensification of cooperation
between the League of Arab States and the United
Nations and suggests a number of proposals that could
contribute to strengthening cooperation between the
two organizations, as follows.
First, we must strengthen cooperation between the
two organizations to enable them to effectively address
the global economic crisis and its impact on Arab
countries, especially with regard to high food prices,
as well as to provide humanitarian support to countries
suffering from ongoing humanitarian crises.
Secondly, we must enhance existing institutional
cooperation between the two organizations in all
fields in a manner that bolsters preventive diplomacy
and peacebuilding and peacekeeping mechanisms,
promotes the participation of women and youth and
builds the capacity of personnel in Member States and
the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States.

24/24

Fifthly, we must work to achieve consensus and
unify the position of the Security Council on Arab
issues, while limiting the use of the veto and promoting
Arab solutions to Arab problems.
Sixthly, we must periodically follow up the role
of the United Nations Liaison Office to the League of
Arab States in order to strengthen the role of the Office
and provide it with the necessary support to achieve the
desired goals.
Last but not least, cooperation between the two
organizations cannot contribute to achieving security,
peace and stability in the region without settling all its
current crises through the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially with regard
to the Palestinian question, which remains the central
issue of the Arab nation, through the independence of
the Palestinian State along the lines of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
the decisions of international legitimacy, as well as the
liberation of all occupied Arab territories in the Syrian
Golan and southern Lebanon.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-16322
