General Assembly-S1:stteenth Session

6

to increase the difficulties of avoiding war and of establishing international peace and security based on the
rule of law,
Believing in the necessity of an international agreement, subject to inspection and control, whereby the
states producing nuclear weapons would refrain from
relinquishing control of such weapons to any nation not
possessing them and whereby states not possessing such
weapons would refrain from manufacturing them,
1. Calls upon all States, and in particular upon the
States at present possessi;:ig nuclear weapons, to use
their best endeavours to secure the conclusion of an
international agreement containing provisions under
which the nuclear States would undertake to refrain
from relinquishing control of nuclear weapons and from
transmitting the information necessary for their manufacture to States not possessing such weapons, and
provisions under whi.ch States not possessing nuclear
weapons would undertake not to manufacture or otherwise acquire control of such weapons;
2. Urges all States to co-operate to those ends.

1070th plenary meeting,
4 December 1961.
1721 (XVI). International co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space
A

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the common interest of mankind in
furthering the peaceful uses of outer space and the
urgent neecf to strengthen international co-operation
in this important field,
B<Jlieving that the exploration and use of outer space
should be only for the betterment of mankind and to
the benefit of States irrespective of the stage of their
economic or scientific development,
1. Commends to States for their guidance in the
exploration and use of outer space the following principles:
(a) International law, including the Charter of the
United Nations, applies to outer space and celestial
bodies;
( b) Outer space and celestial bodies are free for
exploration and use by all States in conformity with
international law and are not subject to national appropriation ;
2. Invites the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to study and report on the legal problems
which may arise from the exploration and use of outer
space.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.
B
The General Assembly,
Believing that the United Nations should provide
a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space,
1. Calls upon States launching objects into orbit or
beyond to furnish information promptly to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, through
the Secretary-General, for the registration of launchings;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to maintain a
public registry of the information furnished in accordance with paragraph 1 above;
3. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, in co-operation with the Secretary-General and making full use of the functions and resources
of the Secretariat:
(a) To maintain close contact with governmental
and non-governmental organizations concerned with
outer space matters;
( b) To provide for the exchange of such information relating to outer space activities as Governments
may supply on a voluntary basis, supplementing but not
duplicating existing technical and scientific exchanges;
( c) To assist in the study of measures for the promotion of international co-operation in outer space
activities;
4. Further requests the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space to report to the General Assembly
on the arrangements undertaken for the performance
of those functions and on such developments relating
to the peaceful uses of outer space as it considers significant.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.
C

The General Assembly,
Noting with gratification the marked progress for
meteorological science and technology opened up by
the advances in outer space,
Convinced of the world-wide benefits to be derived
from international co-operation in weather research
and analysis,
1. Recommends to all Member States and to the
World Meteorological Organization and other appropriate specialized agencies the early and comprehensive
study, in the light of developments in outer space, of
measures:
(a) To advance the state of atmospheric science and
technology so as to provide greater knowledge of basic
physical forces affecting climate and the possibility of
large-scale weather modification ;
( b) To develop existing weather forecasting capabilities and to help Member States make effective use
of such capabilities through regional meteorological
centres;
2. Requests the World Meteorological Organization, consulting as appropriate with the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
other specialized agencies and governmental and nongovernmental organizations, such as the International
Council of Scientific Unions, to submit a report to the
Governments of its Member States and to the Economic
and Social Council at its thirty-fourth session regarding appropriate organizational and financial arrangements to achieve those ends, with a view to their
further consideration by the General Assembly at its
seventeenth session ;
3. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful uses
of Outer Space, as it deems appropriate, to review
that report and submit its comments and recommendations to the Economic and Social Council and to the
General Assembly.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the First Comrni_t_te_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _7

D
The General Assembly,
Believing that communication by means of satellites
should be available to the nations of the world as soon
as practicable on a global and non-discriminatory basis,
Convinced of the need to prepare the way for the
establishment of effective operational satellite communication,
1. Notes with satisfaction that the Inter1;1ational
Telecommunication Union plans to call a special conference in 1963 to make allocations of radio frequency
bands for outer space activities;
2: Recommends that the International Telecommunication Union consider at that conference t_hose
aspects of space communication in which internat10nal
co-operation will be required;
3. Notes the potential importance of con:imun\ca~ion
satellites for use by the United Nations and its pnn~1pal
organs and specialized agencies for both operat10nal
and informational requirements;
4. Invites the Special Fund and _the Expan~ed
Programme of Technical Assistanc~, 1_n cons1.;ltat10n
with the International Telecommurncat1on Umon, to
give sympathetic consideration to requests from Member States for technical and other assistance for the
survey of their communication needs ?'nd_ for t~e. ~evelopment of their domestic commumcation facilities,
so that they may make effective use of space communication ;
5. Requests the Internat!onal _Telecommunication
Union consulting as appropnate with Member States,
the U~ited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and other specialized agencies and governmental and non-governmental organizations, su~h as
the Committee on Space Research of the Internat10nal
Council of Scientific Unions, to submit a report ~n the
implementati~n of !hese proposals to the_ Economic and
Social Council at its thirty-fourth sess10n and to the
General Assembly at its seventeenth session;
6. Requests the Committee on ~he Peacef~l Uses
of Outer Space, as it deems appropriate, to review ~hat
report and submit its comments and recommendations
to the Economic and Social Council and to the General
Assembly.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

E
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1472 (XIV) of 12 December
1959,
Noting that the terms of office of the members of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
expire at the end of 1961,
Noting the report of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space,1
1. Decides to continue the membership of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space as set
forth in General Assembly resolution 1472 (XIV) and
to add Chad, Mongolia, Morocco and Sierra Leone to
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 21, document A/4987.

its membership in recognition of the increas~d membership of the United Nations since the Committee was
established;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to meet not later than 31 March 1962
to carry out its mandate as contained in General Assembly resolution 1472 (XIV), to review the activities
provided for in resolutions A, B, C and D above and
to make such reports as it may consider appropriate.

1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

1722 (XVI). Question of disarmament
The General Assembly,
Noting ·with concern that the continuing arms race
is a heavy burden for humanity and is fraught with
dangers for the cause of world peace,
Conscious 0f its responsibilities, under the Charter
of the United Nations, for disarmament,
Recalling its resolution 1378 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, in which it called upon Governments to make
every effort to achieve a constructive solution of the
problem of general and complete disarmament and
expressed the hope that measures leading towards the
goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control would be worked out in
detail and agreed upon in the shortest possible time,
Being deeply concerned that the objectives of that
resolution be achieved as early as possible,

I
Noting with satisfaction the report submitted to the
General Assembly by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America following
their exchange of views on questions relating to disarmament and to the resumption of negotiations in an
appropriate body,2
1. Welcomes the joint statement of the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America of agreed principles for
disarmament negotiations included in that report;
2. Recommends that negotiations on general and
complete disarmament should be based upon those
principles ;

II
Deeming it essential that negotiations on general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control be resumed at the earliest possible time,
Recognizing that all States have a deep interest in
disarmament negotiations,
1. Endorses the agreement that has been reached on
the composition of a Disarmament Committee, whose
membership will be: Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Canada,
Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, France, India, Italy, Mexico,
Nigeria, Poland, Romania, Sweden, Union of Soyiet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, Umted
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America;
• Ibid., agenda item 19, document A/4879.
