General A1aembl:,-Twent:,-aeeond Senion

40

2333 (XXII). Creation of the post of United
Nation■ High Commlesioner for Human
Righte
The General Assembl)•,
Recalling its resolution 2062 (XX) of 16 December
1965 relating to the creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1237
(XLII) of 6 June 1967, in which the Council endorsed
the recommendation to the General Assembly contained in the draft resolution proposed by the Commission on Human Rights, 6 and Economic and Social
Council resolution 1238 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 on the
same subject,

Regretting that, despite its decision at the 1498th
plenary meeting, held on 19 December 1966, to approve
the Third Committee's recommendation that the consideration of agenda item 61 should be postponed to
the twenty-second session, the consideration of this
question has not been possible at the present session
owing to the heavy programme of work,
1. Decides to give high priority, in accordance with
the aforementioned resolutions and decisions, to the
consideration of this question at its twenty-third session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session with all
the relevant information prepared in conformity with
the resolutions of the Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights
on this matter.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2334 (XXII). Capital puniehment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1396 (XIV) of 20 November 1959 and 1918 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963 on
the question of capital punishment,
Noting that the heavy agenda of the Commission on
Human Rights at its recent sessions has not permitted
it to study the report entitled Capital Punishment, 1
and that therefore the Secretary-General could not present to the General Assembly the report called for in
paragraph 3 of resolution 1918 (XVIII),
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolution
1243 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 transmitting a draft resolution, submitted by the delegations of Sweden and
Venezuela, for a decision by the General Assembly as
to what further steps should be taken in the matter,
Regretting that the workload at its twenty-second
session has not permitted the General Assembly to consider the substance of the item on capital punishment,
1. Decides to consider the question of capital punishment at its twenty-third session ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at that session with pertinent information prepared in the light of Assembly resolution
1918 (XVIII);
6 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-s,cond Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4322 and C.orr.1),

chapter XVIII, draft resolution IV.
7 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 62.IV.2.

3. Invites the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To instruct the Commission on Human Rights
to consider the question of capital punishment, including the draft resolution submitted by the Council in
resolution 1243 (XLII), and to transmit its recommendations on the matter through the Council to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
( b) To seek the views of the Consultative Group
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders concerning the draft resolution submitted by
the Council in resolution 1243 ( XLII), requesting the
Secretary-General to transmit these views to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2335 (XXII). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter XI, section IV, of the
report of the Economic and Social Council, 8 dealing
with the United Nations Children's Fund,
Welcoming the fact that the Executive Board of
the United Nations Children's Fund had reviewed the
assistance policies of the Fund, which are focused not
only on the immediate needs of children but also on
preparing children to contribute to the social and economic development of their countries,
Noting with approval that the United Nations Children's Fund continues to provide emergency aid to
children and mothers in situations of urgent need,
while placing increasing emphasis on long-term programmes,
Noting that co-operation between the United Nations Children's Fund and the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs and the Division of Human Rights
of the United Nations Secretariat, the specialized agencies and the relevant technical and other agencies in
the United Nations family continues to be close,
1. Endorses the policies and programmes of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Congratulates the United Nations Children's
Fund on the occasion of its twenty-first anniversary;
3. Commends the United Nations Children's Fund
for its very substantial and significant achievements
during its twenty-one years of operation, particularly
on behalf of the children of the developing countries;
4. Expresses the hope that the United Nations Children's Fund's goal of $50 million income from voluntary contributions by Governments and private sources
will be attained by the end of 1969, thus enabling the
Fund to continue the constructive work which merited
for it the award of the Nobel Peace Prize for 1965.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2336 (XXII). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Considering that because of its heavy agenda the
Third Committee was unable to consider the draft Convention on Freedom of Information and the draft
Declaration on Freedom of Information at the twentysecond session,
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sec01ltl
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6703 and C.orr.1).

Re1olutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

--------------------

Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms to the promotion of which the United Nations
is dedicated,
Decides to take up at its twenty-third session the
consideration of the item on freedom of information.

1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
2337 (XXII). Status of the Intemational Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
the Intemational Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 2200 A (XXI) of
16 December 1966 it expressed the hope that the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights would be signed and ratified or acceded
to without delay and come into force at an early date,
Noting that according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, submitted in pursuance of resolution 2200 A
(XXI) on the status of ratifications of the Covenants
and of the Optional Protocol,11 there have been no ratifications of or accessions to any of these instruments
and that there have been only nineteen signatures to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, eighteen to the International C'.,ovenant
on Civil and Political Rights, and eleven to the Optional
Protocol,
Desiring to accelerate the ratifications of and accessions to the Covenants and the Optional Protocol,
Convinced that the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations would be greatly enhanced by the coming into force of the Covenants and
the Optional Protocol,
1. Invites States which are eligible to become parties
to the International Covenants on Human Rights and
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights to hasten their ratifications of or accessions to these instruments;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the status of the Covenants and the Optional Protocol to the International Conference on Human Rights
to be held at Teheran in 1968 and to the General
Assembly at its twenty-third session ;
3. Decides to include this item in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-third session.

1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
2338 (XXII). Question of the punishment of war
criminals and of persons who have committed crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3 (I) of 13 February 1946
and 170 (II) of 31 October 1947 on the extradition
and punishment of war criminals, resolution 95 (I) of
11 December 1946 affirming the principles of inter11 A/6820 and Add.1. See also Official Records of the General
A.sstmbly, Twmty-second Session, Third Committee, 1553rd
meeting, para. 53.

national law recognized by the Charter of the Niirnberg Tribunal and the judgement of the Tribunal, and
resolutions 2184 (XXI) of 12 December 1966 and
2202 ( XXI) of 16 December 1966, which expressly
condemned as crimes against humanity the violation
of the economic and political rights of the indigenous
population, on the one hand, and the policies of apartheid, on the other,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1074 D (XXXIX) of 28 July 1965 and 1158 (XLI)
of 5 August 1966 on the punishment of war criminals
and of persons who have committed crimes against
humanitv,
N oti~ that none of the solemn declarations, instruments or conventions relating to prosecution and punishment for war crimes and crimes against humanity
makes provision for a period of limitation,
Considering that war crimes and crimes against
humanity are among the gravest crimes in international
law,
Convinced that effective punishment for war crimes
and crimes against humanity is an important element
in the prevention of such crimes, the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the encouragement of confidence, the furtherance of co-operation
among peoples and the promotion of international
peace and security,
Noting that _the application to war ~r!mes and cri~es
against humamty of the rules of mumc1pal law relatmg
to the period of limitation for ordinary crimes is a
matter of serious concern to world public opinion, since
it prevents the prosecution and punishment of persons
responsible for those crimes,
Recognizing that it is necessary and timely to affirm in international law, through a convention, the
principle that there is no period of limitation for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and to secure
its universal application,
Having considered the report of the joint working
group of the Third and Sixth Committees on the draft
convention on the non-applicability of statutory limitation to war crimes and crimes against humanity, 10
Expressing its regret that owing to the lack of time
it has not been possible to complete consideration of
and to adopt the convention on the non-applicability
of statutory limitation to war crimes and crimes against
humanity,
1. Expresses its thanks to the joint working group
of the Third and Sixth Committee for the work it
has accomplished;
2. Takes note of the report of the joint working
group;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States the report of the joint working group
containing the text of the draft convention adopted by
the group and to invite them to submit comments on
the draft convention;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to issue
to Member States, before the twenty-third session of
10 The joint working group was established, for the twentysecond session, following consultations between the Chairman
of the Third Committee and the Chairman of the Sixth Committee, in accordance with the recommendation adopted by the
General Assembly at its 1564th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1967. For the re_port of the joint working group, ace

0 fficial Records of the Gmeral Assembly, Twm~-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 60. document A/C.3/L.1503.
