United Nations

A/RES/67/187

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 103

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/458)]

67/187. United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access
to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which enshrines the
key principles of equality before the law and the presumption of innocence, as well
as the right to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal,
along with all the guarantees necessary for the defence of anyone charged with a
penal offence, other minimum guarantees and the entitlement to be tried without
undue delay,
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 in
particular article 14 thereof, which states that everyone charged with a criminal
offence shall be entitled to be tried in his or her presence and to defend himself or
herself in person or through legal assistance of his or her own choosing or assigned
to him or her where the interests of justice so require, in a fair and public hearing by
a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law,
Bearing in mind the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, 3
approved by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 663 C (XXIV) of
31 July 1957 and extended by the Council by its resolution 2076 (LXII) of 13 May
1977, according to which an untried prisoner, for the purposes of his or her defence,
shall be allowed to receive visits from his or her legal adviser,
Bearing in mind also the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons
under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, 4 principle 11 of which states that a
detained person shall have the right to defend himself or herself or to be assisted by
counsel as prescribed by law,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal Instruments
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
4
Resolution 43/173, annex.
2

12-48982

*1248982*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

Bearing in mind further the Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers, 5 in
particular principle 6 thereof, which states that any persons who do not have a
lawyer shall, in all cases in which the interests of justice so require, be entitled to
have a lawyer of experience and competence commensurate with the nature of the
offence assigned to them in order to provide effective legal assistance, without
payment by them if they lack sufficient means to pay for such services,
Recalling the Bangkok Declaration on Synergies and Responses: Strategic
Alliances in Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, 6 especially paragraph 18
thereof, in which Member States are called upon to take steps, in accordance with
their domestic laws, to promote access to justice, to consider the provision of legal
aid to those who need it and to enable the effective assertion of their rights in the
criminal justice system,
Recalling also the Salvador Declaration on Comprehensive Strategies for
Global Challenges: Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their
Development in a Changing World, 7 especially paragraph 52 thereof, in which it is
recommended that Member States endeavour to reduce pretrial detention, where
appropriate, and promote increased access to justice and legal defence mechanisms,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2007/24 of 26 July
2007 on international cooperation for the improvement of access to legal aid in
criminal justice systems, particularly in Africa,
Recognizing that legal aid is an essential element of a fair, humane and
efficient criminal justice system that is based on the rule of law and that it is a
foundation for the enjoyment of other rights, including the right to a fair trial, as a
precondition to exercising such rights and an important safeguard that ensures
fundamental fairness and public trust in the criminal justice process,
Recognizing also that the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access
to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems, annexed to the present resolution, can be
applied by Member States, taking into account the great variety of legal systems and
socioeconomic conditions in the world,
Notes with appreciation the work of the open-ended intergovernmental
1.
expert group on strengthening access to legal aid in criminal justice systems, at its
meeting held in Vienna from 16 to 18 November 2011, to develop a set of principles
and guidelines on access to legal aid in criminal justice systems;
Adopts the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal
2.
Aid in Criminal Justice Systems, annexed to the present resolution, as a useful
framework to guide Member States on the principles on which a legal aid system in
criminal justice should be based, taking into account the content of the present
resolution and the fact that all elements of the annex will be applied in accordance
with national legislation;
Invites Member States, consistent with their national legislation, to adopt
3.
and strengthen measures to ensure that effective legal aid is provided, in accordance
with the spirit of the Principles and Guidelines, bearing in mind the diversity of
_______________
5

Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana,
27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.3, annex.
6
Resolution 60/177, annex.
7
Resolution 65/230, annex.

2/20

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

criminal justice systems among different countries and regions around the world and
the fact that legal aid is developed in accordance with the overall balance of the
criminal justice system, as well as the circumstances of countries and regions;
Encourages Member States to consider, where appropriate, the provision
4.
of legal aid and to provide such aid to the maximum extent possible;
5.
Also encourages Member States to draw upon the Principles and Guidelines,
as appropriate, and in accordance with national law, in undertaking national efforts
and measures to strengthen access to legal aid in criminal justice systems;
Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, subject to the
6.
availability of extrabudgetary resources, to continue to provide advisory services
and technical assistance to Member States, upon request, in the area of criminal
justice reform, including restorative justice, alternatives to imprisonment and the
development of integrated plans for the provision of legal aid;
Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, subject to
7.
the availability of extrabudgetary resources, to make the Principles and Guidelines
widely available, including through the development of relevant tools such as
handbooks and training manuals;
Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary
8.
resources for the purposes described above, in accordance with the rules and
procedures of the United Nations;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission on Crime
9.
Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-third session on the implementation of
the present resolution.
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

Annex
United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in
Criminal Justice Systems
A.

Introduction

1.
Legal aid is an essential element of a fair, humane and efficient criminal
justice system that is based on the rule of law. Legal aid is a foundation for the
enjoyment of other rights, including the right to a fair trial, as defined in article 11,
paragraph 1, of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 a precondition to
exercising such rights and an important safeguard that ensures fundamental fairness
and public trust in the criminal justice process.
2.
Furthermore, article 14, paragraph 3 (d), of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights2 states that everyone should be entitled, among other
rights, “to be tried in his presence, and to defend himself in person or through legal
assistance of his own choosing; to be informed, if he does not have legal assistance,
of this right; and to have legal assistance assigned to him in any case where the
interests of justice so require, and without payment by him in any such case if he
does not have sufficient means to pay for it”.
3.
A functioning legal aid system, as part of a functioning criminal justice
system, may reduce the length of time suspects are held in police stations and
detention centres, in addition to reducing the prison population, wrongful
3/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

convictions, prison overcrowding and congestion in the courts, and reducing
reoffending and revictimization. It may also protect and safeguard the rights of
victims and witnesses in the criminal justice process. Legal aid can be utilized to
contribute to the prevention of crime by increasing awareness of the law.
4.
Legal aid plays an important role in facilitating diversion and the use of
community-based sanctions and measures, including non-custodial measures;
promoting greater community involvement in the criminal justice system; reducing
the unnecessary use of detention and imprisonment; rationalizing criminal justice
policies; and ensuring efficient use of State resources.
5.
Regrettably, many countries still lack the necessary resources and capacity to
provide legal aid for suspects, those charged with a criminal offence, prisoners,
victims and witnesses.
6.
The United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in
Criminal Justice Systems, which are drawn from international standards and
recognized good practices, aim to provide guidance to States on the fundamental
principles on which a legal aid system in criminal justice should be based and to
outline the specific elements required for an effective and sustainable national legal
aid system, in order to strengthen access to legal aid pursuant to Economic and
Social Council resolution 2007/24 of 26 July 2007, entitled “International cooperation
for the improvement of access to legal aid in criminal justice systems, particularly
in Africa”.
7.
In line with the Lilongwe Declaration on Accessing Legal Aid in the Criminal
Justice System in Africa and the Lilongwe Plan of Action for the implementation of
the Declaration, the Principles and Guidelines follow a broad concept of legal aid.
8.
For the purposes of the Principles and Guidelines, the term “legal aid”
includes legal advice, assistance and representation for persons detained, arrested or
imprisoned, suspected or accused of, or charged with a criminal offence and for
victims and witnesses in the criminal justice process that is provided at no cost for
those without sufficient means or when the interests of justice so require.
Furthermore, “legal aid” is intended to include the concepts of legal education,
access to legal information and other services provided for persons through
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms and restorative justice processes.
9.
For the purposes of the Principles and Guidelines, the individual who provides
legal aid is herein referred to as the “legal aid provider”, and the organizations that
provide legal aid are referred to as the “legal aid service providers”. The first
providers of legal aid are lawyers, but the Principles and Guidelines also suggest
that States involve a wide range of stakeholders as legal aid service providers in the
form of non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations, religious
and non-religious charitable organizations, professional bodies and associations and
academia. Provision of legal aid to foreign nationals should conform to the
requirements of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations 8 and other applicable
bilateral treaties.
10. It should be noted that States employ different models for the provision of
legal aid. These may involve public defenders, private lawyers, contract lawyers,
pro bono schemes, bar associations, paralegals and others. The Principles and
Guidelines do not endorse any specific model but encourage States to guarantee the
_______________
8

4/20

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

basic right to legal aid of persons detained, arrested or imprisoned, 9 suspected 10 or
accused of, or charged with a criminal offence, while expanding legal aid to include
others who come into contact with the criminal justice system and diversifying legal
aid delivery schemes.
11. The Principles and Guidelines are based on the recognition that States should,
where appropriate, undertake a series of measures that, even if not strictly related to
legal aid, can maximize the positive impact that the establishment and/or
reinforcement of a properly working legal aid system may have on a properly
functioning criminal justice system and on access to justice.
12. Recognizing that certain groups are entitled to additional protection or are
more vulnerable when involved with the criminal justice system, the Principles and
Guidelines also provide specific provisions for women, children and groups with
special needs.
13. The Principles and Guidelines are primarily concerned with the right to legal
aid, as distinct from the right to legal assistance as recognized in international law.
Nothing in these Principles and Guidelines should be interpreted as providing a
lesser degree of protection than that provided under existing national laws and
regulations and international and regional human rights conventions or covenants
applicable to the administration of justice, including, but not limited to, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, 11 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women 12 and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. 13 However, this should not be
interpreted as meaning that States are bound by international and regional
instruments that they have not ratified or acceded to.
B.

Principles

Principle 1
Right to legal aid
14. Recognizing that legal aid is an essential element of a functioning criminal
justice system that is based on the rule of law, a foundation for the enjoyment of
other rights, including the right to a fair trial, and an important safeguard that
ensures fundamental fairness and public trust in the criminal justice process, 14 States
should guarantee the right to legal aid in their national legal systems at the highest
possible level, including, where applicable, in the constitution.

_______________
9

The terms “arrest”, “detained person” and “imprisoned person” are understood as defined in the Body of
Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment (resolution
43/173, annex).
10
The right to legal aid of suspects arises before questioning, when they become aware that they are the
subject of investigation, and when they are under threat of abuse and intimidation, e.g., in custodial
settings.
11
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
12
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
13
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
14
The term “justice process” is understood as defined in the Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving
Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime (Economic and Social Council resolution 2005/20, annex). For the
purpose of the Principles and Guidelines, the term shall also encompass extradition, transfer of prisoners
and mutual legal assistance proceedings.

5/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

Principle 2
Responsibilities of the State
15. States should consider the provision of legal aid their duty and responsibility.
To that end, they should consider, where appropriate, enacting specific legislation
and regulations and ensure that a comprehensive legal aid system is in place that is
accessible, effective, sustainable and credible. States should allocate the necessary
human and financial resources to the legal aid system.
16. The State should not interfere with the organization of the defence of the
beneficiary of legal aid or with the independence of his or her legal aid provider.
17. States should enhance the knowledge of the people about their rights and
obligations under the law through appropriate means, in order to prevent criminal
conduct and victimization.
18. States should endeavour to enhance the knowledge of their communities about
their justice system and its functions, the ways to file complaints before the courts
and alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
19. States should consider adopting appropriate measures for informing their
communities about acts criminalized under the law. The provision of such
information for those travelling to other jurisdictions, where crimes are categorized
and prosecuted differently, is essential for crime prevention.
Principle 3
Legal aid for persons suspected of or charged with a criminal offence
20. States should ensure that anyone who is detained, arrested, suspected of, or
charged with a criminal offence punishable by a term of imprisonment or the death
penalty is entitled to legal aid at all stages of the criminal justice process.
21. Legal aid should also be provided, regardless of the person’s means, if the
interests of justice so require, for example, given the urgency or complexity of the
case or the severity of the potential penalty.
22. Children should have access to legal aid under the same conditions as or more
lenient conditions than adults.
23. It is the responsibility of police, prosecutors and judges to ensure that those
who appear before them who cannot afford a lawyer and/or who are vulnerable are
provided access to legal aid.
Principle 4
Legal aid for victims of crime
24. Without prejudice to or inconsistency with the rights of the accused, States
should, where appropriate, provide legal aid to victims of crime.
Principle 5
Legal aid for witnesses
25. Without prejudice to or inconsistency with the rights of the accused, States
should, where appropriate, provide legal aid to witnesses of crime.

6/20

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

Principle 6
Non-discrimination
26. States should ensure the provision of legal aid to all persons regardless of age,
race, colour, gender, language, religion or belief, political or other opinion, national
or social origin or property, citizenship or domicile, birth, education or social status
or other status.
Principle 7
Prompt and effective provision of legal aid
27. States should ensure that effective legal aid is provided promptly at all stages
of the criminal justice process.
28. Effective legal aid includes, but is not limited to, unhindered access to legal
aid providers for detained persons, confidentiality of communications, access to
case files and adequate time and facilities to prepare their defence.
Principle 8
Right to be informed
29. States should ensure that, prior to any questioning and at the time of
deprivation of liberty, persons are informed of their right to legal aid and other
procedural safeguards as well as of the potential consequences of voluntarily
waiving those rights.
30. States should ensure that information on rights during the criminal justice
process and on legal aid services is made freely available and is accessible to
the public.
Principle 9
Remedies and safeguards
31. States should establish effective remedies and safeguards that apply if access
to legal aid is undermined, delayed or denied or if persons have not been adequately
informed of their right to legal aid.
Principle 10
Equity in access to legal aid
32. Special measures should be taken to ensure meaningful access to legal aid for
women, children and groups with special needs, including, but not limited to, the
elderly, minorities, persons with disabilities, persons with mental illnesses, persons
living with HIV and other serious contagious diseases, drug users, indigenous and
aboriginal people, stateless persons, asylum seekers, foreign citizens, migrants and
migrant workers, refugees and internally displaced persons. Such measures should
address the special needs of those groups, including gender-sensitive and ageappropriate measures.
33. States should also ensure that legal aid is provided to persons living in rural,
remote and economically and socially disadvantaged areas and to persons who are
members of economically and socially disadvantaged groups.

7/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

Principle 11
Legal aid in the best interests of the child
34. In all legal aid decisions affecting children, 15 the best interests of the child
should be the primary consideration.
35. Legal aid provided to children should be prioritized, in the best interests of the
child, and be accessible, age-appropriate, multidisciplinary, effective and responsive
to the specific legal and social needs of children.
Principle 12
Independence and protection of legal aid providers
36. States should ensure that legal aid providers are able to carry out their work
effectively, freely and independently. In particular, States should ensure that legal
aid providers are able to perform all of their professional functions without
intimidation, hindrance, harassment or improper interference; are able to travel, to
consult and meet with their clients freely and in full confidentiality both within their
own country and abroad, and to freely access prosecution and other relevant files;
and do not suffer, and are not threatened with, prosecution or administrative,
economic or other sanctions for any action taken in accordance with recognized
professional duties, standards and ethics.
Principle 13
Competence and accountability of legal aid providers
37. States should put in place mechanisms to ensure that all legal aid providers
possess education, training, skills and experience that are commensurate with the
nature of their work, including the gravity of the offences dealt with, and the rights
and needs of women, children and groups with special needs.
38. Disciplinary complaints against legal aid providers should be promptly
investigated and adjudicated in accordance with professional codes of ethics before
an impartial body and subject to judicial review.
Principle 14
Partnerships
39. States should recognize and encourage the contribution of lawyers’
associations, universities, civil society and other groups and institutions in providing
legal aid.
40. Where appropriate, public-private and other forms of partnership should be
established to extend the reach of legal aid.
C.

Guidelines

Guideline 1
Provision of legal aid
41. Whenever States apply a means test to determine eligibility for legal aid, they
should ensure that:
(a) Persons whose means exceed the limits of the means test but who cannot
afford, or do not have access to, a lawyer in situations where legal aid would have
_______________
15
“Child” shall mean any person under 18 years of age, in line with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.

8/20

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

otherwise been granted and where it is in the interests of justice to provide such aid,
are not excluded from receiving assistance;
(b)

The criteria for applying the means test are widely publicized;

(c) Persons urgently requiring legal aid at police stations, detention centres
or courts should be provided preliminary legal aid while their eligibility is being
determined. Children are always exempted from the means test;
(d) Persons who are denied legal aid on the basis of the means test have the
right to appeal that decision;
(e) A court may, having regard to the particular circumstances of a person
and after considering the reasons for denial of legal aid, direct that that person be
provided with legal aid, with or without his or her contribution, when the interests
of justice so require;
(f) If the means test is calculated on the basis of the household income of a
family, but individual family members are in conflict with each other or do not have
equal access to the family income, only the income of the person applying for legal
aid is used for the purpose of the means test.
Guideline 2
Right to be informed on legal aid
42. In order to guarantee the right of persons to be informed of their right to legal
aid, States should ensure that:
(a) Information on the right to legal aid and what such aid consists of,
including the availability of legal aid services and how to access such services and
other relevant information, is made available to the community and to the general
public in local government offices and educational and religious institutions and
through the media, including the Internet, or other appropriate means;
(b) Information is made available to isolated groups and marginalized
groups. Use should be made of radio and television programmes, regional and local
newspapers, the Internet and other means, in particular, following changes to the
law or specific issues affecting a community, targeted community meetings;
(c) Police officers, prosecutors, judicial officers and officials in any facility
where persons are imprisoned or detained inform unrepresented persons of their
right to legal aid and of other procedural safeguards;
(d) Information on the rights of a person suspected of or charged with a
criminal offence in a criminal justice process and on the availability of legal aid
services is provided in police stations, detention centres, courts and prisons, for
example, through the provision of a letter of rights or in any other official form
submitted to the accused. Such information should be provided in a manner that
corresponds to the needs of illiterate persons, minorities, persons with disabilities
and children; and such information should be in a language that those persons
understand. Information provided to children must be provided in a manner
appropriate to their age and maturity;
(e) Effective remedies are available to persons who have not been
adequately informed of their right to legal aid. Such remedies may include a
prohibition on conducting procedural actions, release from detention, exclusion of
evidence, judicial review and compensation;

9/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

(f)
in place.

Means of verification that a person has actually been informed are put

Guideline 3
Other rights of persons detained, arrested, suspected or accused of, or charged
with a criminal offence
43.

States should introduce measures:

(a) To promptly inform every person detained, arrested, suspected or
accused of, or charged with a criminal offence of his or her right to remain silent;
his or her right to consult with counsel or, if eligible, with a legal aid provider at any
stage of the proceedings, especially before being interviewed by the authorities; and
his or her right to be assisted by an independent counsel or legal aid provider while
being interviewed and during other procedural actions;
(b) To prohibit, in the absence of any compelling circumstances, any
interviewing of a person by the police in the absence of a lawyer, unless the person
gives his or her informed and voluntary consent to waive the lawyer’s presence, and
to establish mechanisms for verifying the voluntary nature of the person’s consent.
An interview should not start until the legal aid provider arrives;
(c) To inform all foreign detainees and prisoners in a language they understand
of their right to request contact with their consular authorities without delay;
(d) To ensure that persons meet with a lawyer or a legal aid provider
promptly after their arrest in full confidentiality; and that the confidentiality of
further communications is guaranteed;
(e) To enable every person who has been detained for any reason to
promptly notify a member of his or her family, or any other appropriate person of
his or her choosing, of his or her detention and location and of any imminent change
of location; the competent authority may, however, delay a notification if absolutely
necessary, if provided for by law and if the transmission of the information would
hinder a criminal investigation;
(f) To provide the services of an independent interpreter, whenever necessary,
and the translation of documents where appropriate;
(g)

To assign a guardian, whenever necessary;

(h) To make available in police stations and places of detention the means to
contact legal aid providers;
(i) To ensure that persons detained, arrested, suspected or accused of, or
charged with a criminal offence are advised of their rights and the implications of
waiving them in a clear and plain manner; and should endeavour to ensure that the
person understands both;
(j) To ensure that persons are informed of any mechanism available for
filing complaints of torture or ill-treatment;
(k) To ensure that the exercise of these rights by a person is not prejudicial
to his or her case.

10/20

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

Guideline 4
Legal aid at the pretrial stage
44. To ensure that detained persons have prompt access to legal aid in conformity
with the law, States should take measures:
(a) To ensure that police and judicial authorities do not arbitrarily restrict the
right or access to legal aid for persons detained, arrested, suspected or accused of, or
charged with a criminal offence, in particular in police stations;
(b) To facilitate access for legal aid providers assigned to provide assistance
to detained persons in police stations and other places of detention for the purpose
of providing that assistance;
(c)

To ensure legal representation at all pretrial proceedings and hearings;

(d) To monitor and enforce custody time limits in police holding cells or other
detention centres, for example, by instructing judicial authorities to screen the remand
caseload in detention centres on a regular basis to make sure that people are remanded
lawfully, that their cases are dealt with in a timely manner and that the conditions in
which they are held meet the relevant legal standards, including international ones;
(e) To provide every person, on admission to a place of detention, with
information on his or her rights in law, the rules of the place of detention and the
initial stages of the pretrial process. Such information should be provided in a
manner that corresponds to the needs of illiterate persons, minorities, persons with
disabilities and children and be in a language that the person in need of legal aid
understands. Information provided to children should be provided in a manner
appropriate for their age and maturity. The information material should be supported
by visual aids prominently located in each detention centre;
(f) To request bar or legal associations and other partnership institutions to
establish a roster of lawyers and paralegals to support a comprehensive legal system
for persons detained, arrested, suspected or accused of, or charged with a criminal
offence, in particular at police stations;
(g) To ensure that every person charged with a criminal offence has adequate
time, facilities and technical and financial support, in case he or she does not have
sufficient means, to prepare his or her defence and is able to consult with his or her
lawyer in full confidentiality.
Guideline 5
Legal aid during court proceedings
45. To guarantee that every person charged with a criminal offence for which a
term of imprisonment or capital punishment may be imposed by a court of law has
access to legal aid in all proceedings at court, including on appeal and other related
proceedings, States should introduce measures:
(a) To ensure that the accused understands the case against him or her and
the possible consequences of the trial;
(b) To ensure that every person charged with a criminal offence has adequate
time, facilities and technical and financial support, in case he or she does not have
sufficient means, to prepare his or her defence and is able to consult with his or her
lawyer in full confidentiality;
(c) To provide representation in any court proceedings by a lawyer of choice,
where appropriate, or by a competent lawyer assigned by the court or other legal aid
11/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

authority at no cost when the person does not have sufficient means to pay and/or
where the interests of justice so require;
(d) To ensure that the counsel of the accused is present at all critical stages of
the proceedings. Critical stages are all stages of a criminal proceeding at which the
advice of a lawyer is necessary to ensure the right of the accused to a fair trial or at
which the absence of counsel might impair the preparation or presentation of a defence;
(e) To request bar or legal associations and other partnership institutions to
establish a roster of lawyers and paralegals to support a comprehensive legal system for
persons detained, arrested, suspected or accused of, or charged with a criminal offence;
such support could include, for example, appearing before the courts on fixed days;
(f) To enable, in accordance with national law, paralegals and law students
to provide appropriate types of assistance to the accused in court, provided that they
are under the supervision of qualified lawyers;
(g) To ensure that unrepresented suspects and the accused understand their
rights. This may include, but is not limited to, requiring judges and prosecutors to
explain their rights to them in clear and plain language.
Guideline 6
Legal aid at the post-trial stage
46. States should ensure that imprisoned persons and children deprived of their
liberty have access to legal aid. Where legal aid is not available, States shall ensure
that such persons are held in prison in conformity with the law.
47.

For this purpose, States should introduce measures:

(a) To provide all persons, on admission to the place of imprisonment and
during their detention, with information on the rules of the place of imprisonment
and their rights under the law, including the right to confidential legal aid, advice
and assistance; the possibilities for further review of their case; their rights during
disciplinary proceedings; and procedures for complaint, appeal, early release,
pardon or clemency. Such information should be provided in a manner that
corresponds to the needs of illiterate persons, minorities, persons with disabilities
and children and should be in a language that the person in need of legal aid
understands. Information provided to children should be provided in a manner
appropriate for their age and maturity. The information material should be supported
by visual aids prominently located in those parts of the facilities to which prisoners
have regular access;
(b) To encourage bar and legal associations and other legal aid providers to
draw up rosters of lawyers, and paralegals, where appropriate, to visit prisons to
provide legal advice and assistance at no cost to prisoners;
(c) To ensure that prisoners have access to legal aid for the purpose of
submitting appeals and filing requests related to their treatment and the conditions
of their imprisonment, including when facing serious disciplinary charges, and for
requests for pardon, in particular for those prisoners facing the death penalty, as
well as for applications for parole and representation at parole hearings;
(d) To inform foreign prisoners of the possibility, where available, of seeking
transfer to serve their sentence in their country of nationality, subject to the consent
of the States involved.

12/20

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

Guideline 7
Legal aid for victims
48. Without prejudice to or inconsistency with the rights of the accused and
consistent with the relevant national legislation, States should take adequate measures,
where appropriate, to ensure that:
(a) Appropriate advice, assistance, care, facilities and support are provided to
victims of crime, throughout the criminal justice process, in a manner that prevents
repeat victimization and secondary victimization; 16
(b) Child victims receive legal assistance as required, in line with the
Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime; 17
(c) Victims receive legal advice on any aspect of their involvement in the
criminal justice process, including the possibility of taking civil action or making a
claim for compensation in separate legal proceedings, whichever is consistent with
the relevant national legislation;
(d) Victims are promptly informed by the police and other front-line
responders (i.e., health, social and child welfare providers) of their right to information
and their entitlement to legal aid, assistance and protection and of how to access
such rights;
(e) The views and concerns of victims are presented and considered at
appropriate stages of the criminal justice process where their personal interests are
affected or where the interests of justice so require;
(f) Victim services agencies and non-governmental organizations can provide
legal aid to victims;
(g) Mechanisms and procedures are established to ensure close cooperation
and appropriate referral systems between legal aid providers and other professionals
(i.e., health, social and child welfare providers) to obtain a comprehensive
understanding of the victim, as well as an assessment of his or her legal,
psychological, social, emotional, physical and cognitive situation and needs.
Guideline 8
Legal aid for witnesses
49.

States should take adequate measures, where appropriate, to ensure that:

(a) Witnesses are promptly informed by the relevant authority of their right to
information, their entitlement to assistance and protection and how to access such rights;
(b) Appropriate advice, assistance, care facilities and support are provided to
witnesses of crime throughout the criminal justice process;
(c) Child witnesses receive legal assistance as required, in line with the
Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime;
(d) All statements or testimony given by the witness at all stages of the
criminal justice process are accurately interpreted and translated.

_______________
16
“Repeat victimization” and “secondary victimization” are understood as defined in paragraphs 1.2 and
1.3 of the appendix to Recommendation Rec(2006)8 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe to member States on assistance to crime victims.
17
Economic and Social Council resolution 2005/20, annex.

13/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

50.

States should, where appropriate, provide legal aid to witnesses.

51. The circumstances in which it may be appropriate to provide legal aid to
witnesses include, but are not limited to, situations in which:
(a)

The witness is at risk of incriminating himself or herself;

(b) There is a risk to the safety and well-being of the witness resulting from
his or her status as such;
(c) The witness is particularly vulnerable, including as a result of having
special needs.
Guideline 9
Implementation of the right of women to access legal aid
52. States should take applicable and appropriate measures to ensure the right of
women to access legal aid, including:
(a) Introducing an active policy of incorporating a gender perspective into
all policies, laws, procedures, programmes and practices relating to legal aid to
ensure gender equality and equal and fair access to justice;
(b) Taking active steps to ensure that, where possible, female lawyers are
available to represent female defendants, accused and victims;
(c) Providing legal aid, advice and court support services in all legal
proceedings to female victims of violence in order to ensure access to justice and
avoid secondary victimization and other such services, which may include the
translation of legal documents where requested or required.
Guideline 10
Special measures for children
53. States should ensure special measures for children to promote children’s
effective access to justice and to prevent stigmatization and other adverse effects as
a result of their being involved in the criminal justice system, including:
(a) Ensuring the right of the child to have counsel assigned to represent the
child in his or her own name in proceedings where there is or could be a conflict of
interest between the child and his or her parents or other parties involved;
(b) Enabling children who are detained, arrested, suspected or accused of,
or charged with a criminal offence to contact their parents or guardians at once and
prohibiting any interviewing of a child in the absence of his or her lawyer or other
legal aid provider, and parent or guardian when available, in the best interests of
the child;
(c) Ensuring the right of the child to have the matter determined in the
presence of the child’s parents or legal guardian, unless it is not considered to be in
the best interests of the child;
(d) Ensuring that children may consult freely and in full confidentiality with
parents and/or guardians and legal representatives;
(e) Providing information on legal rights in a manner appropriate for the
child’s age and maturity, in a language that the child can understand and in a manner
that is gender- and culture-sensitive. Provision of information to parents, guardians
or caregivers should be in addition, and not an alternative, to communicating
information to the child;
14/20

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

(f) Promoting, where appropriate, diversion from the formal criminal justice
system and ensuring that children have the right to legal aid at every stage of the
process where diversion is applied;
(g) Encouraging, where appropriate, the use of alternative measures and
sanctions to deprivation of liberty and ensuring that children have the right to legal
aid so that deprivation of liberty is a measure of last resort and for the shortest
appropriate period of time;
(h) Establishing measures to ensure that judicial and administrative proceedings
are conducted in an atmosphere and manner that allow children to be heard either
directly or through a representative or an appropriate body in a manner consistent with
the procedural rules of national law. Taking into account the child’s age and maturity
may also require modified judicial and administrative procedures and practices.
54. The privacy and personal data of a child who is or who has been involved in
judicial or non-judicial proceedings and other interventions should be protected at
all stages, and such protection should be guaranteed by law. This generally implies
that no information or personal data may be made available or published,
particularly in the media, that could reveal or indirectly enable the disclosure of the
child’s identity, including images of the child, detailed descriptions of the child or
the child’s family, names or addresses of the child’s family members and audio and
video records.
Guideline 11
Nationwide legal aid system
55. In order to encourage the functioning of a nationwide legal aid system, States
should, where it is appropriate, undertake measures:
(a) To ensure and promote the provision of effective legal aid at all stages of
the criminal justice process for persons detained, arrested or imprisoned, suspected
or accused of, or charged with a criminal offence, and for victims of crime;
(b) To provide legal aid to persons who have been unlawfully arrested or
detained or who have received a final judgement of the court as a result of a
miscarriage of justice, in order to enforce their right to retrial, reparation, including
compensation, rehabilitation and guarantees of non-repetition;
(c) To promote coordination between justice agencies and other professionals
such as health, social services and victim support workers in order to maximize the
effectiveness of the legal aid system, without prejudice to the rights of the accused;
(d) To establish partnerships with bar or legal associations to ensure the
provision of legal aid at all stages of the criminal justice process;
(e) To enable paralegals to provide those forms of legal aid allowed by
national law or practice to persons detained, arrested, suspected of, or charged with
a criminal offence, in particular in police stations or other detention centres;
(f) To promote the provision of appropriate legal aid for the purpose of
crime prevention.
56.

States should also take measures:

(a) To encourage legal and bar associations to support the provision of legal
aid by offering a range of services, including those that are free (pro bono), in line
with their professional calling and ethical duty;

15/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

(b) To identify incentives for lawyers to work in economically and socially
disadvantaged areas (e.g., tax exemption, fellowships and travel and subsistence
allowances);
(c) To encourage lawyers to organize regular circuits of lawyers around the
country to provide legal aid to those in need.
57. In the design of their nationwide legal aid schemes, States should take into
account the needs of specific groups, including but not limited to the elderly,
minorities, persons with disabilities, the mentally ill, persons living with HIV and
other severe contagious diseases, drug users, indigenous and aboriginal people,
stateless persons, asylum seekers, foreign citizens, refugees and internally displaced
persons, in line with guidelines 9 and 10.
58. States should take appropriate measures to establish child-friendly 18 and childsensitive legal aid systems, taking into account children’s evolving capacities and
the need to strike an appropriate balance between the best interests of the child and
children’s right to be heard in judicial proceedings, including:
(a) Establishing, where possible, dedicated mechanisms to support specialized
legal aid for children and support the integration of child-friendly legal aid into
general and non-specialized mechanisms;
(b) Adopting legal aid legislation, policies and regulations that explicitly
take into account the child’s rights and special developmental needs, including the
right to have legal or other appropriate assistance in the preparation and presentation
of his or her defence; the right to be heard in all judicial proceedings affecting him
or her; standard procedures for determining best interest; privacy and protection of
personal data; and the right to be considered for diversion;
(c) Establishing child-friendly legal aid service standards and professional
codes of conduct. Legal aid providers working with and for children should, where
necessary, be subject to regular vetting to ensure their suitability for working with
children;
(d) Promoting standard legal aid training programmes. Legal aid providers
representing children should be trained in and be knowledgeable about children’s
rights and related issues, receive ongoing and in-depth training and be capable of
communicating with children at their level of understanding. All legal aid providers
working with and for children should receive basic interdisciplinary training on the
rights and needs of children of different age groups and on proceedings that are
adapted to them, and training on psychological and other aspects of the development
of children, with special attention to girls and children who are members of minority
or indigenous groups, and on available measures for promoting the defence of
children who are in conflict with the law;
(e) Establishing mechanisms and procedures to ensure close cooperation and
appropriate referral systems between legal aid providers and different professionals
to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the child, as well as an assessment of
his or her legal, psychological, social, emotional, physical and cognitive situation
and needs.
_______________
18
“Child-friendly legal aid” is the provision of legal assistance to children in criminal, civil and
administrative proceedings that is accessible, age-appropriate, multidisciplinary and effective, and that is
responsive to the range of legal and social needs faced by children and youth. Child-friendly legal aid is
delivered by lawyers and non-lawyers who are trained in children’s law and child and adolescent
development and who are able to communicate effectively with children and their caretakers.

16/20

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

59. To ensure the effective implementation of nationwide legal aid schemes, States
should consider establishing a legal aid body or authority to provide, administer,
coordinate and monitor legal aid services. Such a body should:
(a) Be free from undue political or judicial interference, be independent of
the Government in decision-making related to legal aid and not be subject to the
direction, control or financial intimidation of any person or authority in the
performance of its functions, regardless of its administrative structure;
(b) Have the necessary powers to provide legal aid, including but not limited
to the appointment of personnel; the designation of legal aid services to individuals;
the setting of criteria and accreditation of legal aid providers, including training
requirements; the oversight of legal aid providers and the establishment of
independent bodies to handle complaints against them; the assessment of legal aid
needs nationwide; and the power to develop its own budget;
(c) Develop, in consultation with key justice sector stakeholders and civil
society organizations, a long-term strategy guiding the evolution and sustainability
of legal aid;
(d)

Report periodically to the responsible authority.

Guideline 12
Funding the nationwide legal aid system
60. Recognizing that the benefits of legal aid services include financial benefits
and cost savings throughout the criminal justice process, States should, where
appropriate, make adequate and specific budget provisions for legal aid services that
are commensurate with their needs, including by providing dedicated and
sustainable funding mechanisms for the national legal aid system.
61.

To this end, States could take measures:

(a) To establish a legal aid fund to finance legal aid schemes, including
public defender schemes, to support legal aid provision by legal or bar associations;
to support university law clinics; and to sponsor non-governmental organizations
and other organizations, including paralegal organizations, in providing legal aid
services throughout the country, especially in rural and economically and socially
disadvantaged areas;
(b)

To identify fiscal mechanisms for channelling funds to legal aid, such as:

(i) Allocating a percentage of the State’s criminal justice budget to legal aid
services that are commensurate with the needs of effective legal aid provision;
(ii) Using funds recovered from criminal activities through seizures or fines
to cover legal aid for victims;
(c) To identify and put in place incentives for lawyers to work in rural areas
and economically and socially disadvantaged areas (e.g., tax exemptions or
reductions, student loan payment reductions);
(d) To ensure fair and proportional distribution of funds between prosecution
and legal aid agencies.
62. The budget for legal aid should cover the full range of services to be provided
to persons detained, arrested or imprisoned, suspected or accused of, or charged
with a criminal offence, and to victims. Adequate special funding should be
17/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

dedicated to defence expenses such as expenses for copying relevant files and
documents and collection of evidence, expenses related to expert witnesses, forensic
experts and social workers, and travel expenses. Payments should be timely.
Guideline 13
Human resources
63. States should, where appropriate, make adequate and specific provisions for
staffing the nationwide legal aid system that are commensurate with their needs.
64. States should ensure that professionals working for the national legal aid
system possess qualifications and training appropriate for the services they provide.
65. Where there is a shortage of qualified lawyers, the provision of legal aid services
may also include non-lawyers or paralegals. At the same time, States should promote
the growth of the legal profession and remove financial barriers to legal education.
66. States should also encourage wide access to the legal profession, including
affirmative action measures to ensure access for women, minorities and economically
disadvantaged groups.
Guideline 14
Paralegals
67. States should, in accordance with their national law and where appropriate,
recognize the role played by paralegals or similar service providers in providing
legal aid services where access to lawyers is limited.
68. For this purpose, States should, in consultation with civil society and justice
agencies and professional associations, introduce measures:
(a) To develop, where appropriate, a nationwide scheme of paralegal
services with standardized training curricula and accreditation schemes, including
appropriate screening and vetting;
(b) To ensure that quality standards for paralegal services are set and
that paralegals receive adequate training and operate under the supervision of
qualified lawyers;
(c) To ensure the availability of monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to
guarantee the quality of the services provided by paralegals;
(d) To promote, in consultation with civil society and justice agencies, the
development of a code of conduct that is binding for all paralegals working in the
criminal justice system;
(e) To specify the types of legal services that can be provided by paralegals
and the types of services that must be provided exclusively by lawyers, unless such
determination is within the competence of the courts or bar associations;
(f) To ensure access for accredited paralegals who are assigned to provide
legal aid to police stations and prisons, facilities of detention or pretrial detention
centres, and so forth;
(g) To allow, in accordance with national law and regulations, courtaccredited and duly trained paralegals to participate in court proceedings and advise
the accused when there are no lawyers available to do so.

18/20

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

A/RES/67/187

Guideline 15
Regulation and oversight of legal aid providers
69. In adherence to principle 12, and subject to existing national legislation
ensuring transparency and accountability, States, in cooperation with professional
associations, should:
(a)

Ensure that criteria are set for the accreditation of legal aid providers;

(b) Ensure that legal aid providers are subject to applicable professional
codes of conduct, with appropriate sanctions for infractions;
(c) Establish rules to ensure that legal aid providers are not allowed to request
any payment from the beneficiaries of legal aid, except when authorized to do so;
(d) Ensure that disciplinary complaints against legal aid providers are
reviewed by impartial bodies;
(e) Establish appropriate oversight mechanisms for legal aid providers, in
particular with a view to preventing corruption.
Guideline 16
Partnerships with non-State legal aid service providers and universities
70. States should, where appropriate, engage in partnerships with non-State legal
aid service providers, including non-governmental organizations and other service
providers.
71. To this end, States should take measures, in consultation with civil society and
justice agencies and professional associations:
(a) To recognize in their legal systems the role to be played by non-State
actors in providing legal aid services to meet the needs of the population;
(b) To set quality standards for legal aid services and support the development
of standardized training programmes for non-State legal aid service providers;
(c) To establish monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to ensure the quality
of legal aid services, in particular those provided at no cost;
(d) To work with all legal aid service providers to increase outreach, quality
and impact and facilitate access to legal aid in all parts of the country and in all
communities, especially in rural and economically and socially disadvantaged areas
and among minority groups;
(e) To diversify legal aid service providers by adopting a comprehensive
approach, for example, by encouraging the establishment of centres to provide legal
aid services that are staffed by lawyers and paralegals and by entering into
agreements with law societies and bar associations, university law clinics and
non-governmental and other organizations to provide legal aid services.
72.

States should, where appropriate, also take measures:

(a) To encourage and support the establishment of legal aid clinics in law
departments within universities to promote clinical and public interest law
programmes among faculty members and the student body, including in the
accredited curriculum of universities;
(b) To encourage and provide incentives to law students to participate, under
proper supervision and in accordance with national law or practice, in a legal aid
clinic or other legal aid community scheme, as part of their academic curriculum or
professional development;
19/20

A/RES/67/187

United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems

(c) To develop, where they do not already exist, student practice rules that
allow students to practise in the courts under the supervision of qualified lawyers or
faculty staff, provided that such rules are developed in consultation with and
accepted by the competent courts or bodies that regulate the practice of law before
the courts;
(d) To develop, in jurisdictions requiring law students to undertake legal
internships, rules for them to be allowed to practise in the courts under the supervision
of qualified lawyers.
Guideline 17
Research and data
73. States should ensure that mechanisms to track, monitor and evaluate legal aid
are established and should continually strive to improve the provision of legal aid.
74.

For this purpose, States could introduce measures:

(a) To conduct regular research and collection of data disaggregated by the
gender, age, socioeconomic status and geographical distribution of legal aid recipients
and to publish the findings of such research;
(b)

To share good practices in the provision of legal aid;

(c) To monitor the efficient and effective delivery of legal aid in accordance
with international human rights standards;
(d) To provide cross-cultural, culturally appropriate, gender-sensitive and
age-appropriate training to legal aid providers;
(e) To improve communication, coordination and cooperation between all
justice agencies, especially at the local level, to identify local problems and to agree
on solutions to improve the provision of legal aid.
Guideline 18
Technical assistance
75. Technical assistance based on needs and priorities identified by requesting
States should be provided by relevant intergovernmental organizations, such as the
United Nations, bilateral donors and competent non-governmental organizations, as
well as by States in the framework of bilateral and multilateral cooperation, with a
view to building and enhancing the national capacities and institutions for the
development and implementation of legal aid systems and criminal justice reforms,
where appropriate.

20/20
