UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/10
14 March 1994
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
At the 3348th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 March 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "Navigation on the
Danube river in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)", the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
"The Security Council has taken note of the letters dated 10 and
14 March 1994 from the Chargé d’affaires of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). In these documents, his Government
acknowledges that the Bulgarian convoy, the Han Kubrat, composed of
six barges transporting 6,000 tons of diesel oil on the Danube entered the
territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) on
the morning of 6 March 1994 at the Port of Prahovo. The Government also
recognizes that the cargo was unloaded and that the convoy returned to
Bulgaria without it.
"The Security Council most strongly condemns this flagrant violation
of the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council prohibiting
the shipment of commodities and products to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). It holds the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) fully accountable
for the non-return of the cargo of the Han Kubrat.
"The Security Council welcomes the cooperative attitude of the
Bulgarian Government. It calls upon the authorities of Bulgaria to assess
the precise circumstances of this act and to prosecute those responsible
for it.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance it attaches to free and
unimpeded navigation on the Danube, which is essential to legitimate
commerce in the region. It again stresses that the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) have undertaken in
writing to guarantee the freedom and security of navigation on this crucial
international waterway. It invites them to respect scrupulously their
commitments in this regard.
"The Security Council stands ready to address the issue again in the
future."
----94-12975 (E)

140394
