A /67/PV.23

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

23rd plenary meeting
Thursday, 11 October 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/502)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, may I take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Fifth
Committee (A/67/502) that is before the Assembly
today?
It was so decided.
The President: Before we begin to take action on
the recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations: requests under Article 19 of the Charter”
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 67/2).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 134.

(Serbia)

Agenda items 115 and 116
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly
The President: I welcome this opportunity to
address the Assembly at the start of the debate on
how to further strengthen the authority of the General
Assembly. This is the only body in which all countries
come together as sovereign equals to advance the aims
of the Charter of the United Nations. To be able to meet
the expectations of humankind, we must continue with
the process of revitalizing and modernizing it.
The topic we are focusing on today is not a new one.
As early as in 1948, the General Assembly recognized
for the first time the need to adapt to changing
circumstances. Near the end of the third session — in
fact, one day after the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights was adopted — an additional item was placed
on the agenda of the plenary. It called for the creation
of an ad hoc committee to consider methods and
procedures which would enable the General Assembly
to discharge its functions more effectively and
expeditiously. Decades later, we continue to try to
make headway in what has always been understood as
a work in progress.
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Alexander
Lomaia, Permanent Representative of Georgia, and
Mrs. Susan Waffa-Ogoo, Permanent Representative of
the Gambia, for leading the Ad Hoc Working Group on

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-54292 (E)

*1254292*

A/67/PV.23

the Revitalization of the General Assembly during the
sixty-sixth session. Its report, contained in document
A/66/891, together with resolution 66/294, adopted by
consensus on the final day of that session, will guide
our deliberations over the coming year.
For the first time, the two agenda items being
discussed today have been scheduled to immediately
follow the Secretary-General’s report on the work of
the Organization. This was done to highlight their
importance for the General Assembly. I believe it is
critical for Member States to consistently implement
that which has already been agreed in the Hall. That
should be a core principle of effective multilateralism
in the twenty-first century.
During this session, the Ad Hoc Working Group is
mandated to review the inventory of General Assembly
resolutions on revitalization, and to issue an updated
version in its report to the plenary. It is my sincere
hope that the findings of the review will suggest
that we are moving in the right direction. So far, we
have made some progress in a number of areas and,
as President, I will work tirelessly to ensure that the
process is further enhanced. I have already begun to
build closer relationships with the other main bodies
of the United Nations. I have started to exchange views
with the Secretary-General, the Presidents of the
Security Council and Economic and Social Council,
and the Heads of various United Nations entities and
specialized agencies, as well as with the Chairs of the
Main Committees. Yesterday, in fact, I met with this
last group. I thanked those in attendance for their
commitment to our shared goals, and reiterated my
belief that their deliberations are critical to advancing
the plenary’s agenda.
The increasing number of informal thematic debates
and high-level events has contributed to the relevance
of this body in addressing a growing number of global
issues. As mandated by resolution 66/294, I will consult
with Member States on the topics to be discussed, with
a view to achieving results-oriented outcomes at the
sixty-seventh session. As President, I will continue the
tradition established by my predecessors and convene
informal meetings of the plenary before and after
Group of 20 (G-20) preparatory meetings, as well as the
annual Heads of State or Government Summit.
In my view, however, we should work on increasing
the complementarity of both policies and actions
between the United Nations and key international
economic players. It is with this in mind that I have
2

proposed to launch a process leading to the establishment
of an effective consultative framework between the
General Assembly and international financial and
trade institutions, as well as groupings such as the
G-20. I believe that if we do this in the right way, the
key actors’ decisions can actually help strengthen and
further revitalize the General Assembly.
The issue before us today has been on the
General Assembly’s agenda for decades, and some
breakthroughs have been made. But I believe that much
more needs to be done. Let us take a step back for a
moment and consider the overall context in which the
process of revitalization is taking place. Whether in the
political, economic or technological realm, the world is
becoming increasingly volatile and unpredictable. The
overall scope and rapidity of the transformations we
face are unprecedented in the annals of history. This
global trend is likely to continue well into the future.
The speed of the changes taking place outside these
walls is increasingly outpacing the tempo of the changes
we are able to agree upon in this building. To retain
the capacity to change the world for the better, we will
need to find the strength to keep changing ourselves.I
am afraid that we are confronted with the choice of
either adapting to the new times, or simply being left
behind to watch the gap between our duties and our
capabilities widen by the day. I am not advocating
haste or revolution, but I am trying to instil a sense of
urgency.
I have tremendous faith in the United Nations. It is
doubtless the greatest humanist project of the twentieth
century, and I firmly believe that its greatness should
extend well into the twenty-first. But that is not going
to happen by default. A bold action is needed. It is up
to the Member States — and to the Member States
only — to propose and decide how to move forward.
I was elected to serve them, to serve the General
Assembly, and I pledge my unwavering commitment
to its endeavours. I believe we all are in favour of
revitalizing and thereby strengthening the authority of
the Assembly. Yet, as the nineteenth-century Scottish
social commentator Thomas Carlyle succinctly put
it, conviction is worthless unless it is converted into
conduct.
So let us conduct ourselves with the courage of our
convictions. Let us revitalize this institution so that
it remains, in the words of the Charter, a centre for
harmonizing the actions of nations.

12-54292

A/67/PV.23

Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. On behalf of
the members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), I
would like to thank you, Sir, for the level of priority you
intend to dedicate to the issue of the revitalization of the
General Assembly and for having taken the initiative
to start with that important topic immediately after the
report of the Secretary-General (A/67/1). You can count
on the Non-Aligned Movement to further convey the
message thereof.
At the outset, allow me to express the gratitude of the
members of the Non-Aligned Movement to Ambassador
Susan Waffa-Ogoo, Permanent Representative of
the Gambia, and Ambassador Alexander Lomaia,
Permanent Representative of Georgia, for their tireless
efforts and excellent work in co-chairing the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General
Assembly during the sixty-sixth session.
NAM welcomes the adoption of resolution 66/294
last September, by which the Assembly established
the Working Group to discuss the issues related to
the Assembly’s revitalization during the sixty-seventh
session, and to continue, in particular, to build on the
progress achieved at past Assembly sessions and on
previous resolutions, and to assess the status of their
implementation.
That assessment and a clear identification of the
underlying causes behind any lack of implementation
are of utmost importance if we are to progressively
eliminate the constraints that continue to prevent the
process of revitalizing the General Assembly from
realizing its full potential. In that regard, the Movement
reaffirms the validity and relevance of its principled
positions related to the process and reiterates its
willingness to contribute effectively and constructively
to the activities of the Working Group with a view to
identifying ways and means to strengthen the role and
authority of the Assembly.
We underline that the revitalization process is of
a political nature, aimed mainly at strengthening the
role of the General Assembly as the chief deliberative
policymaking and representative organ in the wider
United Nations system. The Movement therefore
reiterates the importance of the revitalization of the
Assembly as an item that deserves consideration on an
equal footing with other important topics and welcomes
the President’s decision y to address it at the beginning
of the current session, so that we can make better use of
today’s deliberations in ourwork throughout the session.
12-54292

In our view, new ideas on how to explore further ways
and means of reinvigorating the process in order to give
it a higher profile warrant our consideration.
The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes the need to
fully respect the functions and powers of each principal
organ of the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, and to maintain the balance among the
organs within their respective Charter-based functions
and powers. In that regard, the Security Council must
fully observe all Charter provisions as well as all
Assembly resolutions which clarify its relationship
with the Assembly and other principal organs.
NAM reiterates its concern, raised at previous
sessions, about the continuous attempt by the Security
Council to encroach upon the powers and prerogatives
of the General Assembly. Article 24 of the Charter does
not endow the Security Council with the competence to
address issues that fall within the functions and powers
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.
In the same vein, NAM calls on the Security
Council to submit a more explanatory, comprehensive
and analytical annual report to the General Assembly,
assessing the work of the Council. Furthermore, the
Movement is convinced that activities of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization
will contribute greatly to the whole process of
revitalization and supports the initiative of the creation
of an open-ended working group to study the proper
implementation of the Charter with respect to the
functional relationship of its main organs, in particular
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, as well as the initiative,
under the aforementioned Special Committee, on
strengthening the role of the Organization and
enhancing its effectiveness.
We reaffirm the role and authority of the General
Assembly, including in questions related to international
peace and security, and its intergovernmental,
inclusive and democratic character, which have
immensely contributed to the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the Charter and the goals
of the Organization. The Movement also reaffirms the
intergovernmental nature of the United Nations as such
and underscores the necessity to consult with Member
States on initiatives and activities undertaken within
the Organization and the right of all Member States to

3

A/67/PV.23

express their positions before the Assembly at any time
they wish to do so.
The General Assembly, as the policymaking
organ of the Organization, holds the authority and the
essential role of drafting the framework, upholding
the principles and identifying the objectives of the
wider United Nations system and its numerous organs,
agencies and programmes. Furthermore, the Assembly
should remain the principal organ that reviews the
work of all its subsidiary organs and bodies. It should
maintain its role and mandate in setting the priorities
of the United Nations in considering all budgetary and
administrative issues and reforms, including its absolute
authority to allocate and reallocate financial and human
resources, and in the appointment of senior officials
of the Secretariat, in accordance with the Charter
and relevant Assembly resolutions. In that regard, the
prerogatives of the Assembly, as the chief oversight
organ of the Organization, including on management
and procurement for peacekeeping operations, must be
respected.
While expressing its readiness to continue to
support all ongoing efforts to strengthen the central
role and authority of the General Assembly, NAM
wishes to state that it will oppose any approach that
seeks to undermine or minimize the achievements of
the Assembly, diminish its current role and functioning
or raise questions about its relevance and credibility.
It is clear that while the prerogatives of the
President of the General Assembly have not changed,
his role and activities have evolved over the past years,
in adapting to the growing activities, conferences
and initiatives of the Assembly, performing official
protocol functions, representing the Assembly around
the world, and making the Assembly’s work better
known and more visible. Therefore, the activities of the
Office of the President of the General Assembly have
increased drastically over the years. The agenda of the
Assembly and consequently that of its President include
a tremendous number of issues.
The expansion of activities of the General
Assembly — including the yearly adoption of more or
less 300 resolutions and decisions, the establishment of
working groups and facilitations that convene meetings
and consultations throughout the year — has made the
President’s presence and active participation necessary
during the whole session. The Assembly’s workload
is no longer limited to the main part of its session but
rather covers the whole period from the opening of the
4

session in September to its closing. This tremendous
and increasing activity should of course be matched
with the necessary resources, both human and financial.
NAM recalls in this regard that resolution 66/294
requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals, in
the context of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015, to review the budget allocations
to the Office of the President of General Assembly, and
emphasizes the importance of ensuring the effectiveness
of the Office, including through the strengthening of its
institutional memory. While noting with appreciation
the progress already achieved in that regard, we are of
the view that a particular effort should be devoted to
the implementation of the already existing resolutions
on this matter, as well as to identifying, during the
upcoming discussions of the Working Group, ways and
means to pursue this objective progressively and with
determination.
Among other prerogatives and mandates of the
General Assembly, the selection and appointment of
Secretaries-General of the United Nations is of utmost
importance. As for future Secretary-General mandates,
NAM reaffirms the need for the selection of the
Secretary-General to be transparent to and inclusive
of all Member States and emphasizes, therefore, the
need for the Assembly’s participation in the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General to be more
active, effective and efficient, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and in accordance with
the provisions of its resolutions 51/241, 60/286, 64/301
and 66/294. NAM stresses the importance of the full
implementation of those resolutions in the process of
the selection and appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that a reinvigorated
General Assembly, fully exerting its role and authority
in a more responsive environment, would significantly
contribute to the strengthening of the wider United
Nations system and to the improvement of international
governance and enhancement of multilateralism.
The President: I call on the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Tricot (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States.
The European Union and its member States are
strongly attached to effective multilateralism, with
the United Nations at its core. In this context, we are
12-54292

A/67/PV.23

committed to revitalization and to supporting efforts
aimed at strengthening the role and authority of the
General Assembly, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant resolutions. It is our wish that
the General Assembly, as the only intergovernmental
body with universal membership, be able to take up the
challenge of conciliating legitimacy and efficiency in a
context of emerging global challenges.
We believe that revitalization can be ensured only
when the General Assembly takes relevant action
on issues of common concern to the international
community. Ву doing so, it lives up to its role as one of
the principal organs of the United Nations.
The European Union and its member States
welcome the adoption of resolution 66/294. We would
like to stress the importance of the implementation of
all the Assembly’s resolutions, including those on the
revitalization of its work, and note the impact of such
implementation on the authority, effectiveness and
efficiency of the General Assembly. The revitalization
of the Assembly’s work is clearly interlinked with the
overall reform of the United Nations.
I would like to assure the Assembly that the
European Union and its member States will continue to
engage in a pragmatic manner in all future proceedings
on the matter.
Mr. Advani (India): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, upon your assumption of the presidency of
the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. You
carry an enormous responsibility on your shoulders,
and I wish you the very best for the year ahead.
Many of us with long living memories thought that
the decade that ended in 2010 was the most challenging
the international community had witnessed since the
Second World War. But today we know better. Never
before has the need for enduring calm and certainty in
international relations been felt as ardently as over the
past few years. The political upheaval in West Asia, the
Gulf and North Africa that began in early 2011 and is
still continuing is unprecedented, in terms of both scale
and impact. The ongoing global financial and economic
crisis, which began in the developed world and spread
southwards, has exposed the downside of globalization
and seriously undermined the Cold War-era structures
of global governance.
Our responses to the most challenging sociopolitical
and economic crises of the past 50 years cannot be
patchy and half-hearted. The process should begin here
12-54292

at the United Nations and must be guided by a sense of
urgency.
Today, I was listening very carefully to you, Sir,
when you made your introductory remarks, and I fully
agree with what you had to say regarding the urgency
of what we propose to do today. To quote what you said
this morning:
“I am afraid we are confronted with the choice
of either adapting to new times or simply being left
behind to watch the gap between our duties and our
capabilities widen by the day. I am not advocating
haste or revolution, but I am trying to instil a sense
of urgency.”
The ongoing global financial and economic crisis is
certainly asking us to do this immediately.
First and foremost, the deficit in global governance
must be addressed. The Security Council, whose
structure and set of governing norms harken back to the
realities of the late 1940s, is, I stress, an anachronism.
For the Council to reflect current geopolitical realities,
it needs to be expanded in both the permanent and
non-permanent categories. A reformed Council must
include countries that are willing to bear additional
burdens relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security and be able to sustain worldwide
campaigns against new and emerging global threats,
including terrorism and piracy. That is exactly what
you stressed, Sir, when you said that the gap between
our duties and capabilities is widening by the day.
Next, we need to revitalize the General Assembly.
We need to change it from a mere talking shop to a
place where transnational issues that impact each and
every one of us are addressed swiftly and truly global
solutions prescribed. We therefore appreciate the
importance that you, Sir, have attached to this issue.
You told Member States on the first day of the current
session, on 18 September 2012:
“To revitalize this most universal of multilateral
institutions is to renew our faith not only in the
United Nations programmes and purposes, but also
in each other. Member States can count on me to
assist and facilitate in advancing the revitalization
agenda, including the Security Council reform
process” (A/67/PV.1, p. 3).
We welcome your resolve, Mr. President. You can
count on India’s support in this regard.

5

A/67/PV.23

The starting point of my delegation’s position
is the firm belief that the General Assembly can
be revitalized only when its position as the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of
the United Nations is respected, both in letter and in
spirit. The Assembly should take the lead in setting the
global agenda and restoring the centrality of the United
Nations in the formulation of multilateral approaches
to resolving transnational issues. In particular,
revitalization must restore the primacy of the United
Nations in development matters.
Without prejudging the proceedings of the Ad Hoc
Working Group, which should start soon, I would like
to place on record the Indian delegation’s considered
views on the two agenda items under consideration
today.
First of all, it is critical that we establish a
respectful relationship between the General Assembly
and the Security Council with regard to their respective
mandates, in the spirit of the Charter. The Council
should not encroach upon the Assembly’s mandate
through extremely wide and permissive interpretations
of what constitutes a threat to international peace and
security, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression,
and of the situations under which it can take action
under Chapter VII of the Charter. The Assembly’s
competence in areas such as the process of standardsetting and codification of international law must be
scrupulously respected.
It is clear that the Council’s agenda is overburdened,
to say the least, because it has anointed itself with
the responsibility of dealing with issues that, though
seemingly important, leave it with less time to deal
with the real hotspots that constitute the real threats to
international peace and security. The balance between
the Assembly and the Council is only one of the
dimensions of what needs to be addressed.
Secondly, the Assembly, we believe, must have a
greater say in the process of selecting the SecretaryGeneral. The continued circumscription of the
Assembly’s role and responsibilities in the process of
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General needs to
change in the interests of the United Nations system in
general and the Assembly’s prerogatives in particular.
We could also identify objective criteria for
candidatures, including commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter and extensive leadership,
administrative and diplomatic experience, with due

6

regard being given to regional rotation and gender
equality. It would be equally useful and practical to
encourage the formal presentation of candidatures in a
manner that allows sufficient time for interaction with
Member States and also requires candidates to present
their views to all members of the General Assembly.
Thirdly, the Assembly and the other entities
that form part of the United Nations system must
reflect diplomatic best practices in their day-to-day
functioning. They have a lot to learn from Member
States in this regard.
In conclusion, let me re-emphasize the need to
discuss substantive measures that would strengthen the
role of the General Assembly as the chief deliberative,
policy-making and representative body of the
international community. The General Assembly can
expect India’s constructive support and participation in
these efforts.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): Egypt associates itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, I would like to express Egypt’s
appreciation of your decision, Mr. President, to include
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
at the top of your priorities during the sixty-seventh
session, and for your pledge to assist in advancing the
revitalization agenda.
I take this opportunity to thank the Permanent
Representatives of the Gambia and Georgia for their
efforts as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
during the sixty-sixth session, which led to the adoption
of resolution 66/294. That resolution and the report
(A/67/891) represent a strong basis for the discussions
during the current session.
The increasing challenges facing our world today
require, more than ever, a strong and responsive
General Assembly, so that this universal body may
play its leading role in global governance in the
political, economical and social spheres. For more
than two decades, Member States have adopted by
consensus resolutions containing specific measures
to revitalize the work of the General Assembly as the
main deliberative, policy-making and representative
principal organ of the United Nations. These measures
were not fully implemented, due to the lack of political

12-54292

A/67/PV.23

will to ensure that the Assembly fulfils its mandate
according to the Charter.
Egypt believes that the first step towards achieving
tangible progress in the revitalization of the Assembly
is to transform decisions into actions. The Ad Hoc
Working Group should continue to evaluate the status
of implementation of the provisions of all previously
adopted resolutions to identify the obstacles hindering
their implementation, and then specify what should be
done to overcome them. One of the main obstacles facing
the revitalization of the work of the Assembly is the
Security Council’s continued encroachment on its role
and functions. The Council tends to redefine the scope
of its competence through a broader interpretation of
the issues that may constitute a threat to international
peace and security.
We should strive to establish a mutually reinforcing
and complementary relationship between the principal
organs of the United Nations. It is not sufficient to
claim that each individual body performs its functions
in accordance with the Charter. It is necessary to
promote greater coordination among them. The General
Assembly should not be a mere forum for deliberations.
It must also be a forum for finding solutions. It should
assume a more proactive role in responding to emerging
challenges of common concern to the international
community. The adoption of resolutions 66/253 A and
66/253 B on the situation in Syria shows clearly that
the Assembly can make decisions where the Council
cannot.
As the current Chair of the Arab Group, Egypt,
along with all the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement, is eager to see the State of Palestine become
a full Member of the United Nations. The least we can
expect at this stage of the current session is that the
General Assembly will adopt a resolution to upgrade
Palestine’s status to that of a non-member observer
State at the United Nations, proving that the Assembly
supports the principles of justice and equality without
selectivity or politicization.
Egypt also commends you, Mr. President, for
choosing “Bringing about adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations by peaceful means”
as the overarching theme for the sixty-seventh session of
the General Assembly. It is completely consistent with
the objective of strengthening the role of the Assembly
in the areas of international peace and security and
serving the noble cause of preventing new conflicts and
resolving existing ones. The Assembly should continue
12-54292

to increase the visibility of its work by interacting more
with civil society, non-governmental organizations and
the private sector.
Mr. President, your Office should be further
strengthened through the allocation of more financial
and human resources from the United Nations regular
budget so that it can keep up with the growing demands,
workload and responsibilities of the President of the
General Assembly from one session to the next. It is not
acceptable that the budget allocation for the Office has
not increased since 1998. The establishment in 2010 of
the Trust Fund in support of the Office of the President
was not the best solution. No contribution was made to
the Trust Fund during the sixty-sixth session. That is
why the President’s Office should not have to rely on
voluntary contributions. Resources should be increased
from within the regular budget in order not to affect the
credibility or impartiality of the President’s position.
The selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral is yet another issue of great interest to the
wider membership. The General Assembly should be
more involved at an early stage in the selection process
and in identifying candidates for this key post.
Ms. Flores (Honduras), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly is linked to other processes under the wider
umbrella of the United Nations reform. It should not
be considered in isolation from the wider context of
institutional reform of the United Nations. There is a
dire need to address every element of the reform process
with equal attention. The issue of the revitalization
of the Assembly lies at the core of that process. In
conclusion, I would particularly like to thank the
President for his introduction of this item this morning,
and for his inspirational statement. I would also like
to assure him of the Egyptian delegation’s full support
for all his efforts to enhance the role of the General
Assembly in achieving peace, stability and prosperity
for all.
Mr. Singh (Malaysia): On behalf of my delegation,
I wish to thank the President for convening this meeting
on an issue that is of particular importance to us and
that we feel strongly about. It is pleasing to note that
the President feels as strongly about it as we do. I would
also like to express Malaysia’s appreciation to the
Permanent Representatives of Georgia and the Gambia
for their efforts and leadership in steering the Ad Hoc

7

A/67/PV.23

Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly during the Assembly’s sixtysixth session. We appreciate the convening of four
separate thematic meetings that enabled Member States
to clearly focus on various aspects of revitalization, one
theme at a time. Those discussions, along with all the
efforts by Member States, culminated in the report of
the Ad Hoc Working Group (A/66/891), for which we
should also thank the co-Chairs. On that note, I wish to
align my statement with that made by Algeria on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Year after year, revitalization remains a priority
issue for the General Assembly. Despite the attention
it attracts, we have managed to achieve only qualified
success in revitalizing it. Over the years, we have
seen some improvements in the Assembly’s working
methods, but they are minor. We have still failed to
address the real issue of why the General Assembly must
be revitalized. We should not forget that the key word
here is “revitalization”, not “minor improvements”.
The General Assembly is unquestionably the chief
deliberative policymaking and representative organ
of the United Nations. It is the highest authoritative
body of the United Nations, since it represents all 193
Member States. We must therefore accord it the role
and authority it rightly deserves.
My delegation firmly believes that the lack of
implementation of General Assembly resolutions
continues to be the biggest stumbling block to
enhancing its role and effectiveness. We reiterate
that no other weakness of the General Assembly
undermines its relevance or effectiveness more than the
failure to implement resolutions. Malaysia commends
the Ad Hoc Working Group’s decision to continue its
review of the Assembly’s resolutions on revitalization.
We look forward to receiving the updated inventory
of those resolutions, which will give Member States
a better understanding of the reasons behind the
failure to implement them. The Ad Hoc Working
Group could then discuss the issue and find ways to
overcome problems so as to ensure that the resolutions
are implemented. This is the first step towards the
ultimate goal of realizing the full implementation of all
Assembly resolutions.
Malaysia continues to take the issue of
encroachment seriously. We cannot emphasize enough
the need for all principal organs, especially the two
leading organs — the General Assembly and the
Security Council — to faithfully respect each other’s

8

mandates, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. Both organs must work together in consultation
and cooperation to create a more harmonious working
relationship. Encroachment by one organ on the
mandate of the other would severely affect not only the
functioning of the organ itself, but the entire United
Nations machinery.
It is obvious that the role and activities of the
President of the General Assembly have evolved
significantly over the years. A greater number of issues
and agenda items are now considered by the Assembly
than was the case just a few years ago. Furthermore,
the workload of the General Assembly now spans
the whole year rather than being limited to its main
session. It is therefore only natural that the Office of
the President should be provided with the additional
resources required to enable the President to efficiently
and effectively perform the role that has been entrusted
to him or her by the United Nations Charter.
While we recognize the benefits of the Trust
Fund established to assist in the funding of the work
of the President of the Assembly, it is nonetheless
important that the funding from the regular budget be
increased so that the Office of the President will no
longer be dependent on the Trust Fund and voluntary
contributions. In this regard, Malaysia looks forward
to proposals to review the budget of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly for the biennium
2014-2015.
On the subject of the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral, Malaysia firmly believes that the Assembly
needs to play a more meaningful role in the selection
process. That process needs to be more transparent and
inclusive of all Member States, as the Secretary-General
represents all the Members of the United Nations and
not merely the members of the Security Council. It is
therefore important, when selecting and appointing
the Secretary-General in future, to implement past
resolutions, especially paragraphs 17 to 22 of the annex
to resolution 60/286.
There is an undeniable need to focus on the
substantive aspects of the revitalization process and to
ensure that the General Assembly continues in its role
as the principal policy-making and norm-setting organ
of the United Nations. The issue of the revitalization
of the General Assembly has been the subject of
plenary debate since 1991. Given the number of years
this issue has been considered, it is high time that all
Member States approach the subject with openness
12-54292

A/67/PV.23

and the necessary political will to realize tangible and
substantial progress. If the pace of reform continues to
be as slow as it has been in the past, we will face the
awkward task of revitalizing the revitalization process.
This is something we should certainly avoid.
Mr. Sergeyev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the President for convening
today’s meeting.
The Russian delegation intends to continue to
participate constructively in the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly at this session. We hope that the work of this
Group will be balanced, realistic and depoliticized and
will seek to enhance the effectiveness of the General
Assembly. All initiatives and proposals must be based
on the principle of strict respect for the distribution of
powers among the principal United Nations organs, as
set out in the Charter.
The emphasis in the work of the Group must be
placed on the issue of improving the working methods
of the General Assembly and streamlining its agenda.
The Assembly’s programme of work is in many ways
overburdened, and it would therefore be appropriate to
review the possibility of transferring some of its agenda
items to a biennial or triennial cycle. It would also be
appropriate to lighten the workload in terms of highlevel meetings during the week of the general debate,
when, due to the presence in New York of Heads of State
and Government and Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
there is an especially busy programme of events and
meetings, including bilateral meetings. We should limit
the number of high-level meetings during that period,
and the remaining events should be evenly spread over
the entire session of the Assembly.
We are prepared to examine proposals to enhance
the institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly. However, we would point
out that, as with any proposal that has financial
implications for the United Nations regular budget,
this issue must receive full consideration, in line with
existing procedures, that is, in the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the
Fifth Committee. As to the General Assembly’s role in
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General, Russia
has consistently advocated maintaining the current
practice, based on Article 97 of the Charter, according
to which the Secretary-General is appointed by the
General Assembly upon the recommendation of the
Security Council.
12-54292

With respect to the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions, it seems that, to a large extent,
this problem is related to the degree of realism and
achievability of the goals and provisions of the
original resolutions. Before a decision is proposed, it
is important for us to ask ourselves how implementable
it is in principle. Such an approach should also be
followed in the Group’s own work. We suggest that we
adopt the line of “less is better”.
Mr. Yaroshevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The Republic of Belarus attaches high priority to
strengthening the role of the General Assembly. We
support an enhanced role for the Assembly in resolving
issues of international peace and security, in line with
the United Nations Charter, and we want to maintain
a balance between the principal organs of the United
Nations in considering all issues on the United Nations
agenda. We highlight the need to ensure proper
implementation of General Assembly resolutions, to
further enhance the role of the President of the Assembly
and his Office, and to improve the methods for electing
the Secretary-General and the working methods of the
General Assembly.
The Belarus delegation commends the work of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session.
We are pleased to note the interactive debates that were
held with the Chairs of the Main Committees of the
General Assembly and representatives of the Secretariat
and the effective work of the Chairs in organizing the
negotiation process.
This year, on the initiative of the Non-Aligned
Movement, together with other participants in the
negotiating process, a very important step, in our view,
was taken towards enhancing the General Assembly’s
relevance and visibility. We can now can see it quite
clearly when we simply open the Journal of the United
Nations. Resolution 66/294, for the first time in many
years, established the order in which the principal
organs are set out in the Journal, in line with Article
7 of the Charter — that is, with the General Assembly
first and then the Security Council. That is in line with
the tradition that was followed in the early years of the
Organization’s existence.
With regard to the current session, the delegation of
Belarus will continue to participate actively in the Ad
Hoc Working Group. In particular, we believe that it is
now urgently necessary to design and adopt mechanisms
that will provide clear procedures for agreeing on
9

A/67/PV.23

the fielding of candidatures for the Assembly’s Main
Committees and an order of rotation for the chairs and
rapporteurs from the regional groups. Adopting such
a mechanism will facilitate enhancing the role and
authority of the Assembly, streamline current practices
and establish a clear mechanism for the election of
Chairs and bureaux of the Main Committees. We call
upon our partners to take an active part in working on
the issue in order to achieve an effective and mutually
acceptable decision.
Belarus is convinced that stepping up work to
revitalize the General Assembly will also help us to
make progress in the work of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization. In that
regard, we express our support for the initiative of
Venezuela and Cuba, which is being considered in the
framework of the Special Committee. Issues raised by
our friends deserve serious and balanced examination,
considering the functions and competencies of the
General Assembly and the Security Council and the
substantive decisions taken by them.
It is strategically important that, in the work to
reanimate the activities of the General Assembly, the
letter and spirit of the Charter be followed, as the
Charter establishes that universal organ in the primary
role, with its higher flexibility and capacity to promptly,
appropriately and effectively respond to current issues
of international life. In other words, the Assembly
should be the world’s “number one situation room”
and should be considered as such. In that connection,
the Belarus delegation shares the view of the President
of the General Assembly stated earlier in the meeting
that the General Assembly must “adapt... to the new
times”. The world that is changing before our very eyes,
with globalization and technological revolutions and
other types of revolutions, requires that the process of
optimizing the work of the Assembly be a permanent,
even uninterrupted, process.
Successful businessmen are convinced that they
have to work every minute of the day on improving
business processes. Businessmen are responsible
for businesses and their employees, and they make
profit their target. All of us regard as of paramount
importance the more serious and important values of
our shared responsibility, which is unconditional and
far greater. Therefore our work — the work of the
General Assembly — must conform to the very highest

10

contemporary standards of efficacy, quality and
practical results.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
present, the international situation is undergoing
complex and profound changes. Under the new
situation, the international community expects the
United Nations to play a greater role in safeguarding
world peace, promoting common development and
strengthening international cooperation. The General
Assembly is the Organization’s pre-eminent policy
deliberation body and one of its most important Charter
bodies. The numerous Member States, particularly the
developing countries, would like to see the General
Assembly further enhance its prestige and efficiency
and better fulfil the duties entrusted to it by the Charter.
The revitalization of the General Assembly bears
on the vital interests of all Member States and has
important, far-reaching implications for enhancing the
prestige and credibility of the United Nations. China
commends the President of the General Assembly for
making revitalization of the Assembly one of his priority
items and supports giving full play to the Assembly’s
policy deliberation function. The Assembly, on the
basis of the development of the international situation
and targeting the salient challenges faced by the United
Nations in all fields, should emphasize deliberating
on and dealing with important questions of common
concern to Member States, particularly those involving
the vital interests of the developing countries.
The General Assembly should give particular
attention to, and step up efforts on, development issues
so as to play a greater role in advancing international
cooperation for development. It should strengthen its
arrangements for division of work and cooperation
with organs such as the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council so that each can deploy
its full strength and step up information exchange and
interaction.
On matters regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security, the General Assembly
should strengthen its coordination and cooperation with
the Security Council, on the basis of the division of
work set out in the Charter. China supports improving
the Assembly’s working methods, simplifying its
decision-making procedures and enhancing its
efficiency. Enhancing the quality of reports and
documents should be emphasized. Reports should be
concise and clear, and analytical recommendations
should be well targeted. Pragmatic, action-oriented
12-54292

A/67/PV.23

work styles should be developed. Member States
should also respect the solemnity of General Assembly
resolutions and ensure their full implementation so
as to safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the
Assembly.
The effective functioning of the Office of the
President is an important guarantee of the smooth work
of the Assembly. China supports the strengthening
of the Office of the President in both manpower and
budgetary terms, particularly in order to resolve
current difficulties faced by developing countries when
carrying out the functions of the presidency.
The numerous Member States have high hopes
for the revitalization of the General Assembly. China
firmly supports the President’s efforts to that end, for
a more effective role for the Assembly in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the promotion of global
development. China wishes to continue to advance
the implementation of the series of resolutions on the
revitalization of the Assembly within the framework of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly. We hope that the work
will move steadily forward on the basis of democratic
consultations, going from easier to more difficult
issues in an orderly and gradual manner. China will
work with other Member States for good progress on
the important agenda item of the revitalization of the
General Assembly during the current session of the
Assembly.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Cuba endorses the statement made by the
representative of Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which represents the position of 120
countries. We wish to add some remarks in our national
capacity.
First, the Cuban delegation wishes to thank the
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly for
their commendable work during the sixty-sixth session
of the General Assembly. Under their leadership, the
Ad Hoc Working Group contributed to strengthening
the leading role that the General Assembly plays
in the system of international relations and in the
Organization.
It is unacceptable that numerous General Assembly
resolutions, despite being an important body of
law, have not been implemented. That also applies
to the many resolutions on the revitalization of the

12-54292

General Assembly, whose level of implementation is
unacceptably low despite their having been adopted by
consensus. As we have stated on previous occasions,
the task of revitalizing the General Assembly cannot
be limited to speeches. The General Assembly enjoys
all the legal prerogatives necessary to act. We therefore
hope that this year, the Ad Hoc Working Group will
adopt a broad and flexible agenda aimed at achieving
ambitious goals.
The General Assembly is the principal organ for
deliberation, the adoption of policies and representation
of the United Nations. Owing to its broad and democratic
nature, it enjoys legitimacy and great prestige. It is
the maximum expression of the principle of sovereign
equality among States. The revitalization of its work is
an issue of the greatest importance.
The main obstacle to revitalizing the work of the
General Assembly is the lack of political will on the
part of certain States that attempt to put their narrow
political interests above the views of the majority.
The revitalization issue is therefore not a technical
matter, as some countries would have us believe, but
fundamentally a political issue. It is necessary to strike
the appropriate balance among the principal organs of
the United Nations, in accordance with the Charter.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its concern over
the attempts of the Security Council to establish legal
norms and definitions, overlooking the fact that, under
Article 13 of the Charter, the progressive development
of international law and its codification are the
exclusive responsibility of the General Assembly.
Those dangerous trends and the increasing broadening
of the agenda of the Security Council beyond its
competence must immediately cease because they are
clear violations of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and restrict the debate, transparency
and democratic way in which the problems of today’s
world should be addressed.
We would like to take this opportunity to urgently
appeal once again for a radical reform of the Security
Council that transforms it into the transparent,
participatory and democratic organ demanded by the
international community. The action of the Security
Council and its members is subject to international law,
in particular the Charter.
We cannot speak of an Organization in consonance
with the system of contemporary international relations
without reforming the Security Council and placing

11

A/67/PV.23

the General Assembly at the centre of debate and
multilateral work. The revitalization of the General
Assembly is essential in order to achieve a genuine
reform of the United Nations. We cannot be satisfied
with our work until the General Assembly fully
exercises all its functions and powers.
Cuba reiterates that only a universal and democratic
organ, such as the General Assembly, can tackle the
existing global problems, whose solutions exceed the
limited capacity of a country or a group of countries,
however powerful they believe themselves to be.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
thanks the President for convening this important
debate on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly, which it fervently supports. Indonesia
commends his strong commitment to strengthening
the General Assembly’s role in line with the Charter of
the United Nations. We pledge our full support for his
efforts and those of Member States towards realizing an
effective Assembly.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We welcome the recent adoption of resolution
66/294, mandating the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
to continue its work on the issue during the sixtyseventh session. Resolution 66/294 underscores the
zeal of delegations to reinforce the gravity of the
reform process of the Assembly as an invaluable United
Nations principal organ.
That the Assembly alone uniquely reflects the
aspirations and concerns of all Member States must
elevate the status of its revitalization efforts. We all
need to participate to adequately support the work
on strengthening the Assembly’s role. We therefore
stress the importance of this year’s Ad Hoc Working
Group continuing to build upon the results of previous
sessions and how vital it is for us to support the Group
as it carries out its work. Allow me to make a few
observations on advancing the work of that Group
First, we emphasize updating and utilizing the
inventory chart annexed to the annual reports of the
Ad Hoc Working Group. The chart has proved to be a
valuable tool in systematically identifying, monitoring
and proposing solutions to the issue of the Assembly’s
revitalization. While my delegation is mindful of
the sensitive nature of that exercise, with its obvious
12

political, legal and budgetary implications, it is
important for everyone to be aware of both the deficit
and the progress in the implementation of relevant
United Nations resolutions and decisions on making the
Assembly robust.
We therefore reiterate our request that the Secretariat
update the chart and provide the Working Group
with information about the challenges and obstacles
hindering the timely and concrete implementation of
all relevant resolutions pertaining to the various themes
stated in the inventory charts.
Regarding the selection and appointment of the
heads of United Nations agencies and senior officials
of the Secretariat, we stress that their selection and
appointment must also conform to the criteria of a more
balanced geographical representation.
Secondly, we underline that a faithful implementation
of United Nations resolutions is vital to strengthening
the oversight role of the Assembly. In that regard, we
concur that a strong oversight role of the Assembly is
needed in the management and procurement of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as in the wider
United Nations system’s post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts, including in the areas of preventive diplomacy,
conflict resolution and mediation.
Indonesia is pleased that the theme of this year’s
session focuses on the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means. That focus should be sustained. As
we have already proposed, it would therefore be fitting
that, just as peacekeeping issues have a forum in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly, and post-conflict peacebuilding
issues in the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the
issues of preventive diplomacy, mediation and peaceful
conflict resolution should also have a dedicated United
Nations intergovernmental forum. We also believe that
the Assembly, which is one of the parent bodies of the
PBC, should play a more effective role in guiding and
supporting the Commission’s work.
As my third and last point, I would submit that it is
not for any shortage of resolutions or decisions that the
Assembly has not yet fully claimed its Charter role as
the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations. It is chiefly the lack of
political will and necessary support that is the cause.
The many mutually shared and complex problems of
our globalized world today will not be solved if we do
not come together and strengthen the United Nations

12-54292

A/67/PV.23

multilateral framework that we ourselves created for
that purpose. Let us rise above our differences and
empower and support the Assembly to perform its work
effectively.
I affirm Indonesia’s readiness to work actively
and constructively with all delegations in our common
endeavour to enhance the authority, effectiveness and
efficiency of the General Assembly.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first of all like to thank the Ambassadors of the
Gambia and Georgia for their efforts as co-Chairs of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly during the sixty-sixth
session. While aligning ourselves with the statement
made by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, my delegation would like to
make the following remarks.
With regard to enhancing the role and the authority
of the General Assembly, my country’s delegation
believes that the revitalization of the work of the
Assembly is a key element in the comprehensive reform
of the United Nations since, aside from the Assembly’s
role in establishing the norms and codification of
international law, it is the principal deliberative and
decision-making body and the most representative
entity of the Organization. We affirm the need to
continue strengthening the work and the role of that
important organ by stepping up our efforts. At the
same time, we must ensure that the relevant Assembly
resolutions are implemented as a basic requirement for
making progress in that area.
We believe that enhancing the role and authority of
the Assembly means including urgent issues of common
interest to the international community in its agenda.
We must also ensure that the Assembly adapts rapidly to
the global changes so that it maintains its strength and
effectiveness and is able to meet emerging challenges.
At the same time, we would like to reiterate that the
Assembly should organize thematic debates. Such
debates are a forum for interaction, allowing exchanges
of views on current issues of great international
importance to the Assembly. It would also enable us to
interact with civil society. We hope that such debates
will continue under Mr. Jeremić’s presidency of the
Assembly during this sixty-seventh session in order to
achieve tangible and specific outcomes.
Strengthening the role and authority of the
Assembly also requires that its role in maintaining

12-54292

international peace and security be recognized.
Although Articles 12 and 24 of the Charter invest the
Security Council with the primary responsibility in
that area, that responsibility should not be the Council’s
sole domain. In our view, the Assembly must respond
more rapidly to relevant issues that affect international
peace and security.
We also affirm the need to improve the quality
and content of the annual Security Council reports
submitted to the Assembly; they should be more
analytical and comprehensive so as to reﬂect the context
in which the Council resolutions were adopted and the
situations in which the Council was unable to take any
action. Periodic meetings should be held among the
heads of the principal organs of the United Nations, and
Member States should be informed of the outcomes of
those meetings on a regular basis. It is also important to
promote cooperation and coordination and exchanges
of information between the Assembly and those
organs through regular and transparent mechanisms
that specifically provide for the participation of the
countries directly affected.
With regard to improving the working methods
of the Assembly, my delegation believes that, while
a number of resolutions have been adopted with a
view to improving the working methods of the Main
Committees and the convening of high-level meetings,
it is nevertheless important to study thoroughly some
relevant proposals, such as the need to streamline
the work of the Committees, with the support of all
Member States. We must also facilitate the access
of developing countries to detailed and updated
information on the websites of the Main Committees
and make such information available in all the official
languages, including Arabic. We should ensure that
resolutions, reports and other documents are concise
and that there is an exchange of best practices among
the Committees, taking into account the specific nature
of each Committee. Arrangements for strengthening
the coordination of efforts and setting up schedules
for high-level meetings so that they are optimally
distributed, for the benefit of all, should also be
thoroughly considered.
Regarding the appointment of the Secretary-General
and the senior managers of the Secretariat, I reiterate
our thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
efforts to organize broader consultations with Member
States, based on cooperation and transparency, in order
to enhance the effectiveness of the Organization’s

13

A/67/PV.23

performance. We hope that during this session we will
focus on improving the selection process for senior
managers of the Secretariat, while taking into account
the recommendations set out in the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit (A/65/34), submitted during the sixtyfifth session.
With regard to strengthening the support of the
Office of the President of the General Assembly, we
believe that it is necessary to provide the Office with
adequate financial and human resources to allow the
President of the Assembly to fulfil his function as well
as possible. That support should at least reflect the
changes in the regular budget. We also stress the notion
of strengthening the Assembly’s institutional memory
and benefiting from lessons learned, in the interest of a
smooth transition from one presidency to the next.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
support for resolution 66/294, adopted in September,
which provides for the establishment of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly. In our view, the priority of that
Working Group should be to assess the difficulties
in implementing resolutions so that the revitalization
process can move forward.
Mr. Pope (United States of America): The United
States would like to add its thanks to last year’s co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly, Ambassador
Waffa-Ogoo of the Gambia and Ambassador Lomaia
of Georgia, for their attention to this issue during the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly. Their
leadership culminated in the recently adopted resolution
66/294, which serves as a basis for our continued work
on the topic. We also offer the incoming co-Chairs our
full support once they are named. We look forward to
working with fellow Member States as we consider
the best options for revitalizing the General Assembly
and build on the recommendations that we made to the
Working Group this past session.
The United States is committed to multilateral
engagement and a strong United Nations system. We
recognize the important contributions of the General
Assembly to fulfilling the mission of the United
Nations. We hope that our discussions and the efforts
of the Working Group will be constructive in allowing
us to consider how we can improve working methods to
better enable the Assembly to carry out its work.

14

We continue to advocate for measures to ensure the
improved efficiency, effectiveness and transparency
of the United Nations system. Therefore, streamlining
and prioritizing the agenda and improving the practices
and working methods of the Main Committees will be
the primary focus of our interactions with the Working
Group during the sixty-seventh session.
As part of our efforts to ensure that the General
Assembly remains relevant, we should also encourage
the more timely publishing of General Assembly
resolutions soon after their adoption. Informing
others of our work will highlight the important issues
that we cover and would encourage more expeditious
implementation of General Assembly resolutions by
Member States. Just as providing information to the
world outside of New York is important, the General
Assembly would be better served by increased
interaction between the heads of the principal organs
of the United Nations and the Chairs of the Main
Committees and the President of the General Assembly.
That could perhaps be accomplished by exchanging
views and priorities at the start of each new General
Assembly session. Greater cooperation and increased
coordination among the organs of the United Nations
are critical for enabling us to achieve our goal of
streamlining agendas and reducing wasteful overlap.
We will continue to work with other delegations on
our proposals to improve working methods, such as
discontinuing the practice of adopting resolutions on
outdated or obscure topics, merging or clustering items
closely related in substance, proposing comprehensive
or omnibus resolutions, and encouraging Member
States to exercise greater discipline in their submission
of draft resolutions, that is, to be more deliberate in
keeping their statements succinct and to focus on key
themes. We encourage Member States to consider
reviewing existing resolutions biennially or triennially,
rather than annually, and to exercise greater discipline
in their submission of draft resolutions.
We also propose setting deadlines for achieving
objectives, encouraging General Assembly working
groups to complete their work on time, and rationalizing
the General Assembly’s meeting schedule to allow for
widespread Member State participation. We hope to
see progress on those goals during the sixty-seventh
session.
The roles of the General Assembly and the Security
Council in selecting the Secretary-General are clearly
defined in the Charter. The General Assembly should
12-54292

A/67/PV.23

not, as a priority for its own revitalization, consider
pursuing changes to the Council’s role in selecting a
candidate for Secretary-General.
My delegation looks forward to working closely
with the President of the General Assembly and with
our counterparts from other delegations towards a
constructive dialogue on concrete reform.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate Mr. Vuk Jeremić, President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, on his assumption
of duties as President and to thank him for his leadership
in advancing the revitalization agenda. I would also like
to extend my sincere gratitude to Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz
Al-Nasser, President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-sixth session, as well as to Mr. Alexander
Lomaia, Permanent Representative of Georgia, and
Mrs. Susan Waffa-Ogoo, Permanent Representative of
Gambia, who served as co-Chairs of the previous Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly. Their initiative and dedicated
work culminated in a report (A/66/891) that included
the text of resolution 66/294, which was adopted by
consensus on the final day of the previous session.
As the body in which all 193 Member States
participate, the General Assembly is universally
recognized as the most representative organ of the
United Nations. The General Assembly is mandated
to address any issue and questions falling under its
responsibility, in accordance with the Charter, except
as provided in Article 12.1.
During the course of this year’s general debate,
which was convened under the theme of “Bringing about
adjustment or settlement of international disputes or
situations by peaceful means”, we witnessed a number of
thoughtful statements by dignitaries along with various
side events on the full spectrum of international issues.
That demonstrated once again the importance of this
body in multilateral diplomacy. The General Assembly
can offer a useful forum as we endeavour to adapt to
today’s complex society. In the words of Japanese Prime
Minister Yoshihiko Noda’s address to the General
Assembly on 26 September, we need “to give adequate
consideration to future generations and solve disputes
calmly by reason under rules” (A/67/PV.9, p. 47) . The
revitalization of the General Assembly is thus of high
importance. Building upon mutual trust and confidence
among Member States, we must make steady progress
towards achieving feasible and realistic results on this
matter.
12-54292

During this first week of substantive debate on
individual items on the agenda of the current session,
let me present Japan’s general views on several key
issues.
First, it is essential to strengthen the relations
between the General Assembly and the other principal
organs of the United Nations. With respect to the
Security Council in particular, while the Council
bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the General Assembly
may play a complementary role when the Council fails
to fully exercise its functions, as in the case of the
Syrian Arab Republic. Such functions of the General
Assembly highlight the necessity of establishing a
better relationship between the two organs. Regular
consultations between the Presidents of the Security
Council and the General Assembly would be one
practical way of proceeding in that regard. We look
forward to a debate on the annual report of the Security
Council in November this year with a view to deepening
discussions on the matter.
Secondly, with a view to enhancing its public
awareness, the General Assembly must demonstrate to
the people of the world that it is an organ that is capable
of responding adequately to emerging challenges of
common concern and of producing results-oriented
outcomes. In that regard, thematic debates on relevant
current issues, such as that held in April 2012 on
disaster risk reduction, are most welcome. That practice
has proved to be a useful instrument for encouraging
broader and more flexible exchanges of views outside
the constraints of the formal agenda. Resolution 66/290
on human security, adopted by consensus in September,
is another notable achievement of the General
Assembly. I am confident that the General Assembly
will continue to make notable contributions to putting
human security into practice.
The useful outcomes produced by the General
Assembly lose their meaning if they are not implemented
and followed up. Repeated non-implementation
of General Assembly resolutions would over time
risk diminishing the authority of the Assembly. My
delegation will actively participate in the work of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly in conducting a review
of the inventory of General Assembly resolutions as
agreed upon during the previous session.
Thirdly, it is important to rationalize the work of
the General Assembly with a view to better enabling it
15

A/67/PV.23

to focus its activities on current challenges and events
of common interest to the international community.
It is appropriate, therefore, to continue to consider
ways to streamline and prioritize the agenda of the
General Assembly and its Main Committees. Various
possibilities, such as having biennial or triennial
reviews of agenda items and clustering or eliminating
agenda items, should be given proper consideration,
based on the relevant resolutions.
We also need to consider how to improve working
methods so as to carry out the Assembly’s work
efficiently. For instance, we recall that Member States
were not able to reach consensus on the composition of a
working group on sustainable development goals before
the opening of the current session, as was mandated in
the outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development (resolution 66/288, annex).
The question of the underrepresentation of the AsiaPacific States, in terms of equitable geographical
representation, might also be posed in that regard.
In the light of the considerable importance of the
issue, Japan looks forward to having constructive
discussions aimed at further enhancing the role of the
General Assembly. I would like to reiterate once again
Japan’s commitment to making an active contribution
to that end.
Mr. Mustafizur Rahman (Bangladesh): I am
pleased to address the General Assembly plenary in
this joint debate. Allow me first of all to join previous
speakers in thanking Ambassador Waffa-Ogoo of the
Gambia and Ambassador Lomaia of Georgia for their
excellent work during the past session as the co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly. Their joint
stewardship resulted in the adoption of resolution
66/294 in September, which we consider to be a very
good basis for future discussion on the matter.
The revitalization of the General Assembly is a
critical component of the wider reform of the United
Nations. The continued attention the issue is receiving
indicates the collective desire of the United Nations
membership to see the General Assembly attain its
rightful place in global discourse. We are aware that
reform is a continuous process, but we cannot discuss
the issue ad infinitum. As we will embark on another
round of discussions soon, we must make sure that the
exercise results, within a reasonable period of time, in
decisions that can be implemented.

16

There are a number of issues relating to the
revitalization of the General Assembly that have been
discussed at length over the past years and have been
reflected in the relevant resolutions. The views and
positions of my delegation are generally in line with
the statement made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I will, however,
touch on a few points to reinforce our position.
The objective of the revitalization of the
Assembly is to strengthen its role and position as the
chief deliberative, legislative, policy-making and
representative body of the international community.
The General Assembly should take the lead role
in setting the global agenda and in formulating
multilateral approaches to solving global concerns. The
General Assembly is the forum in which all members
of the international community have the opportunity
to exchange ideas on an equal footing about issues of
common interest and where global consensus can be
reached and solutions to challenges can be found.
We recognize the importance of close cooperation
and coordination among the principal organs of
the United Nations, especially among the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council. In that regard, we welcome the
regular meetings being held between the heads of
those organs. That practice should continue in order to
promote system-wide coherence and effectiveness.
There is a need for the two leading organs of the
United Nations, the General Assembly and the Security
Council, to work in concert and create a harmonious
relationship for maintaining peace and security and
fostering development. In so doing, both organs should
respect each other’s mandates as provided for in the
Charter. We are concerned about the encroachment of
the Security Council on the prerogatives of the General
Assembly. It is being done through extremely broad
interpretations of Charter provisions on threats to
international peace and security.
Although several General Assembly resolutions
have been adopted expressing concern on the issue, the
encroachment unfortunately continues and has even
increased in recent years. In our view, the agenda of
the Council is already overburdened with real threats
to international peace and security, leaving it little time
to deal with peripheral issues, and it should therefore
desist from doing so.

12-54292

A/67/PV.23

The role and activities of the President of the General
Assembly have significantly evolved over the years. It is
essential to ensure sufficient and predictable financial
and human resources for the efficient and successful
functioning of the Office of the President. We welcome
the measures already adopted for its strengthening. We
also welcome the decision to allocate dedicated staff
within the Secretariat for coordinating the transitions
between Presidents. It is important that funding for the
Office from the regular budget be increased, so as to
avoid having the President be dependent on the Trust
Fund and on voluntary contributions to manage the
Office. In our view, such dependence would affect the
credibility and impartiality of that important position.
The General Assembly should have a strong role
in the appointments of the senior management of
the United Nations Secretariat. The selection and
appointment process of the Secretary-General should
be more transparent and inclusive. The process should
involve the entire membership of the United Nations.
Many resolutions have been adopted assigning the
General Assembly a greater role in the process.
We regret that most of the provisions regarding the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
are being overlooked. In that regard, we call for full
implementation of the relevant provisions in considering
future appointments.
The objective of revitalization is to render the
Assembly more efficient and effective. It will require
improvement of working methods and an adjustment of
the agenda to meet current global realities. Discussions
on improving working methods have been exhaustive,
and we recognize some improvements. We appreciate
the convening of thematic debates and high-level
events aimed at establishing a broad international
understanding of current issues. The General Committee
also has an important role to play in considering ways
and means to further improve the Assembly’s working
methods and improve its efficiency.
The agenda of the General Assembly has grown
steadily in response to global demands and expectations.
That has also led to a reduction in the actual time
available to focus on any particular issue. We concur
with the numerous General Assembly resolutions that
call for rationalizing and streamlining the agenda so
that we can pay more attention to priority issues. We
support the biennialization, triennialization, clustering
or even elimination of some items, while preserving
options to add new items.

12-54292

The number of reports requested should also be
rationalized, so as to improve the quality and precision
of documents and to permit more focused deliberation.
We suggest that all of those actions be undertaken with
the clear consent of the co-sponsoring or concerned
States. There should be no attempt to employ artificial
deadlines or so-called sunset clauses to remove an item
without prior approval of the General Assembly or
consent of the concerned State.
The issue of revitalization is a matter that requires
political will. Technical improvement is possible
through implementation of the proposals already made,
but a true revitalization of the body would require
genuine political will and openness. Let us garner such
political will to make the General Assembly a truly
deliberative and decision-making body for the benefit
of all of humankind.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
pleased that the General Assembly is focusing due
attention on the old yet crucially important issue of
the revitalization of its work within the core of the
working agenda of this sixty-seventh session. Let
me also take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Susan Waffa-Ogoo, Permanent Representative of
the Gambia, and Ambassador Alexander Lomaia,
Permanent Representative of Georgia, for their
excellent stewardship of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
during the past session, leading to the adoption of
resolution 66/294.
The Islamic Republic of Iran aligns itself with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
which, we believe, introduced a number of key points
into this important debate. I would also like to make a
few additional remarks and underline some points of
particular significance.
The General Assembly debate on the revitalization
of the work of the Assembly, held in December
(see A/66/PV.70), reflected the urgent need to strengthen
the central role of the Assembly in addressing issues of
genuine concern to the international community in the
political, economic and social arenas. In that connection,
Iran and all the members of the Non-Aligned Movement
have demonstrated their renewed commitment to
engaging in a meaningful effort to reinforce the work
of the General Assembly.

17

A/67/PV.23

Since 1991, we have adopted 20 resolutions
containing specific measures aimed at revitalizing and
enhancing the work of the General Assembly as the most
representative and chief deliberative and policy-making
principal organ of the United Nations. Unfortunately,
those measures, adopted by consensus, have not been
fully implemented, owing mainly to the lack of the
political will needed to ensure that the Assembly plays
its leading role in joint global governance. A thorough
evaluation of the status of implementation of General
Assembly resolutions and a clear identification of the
underlying reasons for their lack of implementation
are therefore crucial to gradually eliminating the
constraints that still prevent the revitalization process
from achieving its full potential.
The fact that a large number of United Nations
resolutions have dealt with the revitalization of the
role and authority of the General Assembly clearly
demonstrates how important the enhancement of the
central role and authority of that organ is for the general
membership. The Assembly should take the lead in
setting the global agenda and restoring the credibility
and centrality of the United Nations in the formulation
of multilateral approaches to resolving international
issues. That was the role intended for the Assembly as
expressed in Article 10 of the Charter, namely, that it
should discuss any questions or matters within the scope
of the Charter or relating to the powers and functions of
any of the organs provided for in the Charter. We should
therefore increase our efforts to explore concrete ways
and means towards full realization of the Assembly’s
functions and powers, as laid down in the Charter.
Regarding relations between the General Assembly
and the other principal organs of the United Nations,
the relationship between the General Assembly and the
Security Council, in particular, has been a matter of
extensive debate, especially in the context of the various
reform efforts, for many years. A considerable number
of Assembly resolutions have established various
criteria aimed at clarifying the relationship between
those two important principal organs. The Charter
confers important functions and responsibilities on
both bodies.
Nonetheless, in recent years we have witnessed
numerous cases of the Security Council’s gradual but
persistent encroachment on the functions and powers of
the Assembly and other organs, such as the Economic
and Social Council. We are particularly concerned
about the Security Council’s practice of setting

18

standards, making laws and establishing definitions in
areas beyond its competence. Let me recall Article 13 of
the Charter, according to which the General Assembly,
as the only universal organ representing every State
Member of the United Nations, is primarily responsible
for the progressive development of international law
and its codification.
With regard to the role and responsibility of the
General Assembly in the process of selecting and
appointing the Secretary-General and in order to comply
with Article 97 of the Charter, we should not relegate
the role of the General Assembly to that of a rubber
stamp. In our view, there is a strong desire among a
large majority of the Members of the Organization to
articulate and improve the procedure for the selection of
the Secretary-General by giving the General Assembly
a more meaningful and determining role in it.
At the same time, ensuring the effectiveness of the
Office of the President of the General Assembly is also
an important factor in enhancing the role and authority
of the General Assembly. In that regard, we reiterate
the importance of strengthening the institutional
memory of the Office of the President by allocating to
it sufficient human and financial resources from the
regular budget of the United Nations, so as to enable
all Member States, developed and developing, to have
an equal opportunity to assume the presidency of the
Assembly efficiently and effectively.
In conclusion, we believe that focusing only
on procedural aspects and the working methods of
the Assembly, important as they are, will not lead
to the comprehensive improvement in its work that
is long overdue. For that, a fundamental shift, an
all-embracing approach and a vigorous effort are
needed. The revitalization of the General Assembly,
as part of the comprehensive reform of the United
Nations, is a dynamic and continuing process. We
should remain committed and constructive throughout
that ongoing exercise, with a view to strengthening
the role and authority of the Assembly as the most
representative and chief deliberative and policymaking
organ of the United Nations. My delegation stands
ready to participate actively in the future deliberations
to be held in that framework in a transparent, open and
inclusive manner.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua would like
to thank the President for organizing this meeting.
Nicaragua endorses the statement made by the
12-54292

A/67/PV.23

representative of Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which expressed our position and that of the
majority of the States Members of this Organization.
Our delegation reiterates its firm commitment to
the process of revitalizing and democratizing the
General Assembly, and we wish to continue to work
constructively, so that the Assembly can be seen to be,
in every aspect, the most representative and legitimate
organ of the Organization.
As we have stated on various occasions, Nicaragua
considers the democratization of the United Nations
to be very important; in order to achieve that goal
we must continue to work to restore the authority of
the General Assembly and enable it to function as the
chief deliberative, standard-setting and democratic
organ of the Organization. We believe that the process
of revitalizing the work of the Assembly must be
universal, transparent and accountable, arrived at
through open and inclusive consultations, which
are a critical component of United Nations reform,
including reform of the Security Council. The Council
cannot continue to usurp the functions and powers
of the General Assembly. The process of electing the
Secretary-General is also very important.
Carrying out that initiative will require restoring
and increasing the authority of the General Assembly,
which in turn will require restoring its functions
and jurisdiction and strengthening its relations and
collaboration with other organs of the Organization.
Such a reinvigoration of the General Assembly would
make it able to answer the needs of all 193 Member
States equally and fulfil the principle of the equality of
all Members.
A similar reinvigoration is essential for the Office
of the President of the General Assembly. Measures
must be taken and procedures put in place to augment
its human and financial resources. Every State should
have the possibility of presiding over the Assembly.
Financial considerations should not be an impediment.
Increased funding for the Office is therefore important
to strengthening the General Assembly.
The Nicaraguan delegation believes that the
General Assembly should more rigorously fulfil its
responsibilities in the nomination and appointment
of the Secretary-General, and should engage Member
States’ participation in a more inclusive way. Likewise,
all Member States should have increased input into
the debate about and the election of candidates. It is

12-54292

also important to say that all resolutions adopted by
consensus on the revitalization of the Assembly should
be implemented fully and as quickly as possible, so as
to actually achieve that goal.
We must rebuff all attempts to minimize the
achievements and importance of the General Assembly,
to diminish its role and functions or to impugn its
relevance and credibility. For the good of all of the
peoples we represent, the voice and the votes of all
States Members of the Organization should be ever
more loudly heard. Nicaragua will continue to support
all efforts to strengthen the central role and authority
of the General Assembly, and we are always ready to
engage in constructive debate on any issue that will
lead to improving the work of our Organization.
Mr. Raza Bashir Tarar (Pakistan): We thank
the President of the General Assembly for convening
this debate, which deals with a subject of paramount
importance for Member States. Pakistan pledges its full
support and cooperation.
We appreciate the work done by the two co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly, as well as that
of their predecessors. We also align ourselves with
the statement made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
In the past two decades, much effort has been
directed towards the shared goal of revitalizing this
unique and universal body. It has been a worthwhile
pursuit for several reasons. Together we have made
considerable progress in rationalizing and streamlining
the work of the Committees. Our collective effort has
led to increased financial savings and efficiency gains.
We have also raised the profile of the General Assembly.
However, for many of us, the revitalization debate
seems to be losing vitality. Concerns persist over a
range of issues, including the non-implementation of
resolutions, the growing encroachment by the Security
Council on the role and authority of the Assembly, the
marginalization of Assembly’s role in the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General and others.
Perhaps, we first need to revitalize the revitalization
debate.
As to the reform of the Security Council, it can be
meaningful only if it is decided with the widest possible
margin of agreement and in a spirit of compromise and
flexibility. Any exercise in reform should make the

19

A/67/PV.23

Council more democratic and accountable to the general
membership and not create new centres of privilege.
In a new debate on revitalization, it would be useful
to focus on two mutually reinforcing aspects, efficiency
and efficacy. In some ways, considerable discussion has
already taken place on improving the working methods
of United Nations bodies, including the Assembly and
its Committees. In fact, several measures have been
adopted, including a more streamlined programme of
work, the biennialization or triennialization of agenda
resolutions and the early selection of the Chairs of the
Committees and Bureaus.
However, those steps have essentially focused
on efficiency and rationalization, and much progress
has indeed been made on that count. Yet, to many of
us, the effectiveness and authority of the Assembly
seems to remain a largely unfulfilled task. We must
therefore dig deeper and identify the real causes behind
the conundrum whereby efficiency gains seemingly
continue to defeat the larger political imperative of
effectiveness. We look forward to a more focused debate
on the correlation between the objectives of efficiency
and effectiveness.
It may also be worthwhile to explore new ideas
about how to bring more vigour, visibility and attention
to the revitalization debate. We propose that the Ad Hoc
Working Group examine the possibility of convening
a high-level meeting in the future. We support the
Non-Aligned Movement’s suggestion in that regard and
look forward to exchanging views within the Working
Group.
Mr. Workie (Ethiopia): At the outset, allow
me to join others in commending the Permanent
Representatives of the Gambia and Georgia for their
very hard and valuable work in co-facilitating the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly during the previous session.
Allow me also to align my delegation with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The General Assembly is not only one of the
principal organs of the United Nations but also its most
representative and chief deliberative, policy-making
body. No other intergovernmental body in the world
enjoys such a universal membership or covers such
a broad spectrum of issues as the General Assembly.
That breadth of membership and scope has a direct
impact on international peace and security.

20

We strongly believe that the revitalization of the
General Assembly will help strengthen the determination
of Member States to pursue multilateralism, which
will, in turn, have a major and far-reaching impact on
rebuilding the authority and credibility of the United
Nations system as a whole. In that regard, we wish to
underline the critical importance of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, and we urge it to build upon its progress in
previous sessions. To that end, we are convinced that
resolutions 65/315 and 66/294 in particular, along with
other earlier resolutions, can and should serve as the
basis for the work of Ad Hoc Working Group.
As for the relationship of the General Assembly to
the other principal organs of the United Nations, my
delegation is of the view that it remains important to
improve transparency, the exchange of information
and cooperation. The General Assembly should benefit
from information about meetings between the President
of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, as well as meetings
involving the Chairs of subsidiary bodies.
Periodic briefings by the President of the General
Assembly on his recent activities, including official
travel, continue to be an appreciated practice and are a
valuable source of information. We also appreciate the
continued practice of holding periodic informal briefings
by the Secretary-General on his priorities, travels and
most recent activities, including his participation in
international meetings and events organized outside the
United Nations, and we encourage him to continue with
that practice.
On the issue of working methods, we would like
to stress the need for the further rationalization and
streamlining of the agendas of the General Assembly
and its Main Committees, so as to better define the
focus and avoid duplication in our deliberations. In
that regard, leadership by the Chairs and the Bureaux
of the Main Committees is of particular importance.
Although each Main Committee is master of its own
rules of procedure, we believe that streamlining and
standardizing certain rules would lead to greater
efficient in the work of the Committees.
While noting with appreciation the progress
achieved so far, we feel that debates in the General
Assembly have often shown duplication, resulting
in the adoption of overlapping resolutions without an
effective mechanism for assessing and evaluating their
implementation, with the result that the assessment’s

12-54292

A/67/PV.23

relevance or effectiveness in helping to achieve the
desired outcomes is undermined. In that regard, we are
in favour of launching the regular review of resolutions
and decisions adopted previously by the Assembly and
of making the necessary adjustments on the basis of the
results stemming from their implementation.
The selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral is yet another issue of great interest to the wider
membership. Our view on the subject is that, without
prejudice to Article 97 of the Charter, the Assembly
should play a more meaningful role in the process of
the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations. We share the views expressed
by others that there must be substantive interaction
between the candidates and the Assembly and that due
regard must continue to be given to regional rotation.
Ensuring the effectiveness of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly is also essential
to improving the role and authority of the Assembly,
including through enhancing the institutional memory

12-54292

of that Office. In that regard, resolution 66/294, which
allocates the necessary budget to and strengthens
the human resources component of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, is of critical
importance.
In conclusion, Ethiopia is ready, as in the past, to
extend its cooperation and looks forward to doing so
by working with the Ad Hoc Working Group during
the current session. We believe that the continuation
of the discussion within the Ad Hoc Working Group
contributes to moving forward not only the process of
the revitalization of the General Assembly but also the
enhancement of the overall reform efforts of the United
Nations system, including the Security Council.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on the agenda items
before us. The Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of agenda items 115 and 116.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

21
