S/2012/922

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2012
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
The members of the Security Council reaffirm their commitment to enhancing
the efficiency and transparency of the Council’s work, including interaction and
dialogue with other Member States, and to implementing all previously agreed
measures, in particular those contained in the note by the President of the Security
Council (S/2010/507).
2.
The members of the Security Council are committed to implementing the
additional measures contained in the present note.
Open debates
3.
It is the understanding of the members of the Security Council that open
debates can benefit from the contributions of both Council members and the wider
membership.
4.
With this in mind, the date of the open debate should be announced with
sufficient time to allow for adequate preparation by all participants.
5.
The members of the Security Council may agree, by consensus on a case-bycase basis and when they consider it appropriate for certain open debates, to invite
non-members to alternate their interventions with those of Council members. In
such situations, those Council members who wish to do so will give up their slot on
the speakers’ list to non-members.
6.
Where appropriate for certain open debates, the adoption of an outcome might
occur at a date subsequent to that of the open debate in order to allow it to more
fully reflect, if the Security Council considers it appropriate, matters raised during
the debate.
7.
All participants speaking in an open debate, including members of the Security
Council, are encouraged to be succinct and focused in their interventions, which,
whenever possible, should not exceed five minutes, or any other time suggested by
the President at the start of the debate. If necessary, the text of a more detailed
statement may be circulated to Council members and participants.
8.
Members of the Security Council acknowledge the usefulness of concept notes
to help focus discussion during an open debate, and encourage the early elaboration
of such notes.

12-64760 (E) 181212

*1264760*

S/2012/922

Security Council annual report
9.
Further to the measures contained in the annex to the note by the President
(S/2010/507) concerning the annual report (paras. 70-75), presidencies in charge of
preparing the draft introduction to the report may consider organizing, where
appropriate, interactive informal exchanges of views with the wider membership.
10. The report, in accordance with paragraph 74 of the annex to the note by the
President (S/2010/507), will continue to be adopted at a public meeting of the
Security Council where members of the Council who wish to do so may comment
on the work of the Council for the period covered by the report.
11. The members of the Security Council encourage the Presidents in charge of the
presentation of the report to the General Assembly to report back to Council
members on relevant suggestions and observations raised during the General
Assembly debate on the annual report.
12. The members of the Security Council encourage continuing efforts to ensure
the inclusion in the report of more substantive information on the Council’s work
and on measures to improve the working methods.
Monthly assessments by the Presidents and informal briefing sessions on the
monthly work
13. Members of the Security Council recognize the usefulness of the monthly
assessments by Council Presidents described in paragraph 62 of the annex to the
note by the President (S/2010/507) in providing as much information as possible on
the main aspects of the work of the Council during that month, and encourage
Council Presidents to submit the monthly assessments soon after the end of their
respective presidencies.
14. Members of the Security Council encourage the holding by Council Presidents
of informal briefing sessions with the wider membership on the work of the Council
at the end of their respective presidencies, as appropriate.
15. Formal wrap-up sessions may also continue to be organized when appropriate
and with the consent of all members of the Security Council.

2

12-64760
