United Nations

S/PV.6384

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6384th meeting
Wednesday, 15 September 2010, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Apakan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mr. Lolo
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-53435 (E)

*1053435*

S/PV.6384

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Tsuneo Nishida, Permanent
Representative of Japan, in his capacity as Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Nishida.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): This is the fifteenth 90-day
report in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of
resolution 1737 (2006). The report covers the period
from 29 June to 15 September 2010, during which time
the Committee held no meetings but conducted its
work using the silence procedure.
I will begin by noting the follow-up that has been
or is being undertaken in response to resolution 1929
(2010) of 9 June, by which the Security Council
adopted additional measures relating to the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Members will recall that, via
paragraphs 10, 11, 12 and 19 of the resolution, the
Council designated 36 additional persons — all but one
of whom had previously been subject to a travel
notification requirement — as subject to the travel ban.
Moreover, the Council designated one additional
person and 40 additional entities as subject to the
assets freeze.
Subsequently, to reflect these new designations,
the Committee updated its consolidated list of
individuals and entities and issued a note verbale to all
Member States, as well as a press release, drawing
attention to the updated list. I should like to recall here
that the Committee also responded to a query from a
Member State seeking confirmation that certain
individuals and entities had not been designated by the

2

Council or the Committee as
aforementioned targeted measures.

subject

to

the

In paragraph 27 of resolution 1929 (2010), the
Council decided that the Committee shall intensify its
efforts to promote the full implementation of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010), including through a work programme
covering
compliance,
investigations,
outreach,
dialogue, assistance and cooperation, to be submitted
to the Council within 45 days of the adoption of the
resolution, that is, by 24 July. The Committee approved
such a work programme and transmitted it to the
Council on 23 July.
By paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), the
Council established, for an initial period of one year
and under the direction of the Committee, a Panel of
Experts to carry out certain tasks, as specified in that
same paragraph. The Committee expects the Panel to
be appointed and operational in the near future and is
committed to establishing a good working relationship
with the Panel upon its constitution.
In paragraph 31 of resolution 1929 (2010), the
Council called upon all States to report to the
Committee within 60 days of the adoption of the
resolution — that is, by 8 August — on the steps they
had taken with a view to implementing effectively
paragraphs 7 to 19 and 21 to 24 of the resolution. For
its part, the Committee sent a note verbale to all
Member States, drawing their attention to the
stipulated date of submission, as well as encouraging
those States that had not yet submitted reports pursuant
to either or all of the three previous resolutions to
submit them separately or in combined form. In this
connection, I would like to report that, thus far, the
Committee has received 36 reports under resolution
1929 (2010). The Committee regrets that many States
have not responded in a timely fashion, as these reports
provide important information that helps the
Committee to assess the implementation of the
imposed measures. The Committee reiterates its call on
all Member States to submit such reports if they have
not done so already. Unless a State requests that its
report be kept confidential, the reports will be issued as
official documents and posted on the Committee’s
website.
That concludes my summary of the follow-up
triggered by the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010).

10-53435

S/PV.6384

The Committee received three notifications from
a Member State with reference to paragraph 5 of
resolution 1737 (2006), concerning the delivery of
items for use in the nuclear power plant in Bushehr,
Iran. The Committee also addressed the matter of an
intended delivery of items for use in that plant. In
addition, the Committee received one notification from
a Member State pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006), as well as additional specific information
on a prior general notification that had been submitted
previously by another Member State pursuant to the
same paragraph in connection with the receipt and
unfreezing of funds, respectively, in order to make
payments due under contracts entered into prior to the
listing of two entities.
The President: I thank Ambassador Nishida for
his briefing. I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Security Council who wish to make
statements.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to review the
efforts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) over the past
90 days. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Nishida for his first report as Chair of that critical
Committee.
Three months have passed since the Council
adopted resolution 1929 (2010) to respond to Iran’s
ongoing refusal to comply with its international
obligations. I would like to make three points about the
situation today and where we go from here.
First, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the clear evidence that Iran is refusing to take any
step to begin resolving concerns that it is pursuing
nuclear weapons and that it continues to take actions
that in fact deepen those concerns. On 6 September, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) reported to the Council that Iran is
continuing and expanding its proliferation-sensitive
nuclear activities in violation of its international
obligations (see S/2010/465). Iran’s enrichment of
uranium, including to nearly 20 per cent, continues
unabated. Additionally, the Director General provided
significant and troubling examples where Iran is
hampering the work of IAEA inspectors, refusing the
IAEA’s legitimate requests for information about and
access to its nuclear facilities and continuing to reject
legitimate inquiries about a possible military

10-53435

dimension to its nuclear programme. I emphasize that
this report states that Iran is hampering the IAEA’s
ability to monitor Iran’s programme. Iran is not
cooperating fully with the IAEA.
The Security Council has clearly established in
its resolutions on Iran that cooperation with the IAEA
is a fundamental benchmark and test of Iran’s peaceful
intentions. The IAEA’s report is the clearest evidence
yet that Iran is refusing to address our proliferation
concerns and appears determined to acquire a nuclear
weapons capability.
Yet, Iran’s disregard for its international
obligations extends beyond its nuclear activities. Iran
has repeatedly attempted to export arms in violation of
resolution 1747 (2007). We are also concerned that Iran
continues to engage in activities related to ballistic
missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons,
including conducting launches using ballistic missile
technology. These activities are prohibited under
resolution 1929 (2010) and undermine Iran’s claims of
peaceful intentions at the very time that the
international community has offered Iran opportunities
to build trust and confidence. The Council and the
1737 Committee will need to consider an appropriate
response to Iran’s serial violations of Security Council
resolutions.
My second point is that Iran’s recent actions
remind us of the urgent need to redouble our efforts to
implement the United Nations sanctions, particularly
those new measures adopted in resolution 1929 (2010).
Already we have seen unprecedented efforts to respond
to Iran’s defiance with pressure in line with the dualtrack approach. Member States should move quickly to
carry out their obligations to implement the new
sanctions and report on their national implementation
efforts to the Committee.
The 1737 Committee continues to play a critical
role in monitoring and improving the enforcement of
Security Council resolutions on Iran. We strongly
support that Committee, which is the principle
mechanism to help States fulfil their obligations, to
implement the measures and to respond when States
fail to enforce United Nations sanctions. The
Committee should move quickly to implement the
action items in its ambitious work programme,
especially to respond to Iran’s well-documented
patterns of sanctions evasion.

3

S/PV.6384

Finally, the Committee should support the
Secretariat’s efforts to establish a new panel of experts
to help monitor and improve sanctions implementation.
We are concerned by the delay in setting up the panel,
and we urge renewed focus to enable that body to
become operational as soon as possible. These steps
can improve sanctions implementation and limit the
risk posed by Iran’s arms smuggling, its development
of nuclear-weapon delivery systems and the
proliferation of sensitive nuclear and ballistic missilerelated items.
My final point is to underscore the continued
commitment of the United States and the international
community to a dialogue and a negotiated solution to
the Iranian nuclear issue. We nevertheless plan to
continue clarifying for Iran the consequences of its
actions, both positive and negative. Our goal remains
to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons. We
are committed to working closely with our partners in
the Security Council and the international community
towards that goal.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to congratulate Ambassador Nishida
on his assumption of the chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). The Chinese delegation will continue to
support and cooperate with the activities carried out by
the Committee and its Chairman. China wishes to
thank Ambassador Nishida for his briefing on the work
of the Committee over the past 90 days. We have taken
note of the fact that the Committee carried out very
effective work during the most recent reporting period,
for which we express our appreciation.
Since December 2006, the Security Council has
adopted a number of resolutions on the Iranian nuclear
issue, including resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007),
1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010). Those resolutions reflect
the international community’s common concern
regarding the Iranian nuclear issue. The resolutions
were adopted in the interest of maintaining the
international
nuclear
non-proliferation
regime,
strengthening the authority and role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and promoting
diplomatic efforts aimed at reaching peaceful solutions
on the Iranian nuclear issue.
Countries have the obligation to implement those
resolutions in a full and earnest manner. However, at
the same time, it is necessary that they not implement

4

their provisions arbitrarily. Implementation should in
no way impede the construction and development of
Iran, nor should it get in the way of normal trade
between Iran and other countries and the normal life of
the Iranian people. It should in no way impede the
maintenance of normal relations between other
countries and Iran.
China has always supported the international nonproliferation regime and we are opposed to Iran’s
possession or development of nuclear weapons. We
support addressing this issue through a dual-track
strategy. China attaches great importance to and has
strictly implemented relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. We have submitted timely reports on
the implementation of the four relevant resolutions.
However, at the same time we believe that sanctions
are not an end in themselves. They cannot provide a
fundamental solution to the problem at hand. Peaceful
solutions through diplomatic efforts and dialogue
remain the best choice.
At present, new opportunities have emerged for
relaunching dialogue and negotiation over this issue.
The E3+3 Governments and Iran have all expressed
their desire to restart negotiations. China hopes that all
the parties concerned will fully seize this opportunity
to do so and, on the basis of equality and mutual
respect, take a more flexible and pragmatic approach
and further strengthen engagement and dialogue so as
to intensify diplomatic efforts on all fronts to reach a
peaceful settlement for this problem.
We have taken note of the latest report on this
issue submitted by the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We hope
that the IAEA will continue to play a constructive role
in finding an appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. We hope that Iran will fully cooperate with the
IAEA and clarify and properly resolve all problems at
an early date so as to build the international
community’s confidence in the peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear issue.
China will continue to actively participate in the
activities of the Committee and, together with others,
we are ready to seize and make best use of all the
positive elements for restarting negotiations and
intensifying diplomatic efforts so as to build
momentum for finding solutions through dialogue and
engagement.

10-53435

S/PV.6384

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Ambassador Nishida for his first
briefing as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and
welcome him to that position. We have full confidence
that, under his leadership, the Committee will continue
to fulfil its important mandate. The Committee’s role
will be of critical importance as we pursue the dualtrack strategy to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue.
This briefing comes just days after the release of
the latest report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on Iran. The report reinforces the
strong messages contained in successive reports that
Iran continues to defy multiple United Nations
resolutions and is failing to cooperate fully with the
Agency.
The report makes clear that Iran has not
suspended its enrichment-related activities or work on
its heavy water-related projects. It indicates that Iran
has produced 2,803 kilograms of low-enriched uranium
enriched to less than 5 per cent. The report also states
that Iran has produced 22 kilograms of low-enriched
uranium enriched to just under 20 per cent. This is a
significant step towards the ability to enrich to
weapons-grade levels, and Iran has no credible civilian
application for this level of enriched uranium.
The report again makes clear that, in the case of
two facilities, Iran did not notify the Agency in a
timely manner of its decision to construct or authorize
their construction, and that this is inconsistent with
Iran’s obligations under the subsidiary arrangements of
its safeguards agreement.
Once again, the report states that Iran has not
discussed possible military dimensions of its
programme with the Agency since August 2008. The
Agency therefore
“remains concerned about the possible existence
in Iran of past or current undisclosed nuclear
related activities involving military related
organizations, including activities related to the
development of a nuclear payload for a missile”
(S/2010/465, annex, enclosure, para. 39))
In summary, the report states that
“while the Agency continues to verify the nondiversion of declared nuclear material in Iran,
Iran has not provided the necessary cooperation
to permit the Agency to confirm that all nuclear

10-53435

material in Iran is in peaceful activities” (Ibid.,
para. 41).
I would also like to highlight our concern over
Iran’s engagement in activities related to ballistic
missiles that are capable of delivering nuclear
weapons, including a launch reported in the Iranian
media last month that used ballistic missile technology.
Paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) prohibits such
activities. The Security Council and the 1737
Committee will need to consider an appropriate
response to Iran’s actions.
We remain deeply concerned both about Iran’s
nuclear programme and about its serial violation of the
resolutions of this Council, which is why we supported
resolution 1929 (2010), which introduced further
sanctions against Iran. The additional measures
imposed by that resolution have now been in force for
three months, so it is a good moment to take stock of
the implementation of the additional measures imposed
on Iran and the new obligations of all United Nations
Member States.
While many States have acted promptly to adjust
their laws and procedures, we would remind those
States that have yet to report to the 1737 Committee on
the measures taken to do so as soon as possible. If the
dual-track strategy is to succeed, the effective and
rigorous implementation by States of all these
measures and those in the Council’s previous
resolutions will be a vital part of the dual-track policy.
The 1737 Committee will have a key and growing role
in ensuring this implementation, both by monitoring
implementation and advising States where necessary.
We were therefore pleased to see a rigorous and
specific work programme submitted to the Council on
23 July. We also look forward to the early appointment
of a professional and dedicated Panel of Experts. The
Panel will be essential to the effective delivery of that
work programme. The Panel will also provide an
additional level of scrutiny directly to the Council on
the
implementation
of
measures,
making
recommendations where necessary. I would urge the
Committee and the Secretariat to make every effort to
operationalize the Panel as soon as possible.
We remain ready to resume the talks on Iran’s
nuclear programme we started in Geneva on 1 October
2009. We believe that such talks can lead to a solution
if they are purposeful, discuss both sides’ concerns and
make swift progress. In again extending our hand, we

5

S/PV.6384

show our determination to resolve these matters
through dialogue and diplomacy.

colleague has done, to recall some elements of the
report.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the new Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), Japanese Ambassador Tsuneo Nishida.
We assure him that, in his activities in that post, he can
rely on the support and cooperation of the Russian
delegation.

First, the report stresses that Iran continues to
refuse to respect its international commitments and to
meet the requirements of the Security Council and of
the IAEA Board of Governors. In addition, Iran
continues its activities to enrich uranium to 3.5 per
cent and 20 per cent and its heavy water related
projects, in violation of repeated demands by the
international community and in the absence of any
credible civilian purpose. Today I wish to reiterate that
Iran’s nuclear programme has no credible civilian
application.

We thank the Chair for the briefing on the work
of the 1737 Committee over the past 90 days. During
this reporting period, the Committee continued to
operate in strict compliance with its mandate. We
anticipate that the recently adopted work programme of
the Committee will be help that entity to effectively
carry out the challenges facing it. We anticipate also
that the Panel of Experts referred to in resolution 1929
(2010) will be of considerable assistance to the
Committee once it is constituted.
On the current situation with respect to the
Iranian nuclear programme, our position remains
unchanged.
We have consistently advocated addressing the
issues relating to this programme through dialogue and
interaction with the Iranian side. The pillar of the
Russian position has always been and continues to be
reliance on negotiations and a diplomatic search for
solutions as well as involving Tehran in joint
endeavours, while ensuring full compliance with the
actions of the IAEA. We call for Iran’s cooperation in
taking the steps necessary to ensure a broad dialogue
with the six countries, aimed at a negotiated settlement
on the issues relating to the Iranian nuclear
programme.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank Ambassador Nishida for
his first 90-day report as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I take this opportunity to hail his predecessor,
Ambassador Takasu, for his outstanding work as Chair
of the Committee.
The general context is known to all of us and is a
source of serious concerns for my country. These
concerns are confirmed by the most recent report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), dated 6 September (S/2010/465,
annex, enclosure). Please allow me, as my British

6

Iran’s cooperation with the Agency is insufficient
and is worsening, as the Director General recently
stressed at the opening of the IAEA Board of
Governors meeting. Inter alia, Iran has objected to the
appointment of two IAEA inspectors in June and it
continues not to cooperate in resolving pending issues,
including those linked to the military dimension of the
Iranian programme.
I also note that Iran has announced its intention to
begin construction of a third uranium enrichment
facility during the first half of 2011, without providing
the information requested by the Agency and counter to
its Safeguards Agreement; and it has done so after the
revelation of a clandestine enrichment facility in Qom.
France is also extremely concerned by Iran’s
activities beyond the nuclear issue, in particular arms
exports and its ballistic missiles programme. Iran
continues activities related to ballistic missiles that
could deliver a nuclear weapon, including launches
making use of ballistic missile technology. Such
activities are contrary to resolution 1929 (2010), in
particular its paragraph 9.
Our response must be decisive. The Council and
the 1737 Committee must focus on these violations of
Security Council resolutions and provide an
appropriate response. Here, we hope that the panel of
experts which will be established will be able to
investigate these violations in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution.
Our aim, of course, is dialogue. But it must be
acknowledged that Iran has refused to respond to our
offers of dialogue and cooperation since 2006. The ball
is in Iran’s court: Iran must regain the trust of the
international community.

10-53435

S/PV.6384

The measures adopted by the Security Council
are clearly not an end in themselves. Their goal is to
convince Iran to negotiate in line with the dual-track
approach that the six countries have consistently
advocated. To be fully effective and attain their
objectives, these measures must be scrupulously
implemented by all and their application must be
strictly monitored. That is the responsibility of all
parties and of the 1737 Committee.
For its part, the European Union, by adopting
measures on 26 July to rigorously implement
resolution 1929 (2010), is fully playing its role; other
countries have decided to follow that example.
As Ambassador Nishida did in his briefing, my
country encourages all delegations that have not yet
done so to submit their national reports to the 1737
Committee on the implementation of resolution 1929
(2010).
It is also essential for the effectiveness of the
Council’s work and for its credibility that the
international community ensure full respect for the
measures adopted by the Security Council. The 1737
Committee plays an essential role in that respect. The
Committee’s activities reveal the scope and diversity of
Iran’s practices to evade the sanctions and thus confirm
that we must maintain great vigilance. It is important

10-53435

for the 1737 Committee to know that Member States
are properly implementing these measures. It must
continue to investigate alleged cases of violations
submitted to it and continue its assistance and outreach
activities.
My country welcomes the fact that at the end of
July the 1737 Committee was able to adopt a complete
work programme for the coming year. We encourage
all States to cooperate with the 1737 Committee and
with the future panel of experts established by
resolution 1929 (2010), which should enhance the
effectiveness of the Committee’s actions. In that
context, my country fully endorses the desire expressed
by the Permanent Representative of Japan that the
panel of experts be rapidly constituted.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
Before adjourning, I would like to inform
members that in order to allow sufficient time for the
translation of the draft resolution on the United Nations
Mission in Nepal to be completed, I propose to invite
members to consultations on the Sudan now and to
return to the Council Chamber thereafter.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

7
