A /75/PV.97

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

97th plenary meeting

Monday, 2 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Konfourou
(Mali), Vice-President, took the Chair.

in plenary meeting and proceed immediately to
its consideration?

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

I give the floor to the representative of Algeria,
who wishes to speak on a point of order.

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at the 96th plenary meeting, on 29 July 2021, the
representative of the United States made a proposal to
consider draft resolution A/75/L.119, which has been
revised as A/75/L.119/Rev.1, to reflect the changes
contained in the letter dated 29 July 2021 from the
President of the General Assembly, and the draft
amendment thereto, under sub-item (a) of agenda item
70.
In that connection, I have been informed that
the proposal has been withdrawn. The Assembly
will therefore proceed to consider draft resolution
A/75/L.119/Rev.1 and the draft amendment thereto,
under sub-item (b) of agenda item 70, as announced in
the United Nations Journal.
Members will recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 18 September 2020, the General Assembly decided
to allocate sub-item (b) of agenda item 70 to the Third
Committee. To enable the Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the draft resolution and the draft
amendment, may I take it that the Assembly wishes
to consider sub-item (b) of agenda item 70 directly

Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): I am just seeking
clarification. We noticed in the The Journal of the
United Nations, before the opening of the meeting,
that with respect to that issue the title did not refer
to the allocation of the item, as it should be, but to its
reallocation. When we speak of reallocation, it means
that the item is already under an item of the agenda
of the General Assembly. For a new item, how can
we speak of reallocation when we are dealing with an
allocation? Could the Secretariat please clarify?
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat to make the
necessary clarifications.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): At the beginning of the
session, the item was allocated to the Third Committee.
Sub-item (b) of agenda item 70 was allocated to the
Third Committee, and draft resolution A/75/L.119/
Rev.1 has been issued under this sub-item. For the
General Assembly to take action on the draft resolution
and on any draft amendment that has been presented,
the General Assembly will have to reallocate that
item to the plenary. It is a procedural action that the
General Assembly plenary usually takes if an item
has been closed or if an item has been reallocated to a
Main Committee. For the General Assembly plenary to
consider that item, it has to reopen it, if the item was

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-21294 (E)

*2121294*

A/75/PV.97

closed, or reallocate it. This action is usually taken up
under agenda item 7, “Organization of work, adoption
of the agenda and allocation of items”. So action on
reopening and/or reallocation is taken up under item 7
of the agenda of the General Assembly.
The Acting President: In that connection, may I
take it that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item
(b) of agenda item 70 directly in plenary meeting and
proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Draft resolution (A/75/L.119/Rev.1)
Draft amendment (A/75/L.121/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Hungary to introduce draft amendment
A/75/L.121/Rev.1.
Mrs. Horváth (Hungary): Hungary would like to
thank the co-facilitators for their efforts in leading the
consultation process on draft resolution A/75/L.119/
Rev.1. We remain deeply committed to eliminating all
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, including against people of African
descent, and to the successful implementation of the
International Decade for People of African Descent.
We have the honour to introduce a revised draft
amendment to operative paragraph 1(h) of the draft
resolution, which was circulated in a letter addressed
to all delegations on 29 July 2020 and is now issued as
A/75/L.121/Rev.1, which seeks to establish consensus
on the paragraph, in line with the previously agreed
language.
As members will recall, Hungary submitted an
amendment to the draft resolution last week, which
was issued as document A/75/L.121. During the course
of the week, we continued to actively engage with the
membership on our proposal with a view to finding
compromise language for operative paragraph 1(h) that
would enjoy consensus and provide the maximum level
of comfort for delegations.
2/15

02/08/2021

As a result of the consultations, it is my honour
to introduce the present revised draft amendment,
which we understand can enjoy consensus among
member States. The amendment relates to the criteria
concerning data collection in operative paragraph
1(h). The original paragraph included a provision
to collect data desegregated by both sex and gender,
which was not agreed language, as those terms are
equivalent in many national contexts, and therefore
their separate interpretation is not possible in many
national legislations, including in Hungary. Our draft
amendment therefore seeks to modify the listing to
include only the term “sex” and, at the same time, add
a reference,
“to enable the systematic design and collection
of and access to high-quality, reliable and timely
desegregated data and gender statistics”.
That addition is agreed language from paragraph
61(o) of the agreed conclusions of the sixty-fifth session
of the Commission on the Status of Women and enjoys
universal support from the membership.
The revised paragraph therefore reads as follows:
“To support the coordination of programmes aimed
at the socioeconomic development of communities
and people of African descent, and to examine the
urgent global need to establish adequate channels to
obtain data disaggregated by income, sex, age, race,
ethnicity, migratory status, disability, geographical
location and other characteristics relevant in
national contexts, to enable the systematic design
and collection of and access to high-quality, reliable
and timely desegregated data and gender statistics
conducive to the better execution of public policies
in relation to people of African descent”.
With this technical amendment, it is our
understanding and sincere hope that the draft
amendment can be adopted by consensus, which we
believe will increase overall support for the paragraph
and strengthen consensus on the draft resolution as
a whole. In that spirit, we invite all delegations to
join consensus on this draft amendment and support
its adoption.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak on a point of order.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States delegation wishes to address the oral
21-21294

02/08/2021

A/75/PV.97

amendment circulated last week on operative paragraph
9 (A/75/L.121). While the United States supports
necessary funding to make the Permanent Forum
successful, the last-minute amendment to operative
paragraph 9 distorts the agreement that was reached by
Member States through the customary and necessary
deliberations process. Further, the draft amendment’s
open-ended approach to funding the Permanent Forum
lacks the clarity and certainty in the funding amount
that is needed to support it.
As such, the United States proposes that the
language in operative paragraph 9 revert to the final
draft language that was submitted for adoption. We
move to strike the phrase
“to strengthen
Forum and”

substantive

support

to

the

so that the first part of the sentence of the paragraph
reads as follows:
“Requests the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner to provide the Permanent Forum,
through the regular budget as well as voluntary
contributions, with all necessary resources”.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed
to consider draft resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1, draft
amendment A/75/L.121/Rev.1 and the oral amendment
presented by the representative of the United States.
In that connection, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I will now read the oral
statement with regard to draft resolution A/75/L.119/
Rev.1.
The present statement is made in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. The Secretariat would like to highlight
operative paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 10 of draft
resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1 with regard to activities
that have programme budget implications. In that
regard, operative paragraphs 2 and 9 have been revised
as follows.
In operative paragraph 2, the phrase
“nominated by organizations of people of African
descent to be selected and appointed in accordance
with the rules of procedure of the Human Rights
Council”

has been replaced with
“to be appointed by the President of the Human
Rights Council following consultation with the
Bureau and the regional groups through their
coordinators on the basis of broad consultations
with organizations of people of African descent”.
In operative paragraph 9, the phrase “to strengthen
substantive support to the Forum and to provide the
Forum” has been added, thereby replacing the phrase
“to provide the Forum”.
The activities referred to in those operative
paragraphs relate to programme 1, General Assembly
and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference
management; programme 20, Human rights; programme
25, Management and support services and to section 2,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management, section 24, Human
rights, and section 29E, Administration, Geneva, of
the proposed programme budget for 2022 as presented
in A/76/6, section 2, A/76/6, section 24, and A/76/6,
section 29E.
With regard to operative paragraph 4, the annual
report of the Permanent Forum to the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly, for translation in all
six official languages, would be of 10,700 words, which
is the standard word count limit for reports that do not
originate in the Secretariat.
With regard to operative paragraphs 6 and 10,
the annual meeting of the Permanent Forum, rotating
between Geneva and New York, would comprise four
working days with interpretation in the six official
languages. The dates for the meetings should be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Existing provisions in the amount of $79,700 are
included in the proposed programme budget for 2022 in
relation to General Assembly resolution 73/262, under
section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council affairs and conference management, and
section 29E, Administration, Geneva. These provide
for the translation of an annual report of 8,500 words
and conferencing services, including sound technician
and recording services, for the annual meeting of the
Permanent Forum for three working days. As such,
additional resources in the amount of $22,400 to
$32,800 would be required to implement the activities
in 2022 and each year thereafter.

21-212943/15

A/75/PV.97

02/08/2021

A range of additional resource requirements is
provided, as it has not been determined at this time
whether the Permanent Forum will meet in Geneva or
New York in 2022.

section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council affairs and conference management; section
24, Human rights; and section 29E, Administration,
Geneva.

Pursuant to the request contained in operative
paragraphs 1 and 9, as revised, it is envisaged that
additional resources would be required to provide
additional staffing to strengthen substantive support to
the Forum and its expanded role as an advisory body to
the Human Rights Council as follows: one Coordinator
of the Permanent Forum at the P-5 level; two Human
Rights Officers at the P-3 level; and one Administrative
Assistant at the General Service (OL) level.

Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/75/L.119/Rev.1, the Secretariat would present a
revised estimates report to the main part of the seventysixth session of the General Assembly detailing the
additional requirements needed under the proposed
programme budget for 2022.

With regard to paragraphs 2, as revised, 3, 5 and
6, it is envisioned that additional resources would be
required to cover the travel of representatives for five
additional Government-appointed high-level experts for
four days of the Permanent Forum; one additional day
of daily subsistence allowance (DSA) for the current
representatives in the Forum; and one additional day
of DSA for the participation of the 25 members of
civil society.
Furthermore, additional resources would also be
required to cover the travel of staff for three of the
additional posts for four days of the Forum and three
days for preparation.

The resource requirements related to requested
activities that are envisaged to take place in 2023 and
thereafter would be presented in the context of the
proposed programme budget for the respective years.
The next oral statement is read out regarding draft
resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1, as proposed to be amended
by the United States to revert to the original operative
paragraph 9 language.
The present statement is made in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. The Secretariat would like to highlight
operative paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 10 of draft
resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1 with regard to activities
that have programme budget implications. Operative
paragraph 9 has been orally amended.

Existing provisions in the amount of $477,700 are
included in the proposed programme budget for 2022 in
relation to General Assembly resolution 73/262, under
section 24, Human rights. These would provide for one
post at the P-4 level and six months of general temporary
assistance at the General Service (OL) level, as well as
the requirements for the travel of representatives for the
current membership of the Forum and 25 participants
from civil society for three days. In addition, resources
are provided for the travel of three eminent personalities
for the annual Forum. As such, additional resources in
the range of $485,000 to $495,000 would be required
to implement the activities in 2022 — and $805,000
to $815,000 in each year thereafter — with additional
resources in the amount of $435,000 in 2022 — and
$755,000 in each year thereafter — attributable to
operative paragraph 9, as revised.

The activities referred to in those operative
paragraphs relate to programme 1, General Assembly
and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference
management, programme 20, Human rights, programme
25, Management and support services, and to section 2,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management, section 24, Human
rights, and section 29E, Administration, Geneva, of the
proposed programme budget for 2022, as presented in
sections 2, 24 and 29 E of document A/76/6.

Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/75/L.119/Rev.1 would give rise to budgetary
implications of between $507,400 and $527,800 under
the proposed programme budget for 2022 — and
$827,400 and $847,800 in each year thereafter — under

With regard to operative paragraphs 6 and 9, the
annual meeting of the Permanent Forum, rotating
between Geneva and New York, would comprise
of four working days with interpretation in the six
official languages. The dates for the meetings should

4/15

With regard to operative paragraph 4, the annual
report of the Permanent Forum to the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly, for translation in all
six official languages, would be of 10,700 words, which
is the standard word count limit for reports that do not
originate in the Secretariat.

21-21294

02/08/2021

A/75/PV.97

be determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.

conference management; section 24, Human rights; and
section 29 E, Administration, Geneva.

Existing provisions in the amount of $79,700 are
included in the proposed programme budget for 2022 in
relation to General Assembly resolution 73/262 under
section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council affairs and conference management, and
section 29E, Administration, Geneva. These provide
for the translation of an annual report of 8,500 words
and conferencing services, including sound technician
and recording services, for the annual meeting of the
Permanent Forum for three working days. As such,
additional resources in the range of $22,400 to $32,800
would be required to implement the activities in 2022
and each year thereafter.

Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/75/L.119/Rev.1, as orally amended, the Secretariat
would present a revised estimates report to the main part
of the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly
detailing the additional requirements needed under the
proposed programme budget for 2022.

A range of additional resource requirements is
provided, as it has not been determined at this time
whether the Permanent Forum would meet in Geneva
or New York in 2022.
Pursuant to the request contained in operative
paragraphs 2, 3, 5, 6 and 9, it is envisaged that additional
resources would be required to cover the travel of
representatives for five additional Governmentappointed high-level experts for four days of the
Permanent Forum, one additional day of DSA for the
current representatives in the Forum and one additional
day of DSA for participation of the 25 members of
civil society.
Existing provisions in the amount of $477,700
are included in the proposed programme budget for
2022 in relation to General Assembly resolution
73/262, under section 24, Human rights. These would
provide for one post at the P-4 level and six months
of general temporary assistance at the General Service
(OL) level, as well as the requirements for the travel
of representatives for the current membership of the
forum and 25 participants from civil society for three
days. In addition, resources are provided for the travel
of three eminent personalities for the annual Forum. As
such, additional resources in the range of $50,000 to
$60,000 would be required to implement the activities
in 2022 and each year thereafter.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/75/L.119/Rev.1, as orally amended, would give rise
to budgetary implications of between $72,400 and
$92,800 under the proposed programme budget for
2022 and each year thereafter under section 2, General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and

The resource requirements related to requested
activities that are envisaged to take place in 2023 and
thereafter would be presented in the context of the
proposed programme budget for the respective years.
The statements I have just read were distributed
through the plenary section on the e-DeleGATE portal
and will be made available in the journal under the
e-statements link for the meeting.
The Acting President: Before we proceed to take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1 and
draft amendment A/75/L.121/Rev.1 and the proposed
oral amendment, all delegations that wish to make a
statement in explanation of vote before the voting on
the draft resolution and/or the proposed amendment are
invited to do so now in one intervention.
I give the floor to the representative of Tunisia on
a point of order.
Ms. Elmansouri (Tunisia): I wish to refer to
document A/75/252, entitled “Allocation of agenda items
for the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly”.
In this document, adopted by the General Assembly on
18 September 2020, agenda item 70 was allocated to
both the Third Committee and to the plenary. I therefore
wanted to take the floor to seek clarification from the
Secretariat as to why a decision had to be made to
reallocate to the Third Committee an agenda item that
was already allocated to the General Assembly, and if
that reallocation was, in fact, needed, why this question
was not raised on Thursday (see A/75/PV.96), when
we first started to consider this draft resolution under
agenda item 70 in the General Assembly?
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): We do allocate items
and sub-items, so even though agenda item 70 was splitallocated between the Third Committee and the plenary,
in the plenary it was for the General Assembly to hold

21-212945/15

A/75/PV.97

an annual commemorative meeting on the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. That
is why it was allocated to the plenary — for the sole
purpose of holding the plenary meeting.
In order for the General Assembly to take
action on draft resolution A/75/L.119 last week (see
A/75/PV.96), the General Assembly therefore had
to reallocate sub-item (b) to the plenary. Normally,
the reallocation or reopening or both are handled
under item 7 — “Organization of work, adoption of
the agenda and allocation of items: reports of the
General Committee”
Last Thursday, all the discussion that took place
was under item 7. The General Assembly had not really
reached the stage of reopening or reallocating any
items. We were still under item 7, dealing with the issue
of the reallocation of sub-item (b) of agenda item 70 to
the plenary.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria on a point of order.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): I request that the rule
of procedure on which we base said reallocation or
reopening of items and sub-items be read out.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The reallocation and
reopening of items are a procedural matter. Therefore,
they are part of the procedural issues that the General
Assembly handles. The issue of agenda inclusion and
allocation are handled by the appropriate rules of
procedure of the General Assembly and then, once an
item is closed, if the General Assembly is to consider
that item — procedurally speaking — it has to reopen
that item. This has been the practice of the General
Assembly in order to reopen an item that has been
closed or to reallocate an item if it was allocated to a
main committee.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Algeria on a point of order.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): I am sorry to take the floor
again, but I want to be very clear on this matter because
it is very important to understand the legal framework
of our work. Does the representative of the Secretariat
mean to say that there is no rule governing this action
and that it is, instead, merely a practice?
6/15

02/08/2021

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The rule that pertains to
the adoption of the agenda is rule 21, which talks about
the adoption of the agenda of the General Assembly
based on the report of the general committee. Then,
once the agenda is adopted and allocated, we operate
on that understanding that agenda items are allocated
to different committees based on their expertise. Once
that committee concludes its work, the items cannot be
considered by that committee anymore, so if action is
needed under that item, it needs to be referred back to
the plenary. Hence, the item needs to be reallocated to
the plenary.
I should like to announce that, since the submission
of draft amendment A/75/L.121/Rev.1, and in addition
to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of
draft amendment A/75/L.121/Rev.1: Cameroon, Egypt,
Eritrea, Guinea, Haiti, Mali, Nigeria and Senegal.
The Acting President: Before we proceed to
take action on draft resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1, in
accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the
General Assembly shall first take a decision on draft
amendment A/75/L.121/Rev.1 and the oral amendment
proposed by the representative of the United States, one
by one.
We shall first turn to draft amendment A/75/L.121/
Rev.1.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft amendment A/75/L.121/Rev.1?
Draft amendment A/75/L.121/Rev.1 was adopted.
The Acting President: We now turn to the
oral amendment.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt the oral amendment proposed by the
representative of the United States?
The oral amendment to
A/75/L.119/Rev.1 was adopted.

draft

resolution

The Acting President: Since draft amendment
A/75/L.121/Rev.1 and the oral amendment proposed
by the representative of the United States have been
adopted, the Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1, entitled “Establishment of
21-21294

02/08/2021

the Permanent Forum of People of African Descent”,
as amended.
I give the floor to the representative of Algeria on
a point of order.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): Delegations were given
the opportunity to co-sponsor the amendment to draft
resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1, but I see that the same was
not done for the draft resolution as a whole. Algeria
requested the floor because it wants to co-sponsor the
draft resolution, as amended.
The Acting President: I have been reminded
that draft resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1, to which the
representative of Algeria is referring, is being presented
by the President of the General Assembly. As such, it
needs no co-sponsors.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
A/75/L.119/Rev.1, as amended?
Draft resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 75/314).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote before the voting, may
I remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Jurečko (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. We extend our sincere appreciation to the
Permanent Representatives of Chad and Costa Rica and
their teams for their leadership and commitment in this
process. The EU remains fully committed to the total
elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, including their contemporary
forms, as well as to the promotion and protection
of human rights for all, without discrimination on
any grounds.
We support all efforts to eradicate all forms
of discrimination and we joined consensus on the
resolution setting out the programme of activities
for the implementation of the International Decade
for People of African Descent, 2015-2024. The EU
engaged constructively on the negotiations on the
mandate and modalities for the new Permanent Forum
of people of African descent with the aim of reaching
a consensual outcome. Our proposals were aimed
at formulating a clear mandate for the new Forum
aimed at non-duplication and close links with existing

A/75/PV.97

mechanisms as well as reasonable size and budgets.
We regret the fact that many of our proposals were
not included in the text. We notably regret that our
language proposals on the need to address stereotypes,
essentialism, stigmatization and assigned identities,
all crucial concepts in the fight against racism, which
had also received support in the room, were not taken
on board.
It is also disappointing that our key concerns
were not addressed despite our having been clear
about them from the start. We regret the presentation
of last-minute revisions by the co-facilitators, with
significant organizational and budgetary implications
without the possibility of Member States debating in a
comprehensive and transparent way the consequences
for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR). We must therefore make
the following observations.
Operative paragraph 1(c), on the mandate of the
Permanent Forum, must be understood in line with
operative paragraph 29(h) of resolution 69/16, which
foresees that Member States should consider adopting
measures to further promote and protect the human
rights of people of African descent as enshrined
in international human rights instruments. In no
way should operative paragraph 1(c) as transferring
the responsibilities of the General Assembly to the
Permanent Forum.
Racism knows no boundaries. In that sense,
our priority must remain the full and effective
implementation of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. We
do not believe that additional instruments are needed, be
it an additional protocol to the Convention or a possible
declaration on the rights of people of African descent.
We must also express our reservations as regards
operative paragraph 1(h), on data collection, which
is not in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and includes controversial elements.
We also remain seriously concerned about the lastminute initiative as included in operative paragraph 9
and its impact on the broader United Nations human
rights system. We regret that those countries that
aim to overcrowd the system with new processes and
structures are also those that systematically oppose the
human rights budget in the relevant discussions of the
Fifth Committee.

21-212947/15

A/75/PV.97

While we fully support OHCHR’s mandates, we
reiterate our position that the Forum should be covered
through voluntary contributions so as not to overburden
the current system. We will take this and the process for
which the revision was proposed into account when the
Fifth Committee reviews the budgetary implications
and adopts the revised estimates this autumn.
Despite our reservations, the European Union
member States joined the consensus on resolution
75/314 in order to acknowledge the urgent need to
eliminate racism and discrimination in all its forms,
including the challenges faced by people of African
descent around the world, and allow the new Forum to
have a constructive start.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I make this
statement on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM would like to thank the co-facilitators
from Costa Rica and Chad for having facilitated
and presented draft resolution A/75/L.119/Rev.1,
“Establishment of the Permanent Forum of People of
African Descent”, under agenda item 70(b).
I would be remiss if I did not note the significance
of the adoption of resolution 75/314 on this day by
consensus. Today is the very day on which most
of the countries of the Caribbean Community are
commemorating the abolishment of slavery, an event
that took place in our region almost 200 years ago,
in 1834. The importance of this day and the adoption
of the resolution are momentous, and this day will go
down in our history as a day of reflection and a day
on which the United Nations took a significant step
forward following its recognition of the contribution
and sacrifice of the many millions of people of African
descent who perished under the weight of the yoke of
slavery and colonialism.
CARICOM is pleased and, indeed, grateful that
through our collective efforts we were able to adopt this
resolution by consensus on the day when in our region
most of our countries are celebrating emancipation
from slavery. We look forward to working with
the global community in addressing appropriate
recommendations from the Permanent Forum of
People of African Descent that will contribute to the
improvement of the lives of people of African descent
and to their full political, economic and social inclusion
as equal citizens, without discrimination of any kind
and with equal enjoyment of all human rights.
8/15

02/08/2021

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Chad and Costa Rica for having
facilitated today’s resolution (resolution 75/314). The
United States strongly supports the creation of the
Permanent Forum for People of African Descent. We
fully engaged in the modalities to shape its mandate.
The Biden-Harris Administration has put dismantling
systemic racism and achieving racial justice at the
forefront of our agenda, because, ultimately, racism is
a problem in every society, and that means that every
society needs to grapple with it.
Recently members have seen us do this grappling
across multilateral forums. At the forty-sixth regular
session of the Human Rights Council, we led a joint
statement on combating racism and racial discrimination
signed by more than 155 countries. We welcomed
cooperation with the investigative mechanisms
established in Human Rights Council resolution 47/21.
Secretary of State Blinken announced that we will
facilitate visits to the United States by the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Today the United Nations has reached another
important milestone on this collective journey: the
establishment of a Permanent Forum for People of
African Descent. The Forum represents the full
acknowledgement that at long last we are compelled to
give voice to the dynamic challenges and aspirations of
people of African descent around the world. The Forum
is universal in its purview, and it is forward-looking in
its agenda. It creates a new and necessary space for all
people of African descent to come together and build a
better future.
There are a few details that I want to be clear about.
First, we want to emphasize that our strong support
for the resolution does not change the United States
position on the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action. The creation of this Forum is but one step
among many that the United Nations system and
Member States are taking to combat all forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance. So
the Permanent Forum is far bigger than any one issue,
programme or conference, and so it is inappropriate
for the establishment of the Forum to be housed under
an individual conference agenda item. So while this
is being adopted under its current agenda item, our
position on the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action remains the same.
21-21294

02/08/2021

Secondly, we want to stress that the mandate of
the Forum does not include the elaboration of a United
Nations declaration. The purview of developing United
Nations declarations remains with Member States. The
Forum’s consideration of a United Nations declaration
on people of African descent would be only a part of the
broader consideration by Member States.
Finally, racism and intolerance, sadly, are
universal. Our approach to eliminating them must be
too. So, we will continue to defend all groups who face
discrimination, including indigenous people; women
and girls; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and
intersex persons; people with disabilities and so many
more. We will elevate their perspectives, their rights
and their fights whenever and wherever we get a chance.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would first like to thank
the Permanent Representatives of Chad and Costa Rica
and their teams for coordinating and facilitating the
negotiations on resolution 75/314, on the establishment
of the Permanent Forum of People of African
Descent. Given the importance that Israel attributes
to the Permanent Forum, we have joined consensus on
the resolution.
However, we would like to make it clear that
we disassociate ourselves from any reference in the
resolution to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, including in the second, third and ninth
preambular paragraphs and operative paragraphs 1 and
6. The Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
is a text that politicizes the fight against racism and
should be treated as such.
Mr. Elizondo Belden (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico would like to thank Costa Rica and Chad for
their hard work in facilitating resolution 75/314, on
the establishment of the Permanent Forum of People
of African Descent, which will be a space to promote
the rights and development of people of African
descent and to make progress towards the elimination
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance.
For over two months, the cofacilitators conducted
an open, inclusive and transparent negotiation process,
in which all elements of the draft were discussed. My
delegation regrets that the ninety-sixth plenary meeting
of the General Assembly ended before being able to take
action on the draft resolution, as this organ had decided.

A/75/PV.97

Mexico believes that full adherence to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly is fundamental to its
working methods and appropriate operation. Although,
we do not question the ability of delegations to submit
draft amendments or oral revisions to amendments,
Mexico regrets that one delegation proceeded to do so
after the conclusion of the silence procedure initiated
by the President of the General Assembly through the
submission of A/75/L.121. That action undermines
our current working methods and must not serve as
a precedent. Like many other delegations, Mexico
supported the language of draft resolution A/75/L.119,
as agreed during the cofacilitation process and
submitted by the President of the General Assembly.
Nevertheless, my delegation joined consensus and
welcomes the establishment of the Permanent Forum of
People of African descent.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking the delegations of Chad and Costa Rica for
their incredibly hard work in facilitating resolution
75/314. I am also very grateful for my colleague from
Guyana for reminding us that today is the anniversary
of the coming into force of the Slavery Abolition Act
of 1833. It is an important moment, as it is every year,
because it reminds us of an end to a dark common
chapter, but it is also a reminder — as we look at this
resolution and agenda item — that we have so much
further to go.
As we said on Friday, the United Kingdom continues
to condemn racism in all its forms and will always do so.
We will work for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as
well as the promotion and protection of human rights
for all, without discrimination on any grounds.
At home, we will work to create a fair society where
all people, regardless of ethnic origin or background, are
valued and can reach their full potential. Internationally,
we will continue to be one of the strongest advocates
for the United Nations mechanisms that help to combat
racism. We strongly believe that one of the most
effective ways to tackle disparities and advocate for
respect among different racial groups is to encourage
countries to uphold their human rights obligations.
We are also committed to the various existing
mechanisms and their important instruments, such
as the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which the
United Nations has created to deal with this issue.

21-212949/15

A/75/PV.97

However, given the number of existing United Nations
mechanisms to consider the issue raised by this draft
resolution, as made clear through the negotiation
process, we do not see the need to mandate the Forum
to continue to elaborate a declaration on the promotion,
protection and full respect of the human rights of
people of African descent. The United Kingdom
strongly believes that we should focus our efforts on
implementing existing norms and treaties rather than
creating new declarations.
Nonetheless, having expressed that concern, the
United Kingdom is pleased to join consensus on this
text, and we remain resolute in our commitment to
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
Mr. Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation
takes the floor to thank the cofacilitators — Ambassadors
Ammo Aziza Baroud and Rodrigo Carazo — who,
along with their teams, did a remarkable job in creating
the Permanent Forum of People of African Descent. We
highly value this new Forum, which my country hopes
will become a venue for dialogue, cooperation and
promotion of the rights of people of African descent.
On the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Durban Declaration and Program of Action,
Chile reaffirms its commitment to combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and all forms of
intolerance — not only in Chile, but globally, wherever
anyone faces discrimination, for whatever reason. This
fight against discrimination is more relevant today,
given the disconcerting increase in discrimination, hate
speech, stigmatization and racism.
In conclusion, I reiterate the importance of
continuing the fight against racism and discrimination
and underscore Chile’s support for the future work
of the members of the Permanent Forum of People
of African Descent, which will undoubtedly be a key
mechanism in achieving the full political, economic
and social inclusion of people of African descent in the
societies in which they live as equal citizens without
discrimination of any kind.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to make a comprehensive statement to
explain the content of the work and the proposals of
resolution 75/314, which has just been adopted. My
statement will be followed by that to be delivered by
my dear friend and sister Ambassador Baroud of Chad,
10/15

02/08/2021

with whom I have been working for many months in
order to achieve what has been realized today.
First of all, as co-facilitator of the resolution, I offer
our thanks and gratitude to all countries and groups of
countries that actively participated in this process by
proposing alternative ideas and considerations, which
without a doubt ultimately improved the final product.
We will have to continue fine-tuning it as we move
towards the future. I would like to thank the staff in the
Office of the President of the General Assembly, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Secretariat who supported the
final stages of this process. I would also like to warmly
thank my colleagues who have supported us today and
in recent days as we moved to finalize work on this
historic resolution.
In my national capacity, I would like to say that the
General Assembly is taking a positive step forward in
realizing a dream that will allow societies that received
people who have for centuries contributed in one way
or another through various forms of work, including in
highly degrading slavery, to begin to listen, within the
United Nations and all other forums, to the voices of the
hundreds of millions of people of African descent as
they share their desires, challenges and needs with the
international community.
With the adoption of this resolution, we have
facilitated the functioning of a permanent forum that,
in a world that seeks to stamp out racism and racial
discrimination, will welcome and support all objectives
oriented towards justice and racial equity. Costa Rica
fervently believes that the reservations and precautions
expressed in this Hall after the voting will soon be
allayed because our action today will ultimately
ensure progress towards fulfilling the rights of people
of African descent, who form a part of many of our
societies.
The Permanent Forum of which we are dreaming
and to which Costa Rica is committed must stand as
a vibrant arena in which we listen to the voices of the
millions of people of African descent who continue
living and working within our societies.
That endeavour, we know, cannot be carried out
with the limited budget of the United Nations alone;
the support and commitment of all individuals and
groups, including but not limited to civil society, will
be needed. This is a vibrant, permanent and dynamic
forum which, if it is to function properly, will have
21-21294

02/08/2021

budgetary implications. Those will be addressed in the
near future on the basis of the proposals of the Fifth
Committee and with the participation and commitment
of all stakeholders.
Once again, I thank dear Ambassador Baroud for her
support for our joint work and all of our colleagues for
their support and consensus in adopting this resolution.
Mr. Zareian (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
wish to express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representatives of Chad and Costa Rica as the
co-facilitators of resolution 75/314, adopted today.
While strongly believing in protecting the rights
and promoting the status of people of African descent,
the delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran would
like to register an explanation of position on resolution
75/314, adding that all related provisions, concepts
and terminologies are understood and interpreted
in accordance with the national laws and regulations
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in full respect for its
religious, cultural and moral values and principles. In
this regard, the delegation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran disassociates itself from any reference made to the
non-consensual phrases in the resolution.
Mr. Sadnovic (Indonesia): My delegation
welcomes the consensus adoption of resolution 75/314,
on the establishment of the Permanent Forum of People
of African Descent. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the co-facilitators. In this regard, allow
me to underline the following.
Indonesia has consistently supported the
establishment of the Permanent Forum. Our view is that
the Forum is important as a consultative mechanism for
promoting the rights, as well as improving the safety
and quality of life and livelihood of people of African
descent. As a vast archipelagic country comprising
more than 17,000 islands, with more than 255 million
people from over 1,300 ethnic groups, Indonesia’s
nation-building has been based on the spirit of unity
and diversity.
In this regard, we would like to emphasize that in
Indonesia’s context, our Constitution grants protections
to and responsibility towards the entire Indonesian
nation without discrimination on the basis of race,
ethnicity, religion, lineage or genealogy. Having said
that, we are committed to supporting the Forum to
ensure that it can carry out its mandate constructively,

A/75/PV.97

guided by and in full respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Baroud (Chad) (spoke in French): Today we
have reached the end of an extremely important process
in the march of the history of the peoples that form
humankind. We have today adopted by consensus the
resolution entitled “Establishment of the Permanent
Forum of People of African Descent” (resolution
75/314). It is a small step, but an important one.
I would first like to thank all the States,
organizations and people who have assisted us and,
throughout this long process, have provided us with
their ideas and thoughts.
This resolution and the approaches contained
therein constitute both a delicate balance resulting from
reflections and discussions with Member States and, at
a time when we are commemorating the seventh year
of the resolution, its mid-term review and the twentieth
anniversary of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, a unique opportunity to fulfil the decision
set forth and adopted by consensus in resolution 69/16
of 18 November 2014, entitled “Programme of activities
for the implementation of the International Decade
for People of African Descent“. The time is ripe for
establishing this Permanent Forum.
In our capacity as facilitators, the Permanent
Missions of Costa Rica and Chad have from the outset
been committed to leading an open, inclusive and
transparent process, and, aware as we are of the political
sensitivities around the process, we are convinced that
we can build on the constituent elements of the Forum
and the consultations conducted between 2014 and
2019 with States, civil society and other stakeholders.
All of this has been done with the aim of remaining
as faithful as possible to the mandate granted by the
General Assembly. Accordingly, for four months, our
two countries have insisted on conducting an open and
in-depth conversation, first, through dialogues with
regional groups to set forth the objectives and take note
of the priorities of the different groups and delegations;
secondly, through open consultations conducted with
the participation of Member States, civil society, and in
particular organizations of people of African descent,
which were invited to share their proposals and visions
for the Forum at a still-initial stage of the process;
and finally, through intergovernmental negotiations
to which we attached particular importance so as to
take into account all positions and balance the different

21-2129411/15

A/75/PV.97

interests of Member States from an open, inclusive and
transparent standpoint.
We have not refrained from drawing on the
experience of the United Nations and its existing
mechanisms to find inspiration for the creation of
a new forum, whether it be the Permanent Forum on
Indigenous Issues, the Durban follow-up mechanisms
and other dynamic forums supported by Member States.
With the resolution that was introduced and adopted
today, we are on our way to establishing a forum that
will constitute an important and innovative component
of the United Nations architecture to fight racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and all related forms
of intolerance and discrimination.
Resolution 75/314 is nothing less than the fruit
of many discussions initiated by States to calibrate
their vision, which were sometimes divergent in terms
of expectations for the Permanent Forum, and of the
commitment of the facilitators to break down differences
and lead the discussions to a point of convergence
where all countries and groups of countries could come
together in a spirit of consensus and good faith. Until
the last moments of the negotiation, we were listening
and willing to work with all delegations, addressing
various concerns and being ready to make necessary
changes, sometimes changes of extreme sensitivity, in
order for delegations to reach consensus.
Now is the time to recognize and salute the role
played by the United Nations, our Organization, as
well as the Human Rights Council in Geneva, which
have truly spared no efforts in terms of catalysing
transformative change to advance the human rights of
people of African descent. Our countries commend the
leadership and commitment of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the struggle for the well-being and sustainable
and inclusive development of people of African descent
and in the overall fight against racism. The Permanent
Forum will certainly serve as a platform to generate new
ideas on how to reverse the injustices experienced by
people of African descent around the world and which
have unfortunately remained in place for too long.
This is therefore an important moment in history
that will move us forward towards respecting the rights
of people of African descent — which are human rights.
Finding solutions to their demands and challenges
must therefore also be focused on the pursuit of human
rights. The impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
12/15

02/08/2021

on racial and ethnic minorities, including people of
African descent, and the global movement against
racism have made this clear.
We must strengthen the human rights response
in the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. With this new
forum, the international community will be able to
reaffirm the essential role played by civil society and
the communities concerned, in this case, people of
African descent, in the analysis of the problems they
face and in the responses that States put in place.
It is for this reason that Costa Rica and Chad
are proud to have participated in this moment in the
march of history. We are proud not only for our own
participation, but also that of every delegation and
State that took part in this interesting and truly exciting
discussion. Moreover, we are able to say today that
wisdom and consensus have prevailed. We take this
opportunity to thank all those who have contributed
to this extraordinary exercise in the march forward
by humankind.
Mr. Magosaki (Japan): It is a bit difficult to speak
after that overwhelming statement, but Japan is very
pleased to join with previous speakers in welcoming
the establishment of the Permanent Forum of People of
African Descent and in paying tribute to the facilitators
of resolution 75/314.
Also, following up on the statement of the United
Kingdom, Japan also hopes that, as we implement
resolution 75/314, synergies among other relevant
mechanisms will be newly created and not duplicated.
Mr. Nze (Nigeria). I take the floor on behalf of the
Group of African States.
At the outset, let me thank the Ambassadors
of Chad and Costa Rica for their coordination and
facilitation of the important negotiation that took place
prior to the adoption of resolution 75/314 and for their
hard work during the process. Let me also thank their
colleagues and those colleagues’ delegations for their
commitment, support, flexibility and constructiveness
during the four months of the negotiations process.
That we all joined consensus on resolution 75/314
today is an affirmation of our collective humanity and
desire for justice, equity and freedom, as well as our
belief that racial discrimination, injustice, racism and
xenophobia must not only be addressed but eliminated.
21-21294

02/08/2021

While I must admit that most of our proposals and
concerns were not addressed or taken on board, we
nevertheless take solace in the fact that the resolution
was at least adopted by consensus. We do hope that the
resolution will point the way forward for the people of
African descent to begin to enjoy unhindered access
to justice, freedom and expression of their God-given
potentials and values.
For the African Group, the adoption of resolution
75/314 is a milestone in our collective fight against
racism, racial discrimination and all vestiges of slavery
and the slave trade. It will lead to the desired inclusion of
people of African descent — politically, economically
and socially — that has been denied to them for so long.
Today, as we leave this hallowed Assembly Hall,
and despite the challenges and shortcomings in the text
of resolution 75/314, we cannot but be happy that we
have at least given voice and effect to the aspirations
of all peoples of African descent. The African Group
welcomes the adoption by consensus of this very
important resolution.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa wishes to
thank the Permanent Missions of Chad and Costa Rica
for the hard work they have put in as they co-facilitated
the resolution entitled “Establishment of the Permanent
Forum of People of African Descent” (resolution 75/314).
South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Nigeria on behalf of the Group
of African States.
We welcome the resolution which we deem timely
because years have passed since the international
community agreed to implement the International
Decade for People of African Descent (resolution
69/16). It is unfortunate that contemporary racially
discriminatory effects of structures of inequality
and subordination resulting from failures to redress
racism, slavery, apartheid and colonialism continue
to persist. We are aware of the racial prejudices and
discrimination that people of African descent still
face today. However, we do take note of the way the
international community is addressing these acts, and
we applaud progress made at the national, regional and
international levels, in conformity with the obligations
and commitments made in the Durban Declaration.
We are pleased with those Governments that
have, since the landmark Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, adopted progressive legislative

A/75/PV.97

and administrative measures to effectively combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance. More importantly, we thank all those who
appreciate and respect the knowledge and contribution
of people of African descent to their economies and the
global community overall.
South Africa welcomes the establishment of
the Permanent Forum of People of African Descent
as a consultative mechanism for people of African
descent and other relevant stakeholders, as a platform
for improving the safety and quality of the lives and
livelihoods of the people of African descent, and as
an advisory body to the Human Rights Council. This
mechanism will address the challenges presented by the
scourges of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance in all their contemporary
forms or manifestations, which people of African
descent confront, which impede the full and effective
realization of their aspirations to overcome challenges
in situations of racism and racial discrimination, and
which promote the enjoyment of all of their human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
South Africa reaffirms its commitment to the full
and effective implementation of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action and the International Decade
for People of African Descent, in line with the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda. We reiterate that a just, equitable,
tolerant, open and socially inclusive world is achievable
for all if the needs of those in vulnerable situations
are met and, in the light of their vulnerabilities, if
victims of human rights violations resulting from
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance are accorded access to justice, effective
and appropriate protection remedies and adequate
reparation and satisfaction for any damage resulting
from such discrimination.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the missions of Costa Rica
and Chad and by expressing our appreciation for their
efforts aimed at reaching the resolution that we adopted
by consensus today (resolution 75/314). That being said,
on behalf of my delegation, I would like to express
our pleasure at having adopted such a resolution,
which we consider an achievement in carrying out and
implementing the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action. Indeed, the forum is a new mechanism built
upon the Working Group that existed before, and we
hope that the work of this forum, in addition to other
Human Rights Council mechanisms, will be able to carry

21-2129413/15

A/75/PV.97

out and form the basis of continued implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
specifically in terms of putting an end to the vestiges
of racial discrimination, slavery, the slave trade and
colonialism, which are indeed a plague in the history of
humankind and which persist to this day.
We call on the international community to assume
its responsibilities, because we must recognize that,
until today, there has unfortunately still been resistance
and opposition, even within the United Nations, and we
deplore that state of affairs. We hope that the Forum
will be a new starting point for putting an end to this
deplorable situation.
Secondly, I would like to comment on some of
the findings that we have noted during the negotiation
process, especially during the last Thursday’s meeting.
My delegation would call on the Secretariat to comply
with its mandate, especially when it acts in support of
and to assist the General Assembly and its subsidiary
bodies. In this regard, I would like to point out that the
oral amendments, for example, were generally not made
in accordance with the Assembly’s rules of procedure.
We emphasize that oral amendments are supposed to
be the exception, and that is clear from the relevant
rule, namely, that all amendments should be circulated
with sufficient advance time and that oral amendments
should be the exception (rule 78). We therefore call for
this rule to be respected by everyone, without exception.
Furthermore, we express another strong concern
when we ask that when a meeting is held to adopt a
text as the final step to accomplish in the process,
that meeting cannot logically be postponed. The rules
of procedure must be respected. The letter from the
Group of African States addressed to the President
of the General Assembly is quite clear on that point,
and we invite everyone to read it and express and show
respect for the governing rules of our governing body
and its subsidiary bodies, since what is at stake is the
credibility of this deliberative organ and its subsidiary
bodies. It is also a matter of the credibility of the United
Nations, which we wish to protect from any misuse. We
hope and we make an appeal and request that the rules
of procedure that govern the General Assembly and its
subsidiary bodies be duly respected. That is our appeal
to the Assembly here in plenary.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption. We
14/15

02/08/2021

will now hear statements following the adoption of
the resolution.
I give the floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Hansen (Holy See): The Holy See
acknowledges the adoption of resolution 75/314,
“Establishment of the Permanent Forum of People of
African Descent”, bringing to completion the process
launched in resolution 69/16 of 18 November 2014.
On this occasion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
the Holy See’s firm view that any theory or form
whatsoever of racism and racial discrimination is
morally unacceptable and must be tackled through local,
national and international efforts, including through
measures aimed at providing justice and support for
victims of racism.
The establishment of the Permanent Forum of
People of African Descent, a consultative mechanism
for people of African descent and other relevant
stakeholders, will hopefully contribute to the
international community’s work to consign the evil of
racism and racial discrimination to the history books.
In the light of the negotiations, the presentation of and
the consultations on the amendments before, during and
after the 96th plenary meeting of the General Assembly
and the positions outlined by Member States at the said
meeting (see A/75/PV.96), the Holy See would like to
make three brief comments.
First, my delegation welcomes the decision of the
General Assembly to return to agreed language in the
list of characteristics related to collection, analysis and
disaggregation of data in paragraph 1 (h).
Secondly, following the decision to make an
addition to the end of paragraph 1 (h), our delegation is
obliged to state that the term “gender” is understood by
the Holy See as grounded in biological sexual identity,
that is, the two sexes — male and female — and, as
such, has the same meaning as the term “sex”.
Thirdly, the discussions on this resolution,
both during the informal consultations and at the
96th plenary meeting, are concerning to our delegation.
They displayed substantial disagreements among
States, related both to the formation of the Permanent
Forum and on broader human rights issues, and the
concern that the process has been impacted by distrust
and a lack of good faith. The impact that racism has
on our world calls the United Nations to greater efforts
and unity.
21-21294

02/08/2021

The Holy See hopes that the Permanent Forum
of People of African Descent will strive to advance
common efforts to which States across the globe will
lend their support.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to Her Excellency Mrs. Ammo Aziza Baroud,
Permanent Representative of Chad to the United

A/75/PV.97

Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Rodrigo Carazo,
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the
United Nations, who ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and negotiations on resolution 75/314 in
informal consultations.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 70.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-2129415/15
