A/70/49 (Vol. I)

Resolutions and Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its seventieth session
Volume I
Resolutions
15 September – 23 December 2015

General Assembly
Official Records·Seventieth Session
Supplement No. 49

United Nations·New York, 2016

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly from
15 September to 23 December 2015, as well as the information requested by the Assembly
in section C, paragraph 3, of its resolution 54/248 of 23 December 1999. Decisions
adopted by the Assembly during this period appear in volume II. Resolutions and decisions
adopted subsequently during the seventieth session will be published in volume III.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee ...........................................................1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee...........................................................203
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) .......................................................................................................................323
IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee ......................................................415
V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee .........................................................591
VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee ..........................................................887
VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee .........................................................971
Annexes
I. Allocation of agenda items ..........................................................................................................1003
II. Checklist of resolutions ...............................................................................................................1017

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/1.

Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ..................................................................... 3

70/3.

Declaration on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations ......................................................... 28

70/4.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal .................................................................. 29

70/5.

Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba........................................................................................................................................................... 32

70/6.

Strengthening of the United Nations system ............................................................................................................. 33

70/7.

Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade ............................ 34

70/10.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency................................................................................................... 35

70/11.

Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of
the members of the party accompanying him............................................................................................................ 37

70/12.

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People ........................................................... 38

70/13.

Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat....................................................................................................... 40

70/14.

Special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat .............................................................................................................................................................. 41

70/15.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine ........................................................................................................ 43

70/16.

Jerusalem ............................................................................................................................................................... 50

70/17.

The Syrian Golan ................................................................................................................................................... 51

70/18.

Credentials of representatives to the seventieth session of the General Assembly ........................................................ 53

70/19.

Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace.................................. 53

70/20.

Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace ........................................................... 56

70/75.

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments ............................. 59

70/76.

Return or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin .............................................................................. 84

70/77.

The situation in Afghanistan .................................................................................................................................... 90

70/78.

Extension of the preparatory period preceding the graduation of the Republic of Vanuatu from the least
developed country category ................................................................................................................................... 107

70/104.

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel........................................ 107

70/105.

Participation of volunteers, “White Helmets”, in the activities of the United Nations in the field of humanitarian
relief, rehabilitation and technical cooperation for development ............................................................................... 115

70/106.

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations................................. 117

70/107.

International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development ........ 126

70/108.

Assistance to the Palestinian people ....................................................................................................................... 134

70/109.

A world against violence and violent extremism ..................................................................................................... 138

70/110.

The impacts of the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon................................................................................................... 141
1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/125.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review of the
implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society ................................................... 142

70/183.

Global health and foreign policy: strengthening the management of international health crises .................................. 152

70/227.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

70/228.

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals....................................................................................... 158
Organization of the 2016 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS .................................................................................... 161

70/235.

Oceans and the law of the sea ................................................................................................................................ 163

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/1
A/RES/70/1

Adopted at the 4th plenary meeting, on 25 September 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.1

70/1. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda:
Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
Preamble
This Agenda is a plan of action for people, planet and prosperity. It also seeks to strengthen universal peace in
larger freedom. We recognize that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is
the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development.
All countries and all stakeholders, acting in collaborative partnership, will implement this plan. We are
resolved to free the human race from the tyranny of poverty and want and to heal and secure our planet. We are
determined to take the bold and transformative steps which are urgently needed to shift the world on to a sustainable
and resilient path. As we embark on this collective journey, we pledge that no one will be left behind.
The 17 Sustainable Development Goals and 169 targets which we are announcing today demonstrate the scale
and ambition of this new universal Agenda. They seek to build on the Millennium Development Goals and
complete what they did not achieve. They seek to realize the human rights of all and to achieve gender equality and
the empowerment of all women and girls. They are integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of
sustainable development: the economic, social and environmental.
The Goals and targets will stimulate action over the next 15 years in areas of critical importance for humanity
and the planet.
People
We are determined to end poverty and hunger, in all their forms and dimensions, and to ensure that all human
beings can fulfil their potential in dignity and equality and in a healthy environment.
Planet
We are determined to protect the planet from degradation, including through sustainable consumption and
production, sustainably managing its natural resources and taking urgent action on climate change, so that it can
support the needs of the present and future generations.
Prosperity
We are determined to ensure that all human beings can enjoy prosperous and fulfilling lives and that
economic, social and technological progress occurs in harmony with nature.
Peace
We are determined to foster peaceful, just and inclusive societies which are free from fear and violence. There
can be no sustainable development without peace and no peace without sustainable development.
Partnership
We are determined to mobilize the means required to implement this Agenda through a revitalized Global
Partnership for Sustainable Development, based on a spirit of strengthened global solidarity, focused in particular on
the needs of the poorest and most vulnerable and with the participation of all countries, all stakeholders and all
people.
3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

The interlinkages and integrated nature of the Sustainable Development Goals are of crucial importance in
ensuring that the purpose of the new Agenda is realized. If we realize our ambitions across the full extent of the
Agenda, the lives of all will be profoundly improved and our world will be transformed for the better.
Declaration
Introduction
1. We, the Heads of State and Government and High Representatives, meeting at United Nations Headquarters
in New York from 25 to 27 September 2015 as the Organization celebrates its seventieth anniversary, have decided
today on new global Sustainable Development Goals.
2. On behalf of the peoples we serve, we have adopted a historic decision on a comprehensive, far-reaching and
people-centred set of universal and transformative Goals and targets. We commit ourselves to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of this Agenda by 2030. We recognize that eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development. We are committed to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions –
economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner. We will also build upon the
achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seek to address their unfinished business.
3. We resolve, between now and 2030, to end poverty and hunger everywhere; to combat inequalities within and
among countries; to build peaceful, just and inclusive societies; to protect human rights and promote gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls; and to ensure the lasting protection of the planet and its natural
resources. We resolve also to create conditions for sustainable, inclusive and sustained economic growth, shared
prosperity and decent work for all, taking into account different levels of national development and capacities.
4. As we embark on this great collective journey, we pledge that no one will be left behind. Recognizing that the
dignity of the human person is fundamental, we wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples
and for all segments of society. And we will endeavour to reach the furthest behind first.
5. This is an Agenda of unprecedented scope and significance. It is accepted by all countries and is applicable to
all, taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development and respecting national
policies and priorities. These are universal goals and targets which involve the entire world, developed and
developing countries alike. They are integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable
development.
6. The Goals and targets are the result of over two years of intensive public consultation and engagement with
civil society and other stakeholders around the world, which paid particular attention to the voices of the poorest and
most vulnerable. This consultation included valuable work done by the Open Working Group of the General
Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals and by the United Nations, whose Secretary-General provided a
synthesis report in December 2014.
Our vision
7. In these Goals and targets, we are setting out a supremely ambitious and transformational vision. We envisage
a world free of poverty, hunger, disease and want, where all life can thrive. We envisage a world free of fear and
violence. A world with universal literacy. A world with equitable and universal access to quality education at all
levels, to health care and social protection, where physical, mental and social well-being are assured. A world where
we reaffirm our commitments regarding the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation and where there is
improved hygiene; and where food is sufficient, safe, affordable and nutritious. A world where human habitats are
safe, resilient and sustainable and where there is universal access to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy.
8. We envisage a world of universal respect for human rights and human dignity, the rule of law, justice, equality
and non-discrimination; of respect for race, ethnicity and cultural diversity; and of equal opportunity permitting the
full realization of human potential and contributing to shared prosperity. A world which invests in its children and in
which every child grows up free from violence and exploitation. A world in which every woman and girl enjoys full
gender equality and all legal, social and economic barriers to their empowerment have been removed. A just,
equitable, tolerant, open and socially inclusive world in which the needs of the most vulnerable are met.
4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. We envisage a world in which every country enjoys sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth and
decent work for all. A world in which consumption and production patterns and use of all natural resources – from
air to land, from rivers, lakes and aquifers to oceans and seas – are sustainable. One in which democracy, good
governance and the rule of law, as well as an enabling environment at the national and international levels, are
essential for sustainable development, including sustained and inclusive economic growth, social development,
environmental protection and the eradication of poverty and hunger. One in which development and the application
of technology are climate-sensitive, respect biodiversity and are resilient. One in which humanity lives in harmony
with nature and in which wildlife and other living species are protected.
Our shared principles and commitments
10. The new Agenda is guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including full
respect for international law. It is grounded in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 international human
rights treaties, the Millennium Declaration2 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome.3 It is informed by other
instruments such as the Declaration on the Right to Development.4
11. We reaffirm the outcomes of all major United Nations conferences and summits which have laid a solid
foundation for sustainable development and have helped to shape the new Agenda. These include the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development,5 the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the World
Summit for Social Development, the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development,6 the Beijing Platform for Action7 and the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.
We also reaffirm the follow-up to these conferences, including the outcomes of the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, the third International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries and the Third United Nations
World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction.
12. We reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, including, inter alia,
the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, as set out in principle 7 thereof.
13. The challenges and commitments identified at these major conferences and summits are interrelated and call
for integrated solutions. To address them effectively, a new approach is needed. Sustainable development recognizes
that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, combating inequality within and among countries,
preserving the planet, creating sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth and fostering social inclusion
are linked to each other and are interdependent.
Our world today
14. We are meeting at a time of immense challenges to sustainable development. Billions of our citizens continue
to live in poverty and are denied a life of dignity. There are rising inequalities within and among countries. There are
enormous disparities of opportunity, wealth and power. Gender inequality remains a key challenge. Unemployment,
particularly youth unemployment, is a major concern. Global health threats, more frequent and intense natural
disasters, spiralling conflict, violent extremism, terrorism and related humanitarian crises and forced displacement of
people threaten to reverse much of the development progress made in recent decades. Natural resource depletion
and adverse impacts of environmental degradation, including desertification, drought, land degradation, freshwater
scarcity and loss of biodiversity, add to and exacerbate the list of challenges which humanity faces. Climate change
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 55/2.
3
Resolution 60/1.
4
Resolution 41/128, annex.
5
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
6
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
2

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

is one of the greatest challenges of our time and its adverse impacts undermine the ability of all countries to achieve
sustainable development. Increases in global temperature, sea level rise, ocean acidification and other climate
change impacts are seriously affecting coastal areas and low-lying coastal countries, including many least developed
countries and small island developing States. The survival of many societies, and of the biological support systems
of the planet, is at risk.
15. It is also, however, a time of immense opportunity. Significant progress has been made in meeting many
development challenges. Within the past generation, hundreds of millions of people have emerged from extreme
poverty. Access to education has greatly increased for both boys and girls. The spread of information and
communications technology and global interconnectedness has great potential to accelerate human progress, to
bridge the digital divide and to develop knowledge societies, as does scientific and technological innovation across
areas as diverse as medicine and energy.
16. Almost 15 years ago, the Millennium Development Goals were agreed. These provided an important
framework for development and significant progress has been made in a number of areas. But the progress has been
uneven, particularly in Africa, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island
developing States, and some of the Millennium Development Goals remain off-track, in particular those related to
maternal, newborn and child health and to reproductive health. We recommit ourselves to the full realization of all
the Millennium Development Goals, including the off-track Millennium Development Goals, in particular by
providing focused and scaled-up assistance to least developed countries and other countries in special situations, in
line with relevant support programmes. The new Agenda builds on the Millennium Development Goals and seeks
to complete what they did not achieve, particularly in reaching the most vulnerable.
17. In its scope, however, the framework we are announcing today goes far beyond the Millennium Development
Goals. Alongside continuing development priorities such as poverty eradication, health, education and food security
and nutrition, it sets out a wide range of economic, social and environmental objectives. It also promises more
peaceful and inclusive societies. It also, crucially, defines means of implementation. Reflecting the integrated
approach that we have decided on, there are deep interconnections and many cross-cutting elements across the new
Goals and targets.
The new Agenda
18. We are announcing today 17 Sustainable Development Goals with 169 associated targets which are integrated
and indivisible. Never before have world leaders pledged common action and endeavour across such a broad and
universal policy agenda. We are setting out together on the path towards sustainable development, devoting
ourselves collectively to the pursuit of global development and of “win-win” cooperation which can bring huge
gains to all countries and all parts of the world. We reaffirm that every State has, and shall freely exercise, full
permanent sovereignty over all its wealth, natural resources and economic activity. We will implement the Agenda
for the full benefit of all, for today’s generation and for future generations. In doing so, we reaffirm our commitment
to international law and emphasize that the Agenda is to be implemented in a manner that is consistent with the
rights and obligations of States under international law.
19. We reaffirm the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as other international
instruments relating to human rights and international law. We emphasize the responsibilities of all States, in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, to respect, protect and promote human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction of any kind as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, property, birth, disability or other status.
20. Realizing gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls will make a crucial contribution to
progress across all the Goals and targets. The achievement of full human potential and of sustainable development is
not possible if one half of humanity continues to be denied its full human rights and opportunities. Women and girls
must enjoy equal access to quality education, economic resources and political participation as well as equal
opportunities with men and boys for employment, leadership and decision-making at all levels. We will work for a
significant increase in investments to close the gender gap and strengthen support for institutions in relation to
gender equality and the empowerment of women at the global, regional and national levels. All forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls will be eliminated, including through the engagement of men
and boys. The systematic mainstreaming of a gender perspective in the implementation of the Agenda is crucial.
6

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

21. The new Goals and targets will come into effect on 1 January 2016 and will guide the decisions we take over
the next 15 years. All of us will work to implement the Agenda within our own countries and at the regional and
global levels, taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development and respecting
national policies and priorities. We will respect national policy space for sustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, in particular for developing States, while remaining consistent with relevant international rules
and commitments. We acknowledge also the importance of the regional and subregional dimensions, regional
economic integration and interconnectivity in sustainable development. Regional and subregional frameworks can
facilitate the effective translation of sustainable development policies into concrete action at the national level.
22. Each country faces specific challenges in its pursuit of sustainable development. The most vulnerable
countries and, in particular, African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States, deserve special attention, as do countries in situations of conflict and post-conflict
countries. There are also serious challenges within many middle-income countries.
23. People who are vulnerable must be empowered. Those whose needs are reflected in the Agenda include all
children, youth, persons with disabilities (of whom more than 80 per cent live in poverty), people living with
HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples, refugees and internally displaced persons and migrants. We resolve
to take further effective measures and actions, in conformity with international law, to remove obstacles and
constraints, strengthen support and meet the special needs of people living in areas affected by complex
humanitarian emergencies and in areas affected by terrorism.
24. We are committed to ending poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including by eradicating extreme poverty
by 2030. All people must enjoy a basic standard of living, including through social protection systems. We are also
determined to end hunger and to achieve food security as a matter of priority and to end all forms of malnutrition. In
this regard, we reaffirm the important role and inclusive nature of the Committee on World Food Security and
welcome the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action.8 We will devote resources to
developing rural areas and sustainable agriculture and fisheries, supporting smallholder farmers, especially women
farmers, herders and fishers in developing countries, particularly least developed countries.
25. We commit to providing inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels – early childhood, primary,
secondary, tertiary, technical and vocational training. All people, irrespective of sex, age, race or ethnicity, and
persons with disabilities, migrants, indigenous peoples, children and youth, especially those in vulnerable situations,
should have access to life-long learning opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to
exploit opportunities and to participate fully in society. We will strive to provide children and youth with a nurturing
environment for the full realization of their rights and capabilities, helping our countries to reap the demographic
dividend, including through safe schools and cohesive communities and families.
26. To promote physical and mental health and well-being, and to extend life expectancy for all, we must achieve
universal health coverage and access to quality health care. No one must be left behind. We commit to accelerating
the progress made to date in reducing newborn, child and maternal mortality by ending all such preventable deaths
before 2030. We are committed to ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services,
including for family planning, information and education. We will equally accelerate the pace of progress made in
fighting malaria, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, hepatitis, Ebola and other communicable diseases and epidemics,
including by addressing growing anti-microbial resistance and the problem of unattended diseases affecting
developing countries. We are committed to the prevention and treatment of non-communicable diseases, including
behavioural, developmental and neurological disorders, which constitute a major challenge for sustainable
development.
27. We will seek to build strong economic foundations for all our countries. Sustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth is essential for prosperity. This will only be possible if wealth is shared and income inequality is
addressed. We will work to build dynamic, sustainable, innovative and people-centred economies, promoting youth
employment and women’s economic empowerment, in particular, and decent work for all. We will eradicate forced
labour and human trafficking and end child labour in all its forms. All countries stand to benefit from having a
healthy and well-educated workforce with the knowledge and skills needed for productive and fulfilling work and
_______________
8

World Health Organization, document EB 136/8, annexes I and II.

7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

full participation in society. We will strengthen the productive capacities of least developed countries in all sectors,
including through structural transformation. We will adopt policies which increase productive capacities,
productivity and productive employment; financial inclusion; sustainable agriculture, pastoralist and fisheries
development; sustainable industrial development; universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy services; sustainable transport systems; and quality and resilient infrastructure.
28. We commit to making fundamental changes in the way that our societies produce and consume goods and
services. Governments, international organizations, the business sector and other non-State actors and individuals
must contribute to changing unsustainable consumption and production patterns, including through the
mobilization, from all sources, of financial and technical assistance to strengthen developing countries’ scientific,
technological and innovative capacities to move towards more sustainable patterns of consumption and production.
We encourage the implementation of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and
Production Patterns. All countries take action, with developed countries taking the lead, taking into account the
development and capabilities of developing countries.
29. We recognize the positive contribution of migrants for inclusive growth and sustainable development. We also
recognize that international migration is a multidimensional reality of major relevance for the development of
countries of origin, transit and destination, which requires coherent and comprehensive responses. We will
cooperate internationally to ensure safe, orderly and regular migration involving full respect for human rights and
the humane treatment of migrants regardless of migration status, of refugees and of displaced persons. Such
cooperation should also strengthen the resilience of communities hosting refugees, particularly in developing
countries. We underline the right of migrants to return to their country of citizenship, and recall that States must
ensure that their returning nationals are duly received.
30. States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral economic, financial or trade
measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full
achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries.
31. We acknowledge that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change9 is the primary
international, intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global response to climate change. We are determined to
address decisively the threat posed by climate change and environmental degradation. The global nature of climate
change calls for the widest possible international cooperation aimed at accelerating the reduction of global
greenhouse gas emissions and addressing adaptation to the adverse impacts of climate change. We note with grave
concern the significant gap between the aggregate effect of parties’ mitigation pledges in terms of global annual
emissions of greenhouse gases by 2020 and aggregate emission pathways consistent with having a likely chance of
holding the increase in global average temperature below 2 degrees Celsius, or 1.5 degrees Celsius above
pre-industrial levels.
32. Looking ahead to the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties in Paris, we underscore the
commitment of all States to work for an ambitious and universal climate agreement. We reaffirm that the protocol,
another legal instrument or agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all parties shall
address in a balanced manner, inter alia, mitigation, adaptation, finance, technology development and transfer and
capacity-building; and transparency of action and support.
33. We recognize that social and economic development depends on the sustainable management of our planet’s
natural resources. We are therefore determined to conserve and sustainably use oceans and seas, freshwater
resources, as well as forests, mountains and drylands and to protect biodiversity, ecosystems and wildlife. We are
also determined to promote sustainable tourism, to tackle water scarcity and water pollution, to strengthen
cooperation on desertification, dust storms, land degradation and drought and to promote resilience and disaster risk
reduction. In this regard, we look forward to the thirteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity to be held in Mexico.
34. We recognize that sustainable urban development and management are crucial to the quality of life of our
people. We will work with local authorities and communities to renew and plan our cities and human settlements so
as to foster community cohesion and personal security and to stimulate innovation and employment. We will reduce
_______________
9

8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.1771, No. 30822.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the negative impacts of urban activities and of chemicals which are hazardous for human health and the
environment, including through the environmentally sound management and safe use of chemicals, the reduction
and recycling of waste and the more efficient use of water and energy. And we will work to minimize the impact of
cities on the global climate system. We will also take account of population trends and projections in our national
rural and urban development strategies and policies. We look forward to the upcoming United Nations Conference
on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development to be held in Quito.
35. Sustainable development cannot be realized without peace and security; and peace and security will be at risk
without sustainable development. The new Agenda recognizes the need to build peaceful, just and inclusive
societies that provide equal access to justice and that are based on respect for human rights (including the right to
development), on effective rule of law and good governance at all levels and on transparent, effective and
accountable institutions. Factors which give rise to violence, insecurity and injustice, such as inequality, corruption,
poor governance and illicit financial and arms flows, are addressed in the Agenda. We must redouble our efforts to
resolve or prevent conflict and to support post-conflict countries, including through ensuring that women have a role
in peacebuilding and State-building. We call for further effective measures and actions to be taken, in conformity
with international law, to remove the obstacles to the full realization of the right of self-determination of peoples
living under colonial and foreign occupation, which continue to adversely affect their economic and social
development as well as their environment.
36. We pledge to foster intercultural understanding, tolerance, mutual respect and an ethic of global citizenship
and shared responsibility. We acknowledge the natural and cultural diversity of the world and recognize that all
cultures and civilizations can contribute to, and are crucial enablers of, sustainable development.
37. Sport is also an important enabler of sustainable development. We recognize the growing contribution of sport
to the realization of development and peace in its promotion of tolerance and respect and the contributions it makes
to the empowerment of women and of young people, individuals and communities as well as to health, education
and social inclusion objectives.
38. We reaffirm, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the need to respect the territorial integrity
and political independence of States.
Means of implementation
39. The scale and ambition of the new Agenda requires a revitalized Global Partnership to ensure its
implementation. We fully commit to this. This Partnership will work in a spirit of global solidarity, in particular
solidarity with the poorest and with people in vulnerable situations. It will facilitate an intensive global engagement
in support of implementation of all the Goals and targets, bringing together Governments, the private sector, civil
society, the United Nations system and other actors and mobilizing all available resources.
40. The means of implementation targets under Goal 17 and under each Sustainable Development Goal are key to
realizing our Agenda and are of equal importance with the other Goals and targets. The Agenda, including the
Sustainable Development Goals, can be met within the framework of a revitalized Global Partnership for
Sustainable Development, supported by the concrete policies and actions as outlined in the outcome document of
the third International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa from 13 to 16 July 2015. We
welcome the endorsement by the General Assembly of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,10 which is an integral part
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We recognize that the full implementation of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda is critical for the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals and targets.
41. We recognize that each country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development. The
new Agenda deals with the means required for implementation of the Goals and targets. We recognize that these will
include the mobilization of financial resources as well as capacity-building and the transfer of environmentally
sound technologies to developing countries on favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms,
as mutually agreed. Public finance, both domestic and international, will play a vital role in providing essential
services and public goods and in catalysing other sources of finance. We acknowledge the role of the diverse private
_______________
10
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development (Addis Ababa Action Agenda),
adopted by the General Assembly on 27 July 2015 (resolution 69/313, annex).

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

sector, ranging from micro-enterprises to cooperatives to multinationals, and that of civil society organizations and
philanthropic organizations in the implementation of the new Agenda.
42. We support the implementation of relevant strategies and programmes of action, including the Istanbul
Declaration and Programme of Action,11 the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway12 and the
Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024,13 and reaffirm the
importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the programme of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development,14 all of which are integral to the new Agenda. We recognize the major challenge to the achievement
of durable peace and sustainable development in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.
43. We emphasize that international public finance plays an important role in complementing the efforts of
countries to mobilize public resources domestically, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable countries with
limited domestic resources. An important use of international public finance, including official development
assistance (ODA), is to catalyse additional resource mobilization from other sources, public and private. ODA
providers reaffirm their respective commitments, including the commitment by many developed countries to
achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance (ODA/GNI) to
developing countries and 0.15 per cent to 0.2 per cent of ODA/GNI to least developed countries.
44. We acknowledge the importance for international financial institutions to support, in line with their mandates,
the policy space of each country, in particular developing countries. We recommit to broadening and strengthening
the voice and participation of developing countries – including African countries, least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and middle-income countries – in international
economic decision-making, norm-setting and global economic governance.
45. We acknowledge also the essential role of national parliaments through their enactment of legislation and
adoption of budgets and their role in ensuring accountability for the effective implementation of our commitments.
Governments and public institutions will also work closely on implementation with regional and local authorities,
subregional institutions, international institutions, academia, philanthropic organizations, volunteer groups and
others.
46. We underline the important role and comparative advantage of an adequately resourced, relevant, coherent,
efficient and effective United Nations system in supporting the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and sustainable development. While stressing the importance of strengthened national ownership and leadership at
the country level, we express our support for the ongoing dialogue in the Economic and Social Council on the
longer-term positioning of the United Nations development system in the context of this Agenda.
Follow-up and review
47. Our Governments have the primary responsibility for follow-up and review, at the national, regional and
global levels, in relation to the progress made in implementing the Goals and targets over the coming 15 years. To
support accountability to our citizens, we will provide for systematic follow-up and review at the various levels, as
set out in this Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. The high-level political forum under the auspices of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council will have the central role in overseeing follow-up and
review at the global level.
48. Indicators are being developed to assist this work. Quality, accessible, timely and reliable disaggregated data
will be needed to help with the measurement of progress and to ensure that no one is left behind. Such data is key to
decision-making. Data and information from existing reporting mechanisms should be used where possible. We
agree to intensify our efforts to strengthen statistical capacities in developing countries, particularly African countries,
least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and middle-income
countries. We are committed to developing broader measures of progress to complement gross domestic product.
_______________
11

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chaps. I and II.
12
Resolution 69/15, annex.
13
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
14
A/57/304, annex.

10

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

A call for action to change our world
49. Seventy years ago, an earlier generation of world leaders came together to create the United Nations. From the
ashes of war and division they fashioned this Organization and the values of peace, dialogue and international
cooperation which underpin it. The supreme embodiment of those values is the Charter of the United Nations.
50. Today we are also taking a decision of great historic significance. We resolve to build a better future for all
people, including the millions who have been denied the chance to lead decent, dignified and rewarding lives and to
achieve their full human potential. We can be the first generation to succeed in ending poverty; just as we may be
the last to have a chance of saving the planet. The world will be a better place in 2030 if we succeed in our
objectives.
51. What we are announcing today – an Agenda for global action for the next 15 years – is a charter for people
and planet in the twenty-first century. Children and young women and men are critical agents of change and will
find in the new Goals a platform to channel their infinite capacities for activism into the creation of a better world.
52. “We the peoples” are the celebrated opening words of the Charter of the United Nations. It is “we the peoples”
who are embarking today on the road to 2030. Our journey will involve Governments as well as parliaments, the
United Nations system and other international institutions, local authorities, indigenous peoples, civil society,
business and the private sector, the scientific and academic community – and all people. Millions have already
engaged with, and will own, this Agenda. It is an Agenda of the people, by the people and for the people – and this,
we believe, will ensure its success.
53. The future of humanity and of our planet lies in our hands. It lies also in the hands of today’s younger
generation who will pass the torch to future generations. We have mapped the road to sustainable development; it
will be for all of us to ensure that the journey is successful and its gains irreversible.
Sustainable Development Goals and targets
54. Following an inclusive process of intergovernmental negotiations, and based on the proposal of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals,15 which includes a chapeau contextualizing the latter, set out
below are the Goals and targets which we have agreed.
55. The Sustainable Development Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible, global in nature and universally
applicable, taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development and respecting
national policies and priorities. Targets are defined as aspirational and global, with each Government setting its own
national targets guided by the global level of ambition but taking into account national circumstances. Each
Government will also decide how these aspirational and global targets should be incorporated into national planning
processes, policies and strategies. It is important to recognize the link between sustainable development and other
relevant ongoing processes in the economic, social and environmental fields.
56. In deciding upon these Goals and targets, we recognize that each country faces specific challenges to achieve
sustainable development, and we underscore the special challenges facing the most vulnerable countries and, in
particular, African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island
developing States, as well as the specific challenges facing the middle-income countries. Countries in situations of
conflict also need special attention.
57. We recognize that baseline data for several of the targets remains unavailable, and we call for increased
support for strengthening data collection and capacity-building in Member States, to develop national and global
baselines where they do not yet exist. We commit to addressing this gap in data collection so as to better inform the
measurement of progress, in particular for those targets below which do not have clear numerical targets.
58. We encourage ongoing efforts by States in other forums to address key issues which pose potential challenges
to the implementation of our Agenda, and we respect the independent mandates of those processes. We intend that
the Agenda and its implementation would support, and be without prejudice to, those other processes and the
decisions taken therein.
_______________
15

Contained in the report of the Open Working Group of the General Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals (A/68/970 and Corr.1;
see also A/68/970/Add.1–3).

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

59. We recognize that there are different approaches, visions, models and tools available to each country, in
accordance with its national circumstances and priorities, to achieve sustainable development; and we reaffirm that
planet Earth and its ecosystems are our common home and that “Mother Earth” is a common expression in a
number of countries and regions.
Sustainable Development Goals
Goal 1.

End poverty in all its forms everywhere

Goal 2.

End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable
agriculture

Goal 3.

Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages

Goal 4.

Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities
for all

Goal 5.

Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

Goal 6.

Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all

Goal 7

Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all

Goal 8.

Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive
employment and decent work for all

Goal 9.

Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and
foster innovation

Goal 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries
Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts*
Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development
Goal 15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage
forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt
biodiversity loss
Goal 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to
justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels
Goal 17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for
Sustainable Development
*

Acknowledging that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is the primary international,
intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global response to climate change.

Goal 1.

End poverty in all its forms everywhere

1.1 By 2030, eradicate extreme poverty for all people everywhere, currently measured as people living on less
than $1.25 a day
1.2 By 2030, reduce at least by half the proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all
its dimensions according to national definitions
1.3 Implement nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including floors, and by 2030
achieve substantial coverage of the poor and the vulnerable
12

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1.4 By 2030, ensure that all men and women, in particular the poor and the vulnerable, have equal rights to
economic resources, as well as access to basic services, ownership and control over land and other forms of
property, inheritance, natural resources, appropriate new technology and financial services, including microfinance
1.5 By 2030, build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations and reduce their exposure and
vulnerability to climate-related extreme events and other economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters
1.a Ensure significant mobilization of resources from a variety of sources, including through enhanced
development cooperation, in order to provide adequate and predictable means for developing countries, in particular
least developed countries, to implement programmes and policies to end poverty in all its dimensions
1.b Create sound policy frameworks at the national, regional and international levels, based on pro-poor and
gender-sensitive development strategies, to support accelerated investment in poverty eradication actions
Goal 2.

End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture

2.1 By 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable
situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round
2.2 By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on
stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant
and lactating women and older persons
2.3 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women,
indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other
productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and
non-farm employment
2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that
increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to
climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil
quality
2.5 By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and
their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national,
regional and international levels, and promote access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the
utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed
2.a Increase investment, including through enhanced international cooperation, in rural infrastructure, agricultural
research and extension services, technology development and plant and livestock gene banks in order to enhance
agricultural productive capacity in developing countries, in particular least developed countries
2.b Correct and prevent trade restrictions and distortions in world agricultural markets, including through the
parallel elimination of all forms of agricultural export subsidies and all export measures with equivalent effect, in
accordance with the mandate of the Doha Development Round
2.c Adopt measures to ensure the proper functioning of food commodity markets and their derivatives and
facilitate timely access to market information, including on food reserves, in order to help limit extreme food price
volatility
Goal 3.

Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages

3.1 By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births
3.2 By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming to
reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25
per 1,000 live births
3.3 By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and combat
hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases
13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3.4 By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases through prevention and
treatment and promote mental health and well-being
3.5 Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use
of alcohol
3.6 By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents
3.7 By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family
planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and
programmes
3.8 Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care
services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water and
soil pollution and contamination
3.a Strengthen the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
in all countries, as appropriate
3.b Support the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the communicable and noncommunicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, provide access to affordable essential medicines
and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which affirms
the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular, provide access to
medicines for all
3.c Substantially increase health financing and the recruitment, development, training and retention of the health
workforce in developing countries, especially in least developed countries and small island developing States
3.d Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early warning, risk reduction
and management of national and global health risks
Goal 4.

Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities
for all

4.1 By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary and secondary education
leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes
4.2 By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys have access to quality early childhood development, care and preprimary education so that they are ready for primary education
4.3 By 2030, ensure equal access for all women and men to affordable and quality technical, vocational and
tertiary education, including university
4.4 By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including technical
and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship
4.5 By 2030, eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure equal access to all levels of education and
vocational training for the vulnerable, including persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and children in
vulnerable situations
4.6 By 2030, ensure that all youth and a substantial proportion of adults, both men and women, achieve literacy
and numeracy
4.7 By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable
development, including, among others, through education for sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles,
human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation
of cultural diversity and of culture’s contribution to sustainable development
14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4.a Build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and provide safe, nonviolent, inclusive and effective learning environments for all
4.b By 2020, substantially expand globally the number of scholarships available to developing countries, in
particular least developed countries, small island developing States and African countries, for enrolment in higher
education, including vocational training and information and communications technology, technical, engineering
and scientific programmes, in developed countries and other developing countries
4.c By 2030, substantially increase the supply of qualified teachers, including through international cooperation
for teacher training in developing countries, especially least developed countries and small island developing
States
Goal 5.

Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere
5.2 Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including
trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation
5.3 Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation
5.4 Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services, infrastructure
and social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the household and the family as
nationally appropriate
5.5 Ensure women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decisionmaking in political, economic and public life
5.6 Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as agreed in accordance
with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development and the Beijing
Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their review conferences
5.a Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to ownership and
control over land and other forms of property, financial services, inheritance and natural resources, in accordance
with national laws
5.b Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications technology, to
promote the empowerment of women
5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls at all levels
Goal 6.

Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all

6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all
6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation,
paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing
recycling and safe reuse globally
6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and
supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water
scarcity
6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary
cooperation as appropriate
6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers
and lakes
15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6.a By 2030, expand international cooperation and capacity-building support to developing countries in waterand sanitation-related activities and programmes, including water harvesting, desalination, water efficiency,
wastewater treatment, recycling and reuse technologies
6.b Support and strengthen the participation of local communities in improving water and sanitation management
Goal 7.

Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all

7.1 By 2030, ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services
7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix
7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency
7.a By 2030, enhance international cooperation to facilitate access to clean energy research and technology,
including renewable energy, energy efficiency and advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel technology, and promote
investment in energy infrastructure and clean energy technology
7.b By 2030, expand infrastructure and upgrade technology for supplying modern and sustainable energy services
for all in developing countries, in particular least developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked
developing countries, in accordance with their respective programmes of support
Goal 8.

Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment
and decent work for all

8.1 Sustain per capita economic growth in accordance with national circumstances and, in particular, at least
7 per cent gross domestic product growth per annum in the least developed countries
8.2 Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, technological upgrading and
innovation, including through a focus on high-value added and labour-intensive sectors
8.3 Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job creation,
entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and growth of micro-, small- and
medium-sized enterprises, including through access to financial services
8.4 Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource efficiency in consumption and production and
endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, in accordance with the 10-Year
Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production, with developed countries taking the lead
8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for
young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value
8.6 By 2020, substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education or training
8.7 Take immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking
and secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including recruitment and use of child
soldiers, and by 2025 end child labour in all its forms
8.8 Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant
workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious employment
8.9 By 2030, devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local
culture and products
8.10 Strengthen the capacity of domestic financial institutions to encourage and expand access to banking,
insurance and financial services for all
8.a Increase Aid for Trade support for developing countries, in particular least developed countries, including
through the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries
8.b By 2020, develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment and implement the Global Jobs
Pact of the International Labour Organization
16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Goal 9.

Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster
innovation

9.1 Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and transborder
infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being, with a focus on affordable and equitable
access for all
9.2 Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise industry’s share of
employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed
countries
9.3 Increase the access of small-scale industrial and other enterprises, in particular in developing countries, to
financial services, including affordable credit, and their integration into value chains and markets
9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use
efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes, with all
countries taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities
9.5 Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors in all countries, in
particular developing countries, including, by 2030, encouraging innovation and substantially increasing the number
of research and development workers per 1 million people and public and private research and development
spending
9.a Facilitate sustainable and resilient infrastructure development in developing countries through enhanced
financial, technological and technical support to African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States
9.b Support domestic technology development, research and innovation in developing countries, including by
ensuring a conducive policy environment for, inter alia, industrial diversification and value addition to commodities
9.c Significantly increase access to information and communications technology and strive to provide universal
and affordable access to the Internet in least developed countries by 2020
Goal 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries
10.1 By 2030, progressively achieve and sustain income growth of the bottom 40 per cent of the population at a
rate higher than the national average
10.2 By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all, irrespective of age, sex,
disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status
10.3 Ensure equal opportunity and reduce inequalities of outcome, including by eliminating discriminatory laws,
policies and practices and promoting appropriate legislation, policies and action in this regard
10.4 Adopt policies, especially fiscal, wage and social protection policies, and progressively achieve greater
equality
10.5 Improve the regulation and monitoring of global financial markets and institutions and strengthen the
implementation of such regulations
10.6 Ensure enhanced representation and voice for developing countries in decision-making in global
international economic and financial institutions in order to deliver more effective, credible, accountable and
legitimate institutions
10.7 Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including through the
implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies
10.a Implement the principle of special and differential treatment for developing countries, in particular least
developed countries, in accordance with World Trade Organization agreements
10.b Encourage official development assistance and financial flows, including foreign direct investment, to States
where the need is greatest, in particular least developed countries, African countries, small island developing States
and landlocked developing countries, in accordance with their national plans and programmes
17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

10.c By 2030, reduce to less than 3 per cent the transaction costs of migrant remittances and eliminate remittance
corridors with costs higher than 5 per cent
Goal 11.
11.1

Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable

By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums

11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving
road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable
situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons
11.3 By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for participatory, integrated and
sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries
11.4

Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage

11.5 By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially
decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including waterrelated disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations
11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention
to air quality and municipal and other waste management
11.7 By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in particular for
women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities
11.a Support positive economic, social and environmental links between urban, peri-urban and rural areas by
strengthening national and regional development planning
11.b By 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing
integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change,
resilience to disasters, and develop and implement, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030, holistic disaster risk management at all levels
11.c Support least developed countries, including through financial and technical assistance, in building
sustainable and resilient buildings utilizing local materials
Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
12.1 Implement the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns,
all countries taking action, with developed countries taking the lead, taking into account the development and
capabilities of developing countries
12.2

By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources

12.3 By 2030, halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along
production and supply chains, including post-harvest losses
12.4 By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life
cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and significantly reduce their release to air, water and
soil in order to minimize their adverse impacts on human health and the environment
12.5

By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse

12.6 Encourage companies, especially large and transnational companies, to adopt sustainable practices and to
integrate sustainability information into their reporting cycle
12.7

Promote public procurement practices that are sustainable, in accordance with national policies and priorities

12.8 By 2030, ensure that people everywhere have the relevant information and awareness for sustainable
development and lifestyles in harmony with nature
18

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12.a Support developing countries to strengthen their scientific and technological capacity to move towards more
sustainable patterns of consumption and production
12.b Develop and implement tools to monitor sustainable development impacts for sustainable tourism that
creates jobs and promotes local culture and products
12.c Rationalize inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption by removing market
distortions, in accordance with national circumstances, including by restructuring taxation and phasing out those
harmful subsidies, where they exist, to reflect their environmental impacts, taking fully into account the specific
needs and conditions of developing countries and minimizing the possible adverse impacts on their development in
a manner that protects the poor and the affected communities
Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
13.1

Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries

13.2

Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning

13.3 Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation,
adaptation, impact reduction and early warning
13.a Implement the commitment undertaken by developed-country parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change to a goal of mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all sources to
address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on
implementation and fully operationalize the Green Climate Fund through its capitalization as soon as possible
13.b Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in
least developed countries and small island developing States, including focusing on women, youth and local and
marginalized communities
Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based
activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution
14.2 By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant adverse
impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action for their restoration in order to achieve healthy
and productive oceans
14.3 Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced scientific cooperation
at all levels
14.4 By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and
destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the
shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their
biological characteristics
14.5 By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and international
law and based on the best available scientific information
14.6 By 2020, prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to overcapacity and overfishing,
eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and refrain from introducing new
such subsidies, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and differential treatment for developing and least
developed countries should be an integral part of the World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation16

_______________


Acknowledging that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is the primary international, intergovernmental
forum for negotiating the global response to climate change.
16
Taking into account ongoing World Trade Organization negotiations, the Doha Development Agenda and the Hong Kong ministerial
mandate.

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14.7 By 2030, increase the economic benefits to small island developing States and least developed countries
from the sustainable use of marine resources, including through sustainable management of fisheries, aquaculture
and tourism
14.a Increase scientific knowledge, develop research capacity and transfer marine technology, taking into account
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology,
in order to improve ocean health and to enhance the contribution of marine biodiversity to the development of
developing countries, in particular small island developing States and least developed countries
14.b

Provide access for small-scale artisanal fishers to marine resources and markets

14.c Enhance the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources by implementing international law
as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which provides the legal framework for the
conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources, as recalled in paragraph 158 of “The future we want”
Goal 15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests,
combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss
15.1 By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater
ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under
international agreements
15.2 By 2020, promote the implementation of sustainable management of all types of forests, halt deforestation,
restore degraded forests and substantially increase afforestation and reforestation globally
15.3 By 2030, combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including land affected by desertification,
drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land degradation-neutral world
15.4 By 2030, ensure the conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, in order to enhance
their capacity to provide benefits that are essential for sustainable development
15.5 Take urgent and significant action to reduce the degradation of natural habitats, halt the loss of biodiversity
and, by 2020, protect and prevent the extinction of threatened species
15.6 Promote fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and
promote appropriate access to such resources, as internationally agreed
15.7 Take urgent action to end poaching and trafficking of protected species of flora and fauna and address both
demand and supply of illegal wildlife products
15.8 By 2020, introduce measures to prevent the introduction and significantly reduce the impact of invasive
alien species on land and water ecosystems and control or eradicate the priority species
15.9 By 2020, integrate ecosystem and biodiversity values into national and local planning, development
processes, poverty reduction strategies and accounts
15.a Mobilize and significantly increase financial resources from all sources to conserve and sustainably use
biodiversity and ecosystems
15.b Mobilize significant resources from all sources and at all levels to finance sustainable forest management
and provide adequate incentives to developing countries to advance such management, including for conservation
and reforestation
15.c Enhance global support for efforts to combat poaching and trafficking of protected species, including by
increasing the capacity of local communities to pursue sustainable livelihood opportunities
Goal 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for
all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels

20

16.1

Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere

16.2

End abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against and torture of children

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16.3

Promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure equal access to justice for all

16.4 By 2030, significantly reduce illicit financial and arms flows, strengthen the recovery and return of stolen
assets and combat all forms of organized crime
16.5

Substantially reduce corruption and bribery in all their forms

16.6

Develop effective, accountable and transparent institutions at all levels

16.7

Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making at all levels

16.8

Broaden and strengthen the participation of developing countries in the institutions of global governance

16.9

By 2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration

16.10 Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national
legislation and international agreements
16.a Strengthen relevant national institutions, including through international cooperation, for building capacity at
all levels, in particular in developing countries, to prevent violence and combat terrorism and crime
16.b

Promote and enforce non-discriminatory laws and policies for sustainable development

Goal 17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable
Development
Finance
17.1 Strengthen domestic resource mobilization, including through international support to developing countries,
to improve domestic capacity for tax and other revenue collection
17.2 Developed countries to implement fully their official development assistance commitments, including the
commitment by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official
development assistance (ODA/GNI) to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of ODA/GNI to least
developed countries; ODA providers are encouraged to consider setting a target to provide at least 0.20 per cent of
ODA/GNI to least developed countries
17.3

Mobilize additional financial resources for developing countries from multiple sources

17.4 Assist developing countries in attaining long-term debt sustainability through coordinated policies aimed at
fostering debt financing, debt relief and debt restructuring, as appropriate, and address the external debt of highly
indebted poor countries to reduce debt distress
17.5

Adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for least developed countries

Technology
17.6 Enhance North-South, South-South and triangular regional and international cooperation on and access to
science, technology and innovation and enhance knowledge sharing on mutually agreed terms, including through
improved coordination among existing mechanisms, in particular at the United Nations level, and through a global
technology facilitation mechanism
17.7 Promote the development, transfer, dissemination and diffusion of environmentally sound technologies to
developing countries on favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed
17.8 Fully operationalize the technology bank and science, technology and innovation capacity-building
mechanism for least developed countries by 2017 and enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular
information and communications technology
Capacity-building
17.9 Enhance international support for implementing effective and targeted capacity-building in developing
countries to support national plans to implement all the Sustainable Development Goals, including through NorthSouth, South-South and triangular cooperation
21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Trade
17.10 Promote a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system under
the World Trade Organization, including through the conclusion of negotiations under its Doha Development
Agenda
17.11 Significantly increase the exports of developing countries, in particular with a view to doubling the least
developed countries’ share of global exports by 2020
17.12 Realize timely implementation of duty-free and quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all least
developed countries, consistent with World Trade Organization decisions, including by ensuring that preferential
rules of origin applicable to imports from least developed countries are transparent and simple, and contribute to
facilitating market access
Systemic issues
Policy and institutional coherence
17.13 Enhance global macroeconomic stability, including through policy coordination and policy coherence
17.14 Enhance policy coherence for sustainable development
17.15 Respect each country’s policy space and leadership to establish and implement policies for poverty
eradication and sustainable development
Multi-stakeholder partnerships
17.16 Enhance the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, complemented by multi-stakeholder
partnerships that mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, to support the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in all countries, in particular developing countries
17.17 Encourage and promote effective public, public-private and civil society partnerships, building on the
experience and resourcing strategies of partnerships
Data, monitoring and accountability
17.18 By 2020, enhance capacity-building support to developing countries, including for least developed countries
and small island developing States, to increase significantly the availability of high-quality, timely and reliable data
disaggregated by income, gender, age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability, geographic location and other
characteristics relevant in national contexts
17.19 By 2030, build on existing initiatives to develop measurements of progress on sustainable development that
complement gross domestic product, and support statistical capacity-building in developing countries
Means of implementation and the Global Partnership
60. We reaffirm our strong commitment to the full implementation of this new Agenda. We recognize that we will
not be able to achieve our ambitious Goals and targets without a revitalized and enhanced Global Partnership and
comparably ambitious means of implementation. The revitalized Global Partnership will facilitate an intensive
global engagement in support of implementation of all the Goals and targets, bringing together Governments, civil
society, the private sector, the United Nations system and other actors and mobilizing all available resources.
61. The Agenda’s Goals and targets deal with the means required to realize our collective ambitions. The means of
implementation targets under each Sustainable Development Goal and Goal 17, which are referred to above, are key
to realizing our Agenda and are of equal importance with the other Goals and targets. We shall accord them equal
priority in our implementation efforts and in the global indicator framework for monitoring our progress.
62. This Agenda, including the Sustainable Development Goals, can be met within the framework of a revitalized
Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, supported by the concrete policies and actions outlined in the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Addis
Ababa Action Agenda supports, complements and helps to contextualize the 2030 Agenda’s means of
implementation targets. It relates to domestic public resources, domestic and international private business and
22

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

finance, international development cooperation, international trade as an engine for development, debt and debt
sustainability, addressing systemic issues and science, technology, innovation and capacity-building, and data,
monitoring and follow-up.
63. Cohesive nationally owned sustainable development strategies, supported by integrated national financing
frameworks, will be at the heart of our efforts. We reiterate that each country has primary responsibility for its own
economic and social development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be
overemphasized. We will respect each country’s policy space and leadership to implement policies for poverty
eradication and sustainable development, while remaining consistent with relevant international rules and
commitments. At the same time, national development efforts need to be supported by an enabling international
economic environment, including coherent and mutually supporting world trade, monetary and financial systems,
and strengthened and enhanced global economic governance. Processes to develop and facilitate the availability of
appropriate knowledge and technologies globally, as well as capacity-building, are also critical. We commit to
pursuing policy coherence and an enabling environment for sustainable development at all levels and by all actors,
and to reinvigorating the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development.
64. We support the implementation of relevant strategies and programmes of action, including the Istanbul
Declaration and Programme of Action, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the
Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024, and reaffirm the
importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the programme of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, all of which are integral to the new Agenda. We recognize the major challenge to the achievement of
durable peace and sustainable development in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.
65. We recognize that middle-income countries still face significant challenges to achieve sustainable
development. In order to ensure that achievements made to date are sustained, efforts to address ongoing challenges
should be strengthened through the exchange of experiences, improved coordination, and better and focused support
of the United Nations development system, the international financial institutions, regional organizations and other
stakeholders.
66. We underscore that, for all countries, public policies and the mobilization and effective use of domestic
resources, underscored by the principle of national ownership, are central to our common pursuit of sustainable
development, including achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. We recognize that domestic resources are
first and foremost generated by economic growth, supported by an enabling environment at all levels.
67. Private business activity, investment and innovation are major drivers of productivity, inclusive economic
growth and job creation. We acknowledge the diversity of the private sector, ranging from micro-enterprises to
cooperatives to multinationals. We call upon all businesses to apply their creativity and innovation to solving
sustainable development challenges. We will foster a dynamic and well-functioning business sector, while
protecting labour rights and environmental and health standards in accordance with relevant international standards
and agreements and other ongoing initiatives in this regard, such as the Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights17 and the labour standards of the International Labour Organization, the Convention on the Rights of the
Child18 and key multilateral environmental agreements, for parties to those agreements.
68. International trade is an engine for inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction, and contributes to the
promotion of sustainable development. We will continue to promote a universal, rules-based, open, transparent,
predictable, inclusive, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system under the World Trade
Organization, as well as meaningful trade liberalization. We call upon all members of the World Trade Organization
to redouble their efforts to promptly conclude the negotiations on the Doha Development Agenda.19 We attach great
importance to providing trade-related capacity-building for developing countries, including African countries, least
developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and middle-income countries,
including for the promotion of regional economic integration and interconnectivity.

_______________
17

A/HRC/17/31, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
19
A/C.2/56/7, annex.
18

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

69. We recognize the need to assist developing countries in attaining long-term debt sustainability through
coordinated policies aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief, debt restructuring and sound debt management, as
appropriate. Many countries remain vulnerable to debt crises and some are in the midst of crises, including a
number of least developed countries, small island developing States and some developed countries. We reiterate that
debtors and creditors must work together to prevent and resolve unsustainable debt situations. Maintaining
sustainable debt levels is the responsibility of the borrowing countries; however we acknowledge that lenders also
have a responsibility to lend in a way that does not undermine a country’s debt sustainability. We will support the
maintenance of debt sustainability of those countries that have received debt relief and achieved sustainable debt
levels.
70. We hereby launch a Technology Facilitation Mechanism which was established by the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda in order to support the Sustainable Development Goals. The Technology Facilitation Mechanism will be
based on a multi-stakeholder collaboration between Member States, civil society, the private sector, the scientific
community, United Nations entities and other stakeholders and will be composed of a United Nations inter-agency
task team on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, a collaborative multistakeholder forum on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals and an online
platform.

24

•

The United Nations inter-agency task team on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable
Development Goals will promote coordination, coherence and cooperation within the United Nations
system on science, technology and innovation-related matters, enhancing synergy and efficiency, in
particular to enhance capacity-building initiatives. The task team will draw on existing resources and will
work with 10 representatives from civil society, the private sector and the scientific community to prepare
the meetings of the multi-stakeholder forum on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable
Development Goals, as well as in the development and operationalization of the online platform, including
preparing proposals for the modalities for the forum and the online platform. The 10 representatives will
be appointed by the Secretary-General, for periods of two years. The task team will be open to the
participation of all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and the functional commissions of the
Economic and Social Council and it will initially be composed of the entities that currently integrate the
informal working group on technology facilitation, namely, the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the International Telecommunication Union, the
World Intellectual Property Organization and the World Bank.

•

The online platform will be used to establish a comprehensive mapping of, and serve as a gateway for,
information on existing science, technology and innovation initiatives, mechanisms and programmes,
within and beyond the United Nations. The online platform will facilitate access to information,
knowledge and experience, as well as best practices and lessons learned, on science, technology and
innovation facilitation initiatives and policies. The online platform will also facilitate the dissemination of
relevant open access scientific publications generated worldwide. The online platform will be developed
on the basis of an independent technical assessment which will take into account best practices and lessons
learned from other initiatives, within and beyond the United Nations, in order to ensure that it will
complement, facilitate access to and provide adequate information on existing science, technology and
innovation platforms, avoiding duplications and enhancing synergies.

•

The multi-stakeholder forum on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development
Goals will be convened once a year, for a period of two days, to discuss science, technology and
innovation cooperation around thematic areas for the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, congregating all relevant stakeholders to actively contribute in their area of expertise. The forum
will provide a venue for facilitating interaction, matchmaking and the establishment of networks between
relevant stakeholders and multi-stakeholder partnerships in order to identify and examine technology
needs and gaps, including on scientific cooperation, innovation and capacity-building, and also in order to
help to facilitate development, transfer and dissemination of relevant technologies for the Sustainable
Development Goals. The meetings of the forum will be convened by the President of the Economic and
Social Council before the meeting of the high-level political forum under the auspices of the Council or,
alternatively, in conjunction with other forums or conferences, as appropriate, taking into account the

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

theme to be considered and on the basis of a collaboration with the organizers of the other forums or
conferences. The meetings of the forum will be co-chaired by two Member States and will result in a
summary of discussions elaborated by the two co-Chairs, as an input to the meetings of the high-level
political forum, in the context of the follow-up and review of the implementation of the post-2015
development agenda.
•

The meetings of the high-level political forum will be informed by the summary of the multi-stakeholder
forum. The themes for the subsequent multi-stakeholder forum on science, technology and innovation for
the Sustainable Development Goals will be considered by the high-level political forum on sustainable
development, taking into account expert inputs from the task team.

71. We reiterate that this Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, including the means of
implementation, are universal, indivisible and interlinked.
Follow-up and review
72. We commit to engaging in systematic follow-up and review of the implementation of this Agenda over the
next 15 years. A robust, voluntary, effective, participatory, transparent and integrated follow-up and review
framework will make a vital contribution to implementation and will help countries to maximize and track progress
in implementing this Agenda in order to ensure that no one is left behind.
73. Operating at the national, regional and global levels, it will promote accountability to our citizens, support
effective international cooperation in achieving this Agenda and foster exchanges of best practices and mutual
learning. It will mobilize support to overcome shared challenges and identify new and emerging issues. As this is a
universal Agenda, mutual trust and understanding among all nations will be important.
74. Follow-up and review processes at all levels will be guided by the following principles:
(a) They will be voluntary and country-led, will take into account different national realities, capacities and
levels of development and will respect policy space and priorities. As national ownership is key to achieving
sustainable development, the outcome from national-level processes will be the foundation for reviews at the
regional and global levels, given that the global review will be primarily based on national official data sources.
(b) They will track progress in implementing the universal Goals and targets, including the means of
implementation, in all countries in a manner which respects their universal, integrated and interrelated nature and the
three dimensions of sustainable development.
(c) They will maintain a longer-term orientation, identify achievements, challenges, gaps and critical
success factors and support countries in making informed policy choices. They will help to mobilize the necessary
means of implementation and partnerships, support the identification of solutions and best practices and promote the
coordination and effectiveness of the international development system.
(d) They will be open, inclusive, participatory and transparent for all people and will support reporting by all
relevant stakeholders.
(e) They will be people-centred, gender-sensitive, respect human rights and have a particular focus on the
poorest, most vulnerable and those furthest behind.
(f) They will build on existing platforms and processes, where these exist, avoid duplication and respond to
national circumstances, capacities, needs and priorities. They will evolve over time, taking into account emerging
issues and the development of new methodologies, and will minimize the reporting burden on national
administrations.
(g) They will be rigorous and based on evidence, informed by country-led evaluations and data which is
high-quality, accessible, timely, reliable and disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migration status,
disability and geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts.
(h) They will require enhanced capacity-building support for developing countries, including the
strengthening of national data systems and evaluation programmes, particularly in African countries, least developed
countries, small island developing States, landlocked developing countries and middle-income countries.
(i)

They will benefit from the active support of the United Nations system and other multilateral institutions.
25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

75. The Goals and targets will be followed up and reviewed using a set of global indicators. These will be
complemented by indicators at the regional and national levels which will be developed by Member States, in
addition to the outcomes of work undertaken for the development of the baselines for those targets where national
and global baseline data does not yet exist. The global indicator framework, to be developed by the Inter-Agency
and Expert Group on Sustainable Development Goal Indicators, will be agreed by the Statistical Commission by
March 2016 and adopted thereafter by the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, in line with
existing mandates. This framework will be simple yet robust, address all Sustainable Development Goals and
targets, including for means of implementation, and preserve the political balance, integration and ambition
contained therein.
76. We will support developing countries, particularly African countries, least developed countries, small island
developing States and landlocked developing countries, in strengthening the capacity of national statistical offices
and data systems to ensure access to high-quality, timely, reliable and disaggregated data. We will promote
transparent and accountable scaling-up of appropriate public-private cooperation to exploit the contribution to be
made by a wide range of data, including earth observation and geospatial information, while ensuring national
ownership in supporting and tracking progress.
77. We commit to fully engage in conducting regular and inclusive reviews of progress at the subnational,
national, regional and global levels. We will draw as far as possible on the existing network of follow-up and review
institutions and mechanisms. National reports will allow assessments of progress and identify challenges at the
regional and global level. Along with regional dialogues and global reviews, they will inform recommendations for
follow-up at various levels.
National level
78. We encourage all Member States to develop as soon as practicable ambitious national responses to the overall
implementation of this Agenda. These can support the transition to the Sustainable Development Goals and build on
existing planning instruments, such as national development and sustainable development strategies, as appropriate.
79. We also encourage Member States to conduct regular and inclusive reviews of progress at the national and
subnational levels which are country-led and country-driven. Such reviews should draw on contributions from
indigenous peoples, civil society, the private sector and other stakeholders, in line with national circumstances,
policies and priorities. National parliaments as well as other institutions can also support these processes.
Regional level
80. Follow-up and review at the regional and subregional levels can, as appropriate, provide useful opportunities
for peer learning, including through voluntary reviews, sharing of best practices and discussion on shared targets.
We welcome in this respect the cooperation of regional and subregional commissions and organizations. Inclusive
regional processes will draw on national-level reviews and contribute to follow-up and review at the global level,
including at the high-level political forum on sustainable development.
81. Recognizing the importance of building on existing follow-up and review mechanisms at the regional level
and allowing adequate policy space, we encourage all Member States to identify the most suitable regional forum in
which to engage. United Nations regional commissions are encouraged to continue supporting Member States in
this regard.
Global level
82. The high-level political forum will have a central role in overseeing a network of follow-up and review
processes at the global level, working coherently with the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and
other relevant organs and forums, in accordance with existing mandates. It will facilitate sharing of experiences,
including successes, challenges and lessons learned, and provide political leadership, guidance and
recommendations for follow-up. It will promote system-wide coherence and coordination of sustainable
development policies. It should ensure that the Agenda remains relevant and ambitious and should focus on the
assessment of progress, achievements and challenges faced by developed and developing countries as well as new
and emerging issues. Effective linkages will be made with the follow-up and review arrangements of all relevant
United Nations conferences and processes, including on least developed countries, small island developing States
and landlocked developing countries.
26

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

83. Follow-up and review at the high-level political forum will be informed by an annual progress report on the
Sustainable Development Goals to be prepared by the Secretary-General in cooperation with the United Nations
system, based on the global indicator framework and data produced by national statistical systems and information
collected at the regional level. The high-level political forum will also be informed by the Global Sustainable
Development Report, which shall strengthen the science-policy interface and could provide a strong evidence-based
instrument to support policymakers in promoting poverty eradication and sustainable development. We invite the
President of the Economic and Social Council to conduct a process of consultations on the scope, methodology and
frequency of the global report as well as its relation to the progress report, the outcome of which should be reflected
in the ministerial declaration of the session of the high-level political forum in 2016.
84. The high-level political forum, under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council, shall carry out regular
reviews, in line with General Assembly resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013. Reviews will be voluntary, while
encouraging reporting, and include developed and developing countries as well as relevant United Nations entities
and other stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector. They shall be State-led, involving ministerial
and other relevant high-level participants. They shall provide a platform for partnerships, including through the
participation of major groups and other relevant stakeholders.
85. Thematic reviews of progress on the Sustainable Development Goals, including cross-cutting issues, will also
take place at the high-level political forum. These will be supported by reviews by the functional commissions of
the Economic and Social Council and other intergovernmental bodies and forums which should reflect the
integrated nature of the Goals as well as the interlinkages between them. They will engage all relevant stakeholders
and, where possible, feed into, and be aligned with, the cycle of the high-level political forum.
86. We welcome, as outlined in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the dedicated follow-up and review for the
financing for development outcomes as well as all the means of implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals which is integrated with the follow-up and review framework of this Agenda. The intergovernmentally agreed
conclusions and recommendations of the annual Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development
will be fed into the overall follow-up and review of the implementation of this Agenda in the high-level
political forum.
87. Meeting every four years under the auspices of the General Assembly, the high-level political forum will
provide high-level political guidance on the Agenda and its implementation, identify progress and emerging
challenges and mobilize further actions to accelerate implementation. The next high-level political forum under the
auspices of the General Assembly will be held in 2019, with the cycle of meetings thus reset, in order to maximize
coherence with the quadrennial comprehensive policy review process.
88. We also stress the importance of system-wide strategic planning, implementation and reporting in order to
ensure coherent and integrated support to the implementation of the new Agenda by the United Nations
development system. The relevant governing bodies should take action to review such support to implementation
and to report on progress and obstacles. We welcome the ongoing dialogue in the Economic and Social Council on
the longer-term positioning of the United Nations development system and look forward to taking action on these
issues, as appropriate.
89. The high-level political forum will support participation in follow-up and review processes by the major
groups and other relevant stakeholders in line with resolution 67/290. We call upon those actors to report on their
contribution to the implementation of the Agenda.
90. We request the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States, to prepare a report, for consideration at
the seventieth session of the General Assembly in preparation for the 2016 meeting of the high-level political forum,
which outlines critical milestones towards coherent, efficient and inclusive follow-up and review at the global level.
The report should include a proposal on the organizational arrangements for State-led reviews at the high-level
political forum under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council, including recommendations on voluntary
common reporting guidelines. It should clarify institutional responsibilities and provide guidance on annual themes,
on a sequence of thematic reviews, and on options for periodic reviews for the high-level political forum.
91. We reaffirm our unwavering commitment to achieving this Agenda and utilizing it to the full to transform our
world for the better by 2030.
27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Instruments mentioned in the section entitled
“Sustainable Development Goals and targets”
World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2302,
No. 41032)
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 (resolution 69/283, annex II)
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363)
“The future we want” (resolution 66/288, annex)
RESOLUTION 70/3
A/RES/70/3

Adopted at the 38th plenary meeting, on 23 October 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.4, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

70/3. Declaration on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
The General Assembly
Adopts the following declaration:
Declaration on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
1. We solemnly reaffirm our faith in the United Nations and our unfailing commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter, as well as to the Charter in its entirety.
2. We firmly believe that the Charter enshrines our common values as human beings, which unite us in
diversity beyond our differences of language, culture or religion, today as 70 years ago.
3. We pay tribute to the founders of the United Nations and to the dedicated men and women who have
contributed their work, and sometimes their life, to the ideals of the United Nations, and we acknowledge the crucial
role that the Organization has played in the past seven decades in the fields of peace and security, human rights and
social and economic development.
4. We wish to renew the determination set forth in the Preamble to the Charter “to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind” by
recommitting to our obligation to refrain in our international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the United Nations.
5. We recommit ourselves to fulfilling in good faith the obligations assumed by us in accordance with the
Charter and to the principle of the sovereign equality of all States, respect for their territorial integrity and political
independence, the right to self-determination of peoples, the non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and the
resolution of international disputes by peaceful means and in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law.
6. We reaffirm our faith in the inherent dignity of the human person and in the equal rights of women and
men, as well as our commitment to promoting, protecting and ensuring all human rights for all without distinction of
any kind, and recognize those rights as the foundation of freedom, justice and peace. We are determined to renew our
endeavours to cooperate in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character.
7. We recognize the important role played by the United Nations in the promotion of economic and social
development in the past decades. In this regard, we recognize that eradicating poverty, in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development. We are resolved to further the pursuit of global development and win-win cooperation
through our full support to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.20

_______________
20

28

Resolution 70/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. We solemnly pledge to continue to cooperate with a strong, legitimate and credible United Nations. We
bear in mind the ongoing process of United Nations reforms in all their aspects. We are confident that, with the
responsibility and generosity of its members, the United Nations will be able to respond swiftly and efficiently to the
challenges of tomorrow.
RESOLUTION 70/4
A/RES/70/4

Adopted at the 39th plenary meeting, on 26 October 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.3 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

70/4. Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/9 of 6 November 2013, in which it decided to include in the provisional agenda of
its seventieth session the sub-item entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic
ideal”, and recalling also its prior decision to consider the sub-item every two years, in advance of the Summer and
Winter Olympic Games,
Recalling also its resolution 48/11 of 25 October 1993, which, inter alia, revived the ancient Greek tradition of
ekecheiria (“Olympic Truce”) calling for a truce during the Olympic Games to encourage a peaceful environment
and ensure safe passage, access and participation for athletes and relevant persons at the Games, thereby mobilizing
the youth of the world to the cause of peace,
Recalling further that the core concept of ekecheiria, historically, has been the cessation of hostilities from
seven days before until seven days after the Olympic Games, which, according to the legendary oracle of Delphi,
was to replace the cycle of conflict with a friendly athletic competition every four years,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of sport in promoting education, sustainable development, peace,
cooperation, solidarity, fairness, social inclusion and health at the local, regional and international levels, and noting
that, as declared in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,21 sports can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance and
understanding among peoples and nations,
Welcoming the designation of 6 April as the International Day of Sport for Development and Peace,
Recalling the inclusion in the United Nations Millennium Declaration22 of an appeal for the observance of the
Olympic Truce now and in the future and for support for the International Olympic Committee in its efforts to
promote peace and human understanding through sport and the Olympic ideal,
_______________
21
22

Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 55/2.

29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Acknowledging the valuable contribution that the appeal launched by the International Olympic Committee on
21 July 1992 for an Olympic Truce could make towards advancing the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 69/6 of 31 October 2014 on sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace, in which it called upon future hosts of the Olympic Games and the Paralympic Games and
other Member States to include sport, as appropriate, in conflict prevention activities and to ensure the effective
implementation of the Olympic Truce during the Games,
Noting that the XXXI Olympic Summer Games will be held from 5 to 21 August 2016, and that the XV
Paralympic Summer Games will be held from 7 to 18 September 2016, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
Recalling that one of the main goals of the Olympic Summer Games and the Paralympic Summer Games in
Rio de Janeiro is to foster an atmosphere of peace, development, tolerance and understanding among the countries
united therein,
Welcoming the significant impetus that the Olympic Summer Games, Paralympic Summer Games, Youth
Summer Olympic Games, Olympic Winter Games, Paralympic Winter Games and Youth Winter Olympic Games
give to the volunteer movement around the world, acknowledging the contributions of volunteers to the success of
the Games, and in this regard calling upon host countries to promote social inclusion without discrimination of
any kind,
Noting the successful conclusion of the XXII Olympic Winter Games and the XI Paralympic Winter Games,
held in Sochi, Russian Federation, from 7 to 23 February and from 7 to 16 March 2014, respectively, and
welcoming the XXIII Olympic Winter Games and the XII Paralympic Winter Games, to be held in Pyeongchang,
Republic of Korea, from 9 to 25 February and from 9 to 18 March 2018, respectively, the XXXII Olympic Summer
Games and the XVI Paralympic Summer Games, to be held in Tokyo from 24 July to 9 August and from 25 August
to 6 September 2020, respectively, and the XXIV Olympic Winter Games and the XIII Paralympic Winter Games,
to be held in Beijing from 4 to 20 February and from 4 to 13 March 2022, respectively,
Acknowledging the joint endeavours of the International Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic
Committee, the United Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace and relevant United Nations entities in
such fields as the promotion of human rights, human development, poverty alleviation, humanitarian assistance,
health promotion, HIV and AIDS prevention, child and youth education, gender equality, peacebuilding and
sustainable development,
Recalling article 31 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,23 which outlines the right of the child to
engage in play and recreational activities, and the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the
General Assembly on children, entitled “A world fit for children”,24 which stresses the promotion of physical,
mental and emotional health through play and sports,
Acknowledging the importance of the Youth Olympic Games in inspiring youth through integrated sports and
cultural and educational experiences, noting in this regard the successful conclusion of the second Youth Summer
Olympic Games, held in Nanjing, China, from 16 to 28 August 2014, and welcoming the second Youth Winter
Olympic Games, to be held in Lillehammer, Norway, from 12 to 21 February 2016, and the third Youth Summer
Olympic Games, to be held in Buenos Aires from 1 to 12 October 2018,
Noting that the Special Olympics World Winter Games will be held in Graz, Austria, from 14 to
25 March 2017,
Recognizing that the active involvement of persons with disabilities in sports and the Olympics contributes to
the full and equal realization of their human rights, as well as respect for their inherent dignity, recalling articles 1
and 30 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,25 in which States parties recognized the right of
persons with disabilities, including those with long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments, to
_______________
23

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
25
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
24

30

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

take part on an equal basis with others in cultural life, with a view to enabling persons with disabilities to participate
on an equal basis with others in recreational, leisure and sporting activities, and noting in this regard plans to stage
integrated and inclusive Games,
Recognizing also the imperative need to engage women and girls in the practice of sport for development and
peace, and welcoming activities that aim to foster and encourage initiatives in this regard at the global level,
Welcoming the commitment made by various States Members of the United Nations and other relevant
stakeholders to developing national and international programmes that promote peace and conflict resolution, the
Olympic and Paralympic values and the Olympic Truce ideals through sport and through culture, education,
sustainable development and wider public engagement, and acknowledging the contribution of former hosts of the
Olympic Games in this regard,
Recognizing the humanitarian opportunities presented by the Olympic Truce and by other initiatives supported
by the United Nations to achieve the cessation of conflict,
Recalling that, in its resolution 69/6, it supported the independence and autonomy of sport and recognized the
unifying and conciliative nature of major international sport events and that such events should be organized in the
spirit of peace, mutual understanding, friendship, tolerance and inadmissibility of discrimination of any kind,
Welcoming the decision of the International Olympic Committee to reinforce fundamental principle 6 of the
Olympic Charter, which states that the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in the Olympic Charter shall
be secured for all, without discrimination of any kind,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations flag will be flown at the Olympic stadium and in the Olympic
villages of the XXXI Olympic Summer Games and the XV Paralympic Summer Games,
1. Urges Member States to observe the Olympic Truce individually and collectively, within the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations, throughout the period from the seventh day before the start of the XXXI
Olympic Summer Games until the seventh day following the end of the XV Paralympic Summer Games, to be held
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;
2. Underlines the importance of cooperation among Member States to collectively implement the values of
the Olympic Truce around the world, and emphasizes the important role of the International Olympic Committee,
the International Paralympic Committee and the United Nations in this regard;
3. Welcomes the work of the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic Committee,
as well as the International Olympic Truce Foundation and the International Olympic Truce Centre, in mobilizing
national and international sports federations and organizations, National Olympic and Paralympic Committees and
associations of National Olympic Committees to take concrete actions at the local, national, regional and international
levels to promote and strengthen a culture of peace based on the spirit of the Olympic Truce, and invites those
organizations and national committees to cooperate and share information and best practices, as appropriate;
4. Also welcomes the leadership of Olympic and Paralympic athletes in promoting peace and human
understanding through sport and the Olympic ideal;
5. Calls upon all Member States to cooperate with the International Olympic Committee and the
International Paralympic Committee in their efforts to use sport as a tool to promote peace, dialogue and
reconciliation in areas of conflict during and beyond the period of the Olympic and Paralympic Games;
6. Recognizes that sport and the Olympic and Paralympic Games can be used to promote human rights and
strengthen universal respect for such rights, thus contributing to their full realization;
7. Welcomes the cooperation among Member States, the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, and the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic Committee, to
maximize the potential of sport to make a meaningful and sustainable contribution to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals within the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,26 and encourages the
Olympic and Paralympic movements to work closely with national and international sports organizations on the use
of sport to this end;
_______________
26

Resolution 70/1.

31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly to promote the observance of
the Olympic Truce among Member States and support for human development initiatives through sport and to
continue to cooperate effectively with the International Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic
Committee and the sporting community in general in the realization of those objectives;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session the sub-item entitled
“Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal” of the item entitled “Sport for
development and peace” and to consider the sub-item before the XXIII Olympic Winter Games and the
XII Paralympic Winter Games, to be held in Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea, in 2018.
RESOLUTION 70/5
A/RES/70/5

Adopted at the 40th plenary meeting, on 27 October 2015, by a recorded vote of 191 to 2, with no abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/70/L.2, sponsored by Cuba
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: None

70/5. Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
The General Assembly,
Determined to encourage strict compliance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming, among other principles, the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in
their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, which are also enshrined in many
international legal instruments,
Recalling the statements of the Heads of State or Government of Latin America and the Caribbean at the
Summits of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States regarding the need to put an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba,
Concerned about the continued promulgation and application by Member States of laws and regulations, such
as that promulgated on 12 March 1996 known as “the Helms-Burton Act”, the extraterritorial effects of which affect
the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction and the freedom
of trade and navigation,
Taking note of declarations and resolutions of different intergovernmental forums, bodies and Governments
that express the rejection by the international community and public opinion of the promulgation and application of
measures of the kind referred to above,
32

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling its resolutions 47/19 of 24 November 1992, 48/16 of 3 November 1993, 49/9 of 26 October 1994,
50/10 of 2 November 1995, 51/17 of 12 November 1996, 52/10 of 5 November 1997, 53/4 of 14 October 1998,
54/21 of 9 November 1999, 55/20 of 9 November 2000, 56/9 of 27 November 2001, 57/11 of 12 November 2002,
58/7 of 4 November 2003, 59/11 of 28 October 2004, 60/12 of 8 November 2005, 61/11 of 8 November 2006, 62/3
of 30 October 2007, 63/7 of 29 October 2008, 64/6 of 28 October 2009, 65/6 of 26 October 2010, 66/6 of
25 October 2011, 67/4 of 13 November 2012, 68/8 of 29 October 2013 and 69/5 of 28 October 2014,
Welcoming the re-establishment of diplomatic relations between the Governments of Cuba and the United
States of America,
Recognizing the expressed will of the President of the United States of America to work for the elimination of
the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba,
Concerned that, since the adoption of its resolutions 47/19, 48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10, 53/4, 54/21,
55/20, 56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12, 61/11, 62/3, 63/7, 64/6, 65/6, 66/6, 67/4, 68/8 and 69/5, the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba is still in place, and concerned also about the adverse effects of
such measures on the Cuban people and on Cuban nationals living in other countries,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 69/5;27

2. Reiterates its call upon all States to refrain from promulgating and applying laws and measures of the
kind referred to in the preamble to the present resolution, in conformity with their obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, which, inter alia, reaffirm the freedom of trade and navigation;
3. Once again urges States that have and continue to apply such laws and measures to take the steps
necessary to repeal or invalidate them as soon as possible in accordance with their legal regime;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the appropriate organs and agencies of the United
Nations system, to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution in the light of the purposes and
principles of the Charter and international law and to submit it to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
RESOLUTION 70/6
A/RES/70/6

Adopted at the 45th plenary meeting, on 3 November 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.6,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

70/6. Strengthening of the United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its determination to further strengthen the role, capacity, effectiveness and efficiency of the United
Nations system,
Encouraging coherence, synergies and complementarities among ongoing reviews of the United Nations
peace and security architecture,
Taking note with appreciation of the initiative of the Secretary-General aimed at strengthening the United
Nations system, including the establishment of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
Welcoming the wide and significant consultations undertaken by the High-level Independent Panel with
diverse groups and stakeholders,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General28 and the report of the High-level Independent Panel,29
_______________
27

A/70/120.
A/70/357-S/2015/682.
29
See A/70/95-S/2015/446.
28

33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Decides to give further consideration during the seventieth session of the General Assembly to the
recommendations emanating from the initiative of the Secretary-General, in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the Fourth Committee, the Fifth Committee and other relevant bodies, in accordance with
established procedures and in compliance with their respective purview.
RESOLUTION 70/7
A/RES/70/7

Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 4 November 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.5
and Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam

70/7. Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 61/19 of 28 November 2006, entitled “Commemoration of the two-hundredth
anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade” and subsequent resolutions entitled “Permanent
memorial to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”,
Recalling also the designation of 25 March as the annual International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade,
Recognizing that too little is known about the transatlantic slave trade and its lasting consequences, felt
throughout the world, and welcoming the increased attention that the annual commemoration by the General
Assembly has brought to the issue, including raising awareness in many States,
Noting the initiatives undertaken by States in reaffirming their commitment to implement paragraphs 101 and
102 of the Durban Declaration of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance, aimed at countering the legacy of slavery and contributing to the restoration of the dignity of
the victims of slavery and the slave trade,30
Recalling, in particular, paragraph 101 of the Durban Declaration, which, inter alia, invited the international
community and its members to honour the memory of the victims,
Recalling also its resolution 68/237 of 23 December 2013, by which it proclaimed the International Decade
for People of African Descent from 1 January 2015 to 31 December 2024, and its resolution 69/16 of 18 November
2014, by which it adopted the programme of activities for the Decade,
Stressing the importance of educating and informing current and future generations about the causes,
consequences, lessons and legacy of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade,
Recalling that the permanent memorial initiative complements the work being done at the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the Slave Route Project,
1. Welcomes the erection of the Ark of Return, at a place of prominence at United Nations Headquarters
that is easily accessible to delegates, United Nations staff and visitors, as the permanent memorial to honour the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, in acknowledgement of the tragedy and in consideration of the
legacy of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade;
_______________
30

34

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Expresses gratitude to the committee of interested States, drawn from all geographical regions of the
world, comprising Brazil, Ghana, Jamaica, Kenya, the Netherlands, Portugal, Qatar, Senegal, Suriname and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, with Member States from the Caribbean Community and
the African Union playing a primary role, in collaboration with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, representatives of the Secretariat and civil society, which oversaw the permanent memorial
project;
3. Recalls the establishment of a trust fund account for the permanent memorial, referred to as the United
Nations Trust Fund for Partnerships – Permanent Memorial, administered by the United Nations Office for
Partnerships, and notes the current status of contributions to the Trust Fund;31
4. Expresses sincere appreciation to those Member States, organizations and individuals that have made
contributions to the Trust Fund;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the programme of educational outreach on the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery32 relating to the diverse educational outreach strategy to increase awareness of
and to educate future generations about the causes, consequences, lessons and legacy of the transatlantic slave trade
and to communicate the dangers of racism and prejudice, and encourages continued action in this regard;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to organize an annual series of activities to commemorate
the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, including a
commemorative meeting of the General Assembly at United Nations Headquarters and, as appropriate, activities
through the network of United Nations information centres;
7. Requests the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in cooperation with the countries
concerned and with relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to continue to take appropriate
steps to enhance world public awareness of the commemorative activities and the permanent memorial at United
Nations Headquarters;
8. Reiterates its request, in resolution 64/15 of 16 November 2009, for Member States to develop, in
accordance with their national legislation, educational programmes, including through school curricula, designed to
educate and inculcate in future generations an understanding of the lessons, history and consequences of slavery and
the slave trade, and to provide such information to the Secretary-General for inclusion in his report;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session on
continued action to implement the programme of educational outreach, including actions taken by Member States in
implementing the present resolution, as well as steps to enhance world public awareness of the commemorative
activities and the permanent memorial;
10. Requests the United Nations Office for Partnerships, through the Secretary-General, to submit a
comprehensive report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the status of the Trust Fund and, in
particular, on contributions received and their utilization;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session an item entitled
“Commemoration of the abolition of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”.
RESOLUTION 70/10
A/RES/70/10

Adopted at the 56th plenary meeting, on 17 November 2015, by a recorded vote of 99 to none, with 10 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/70/L.8 and Add.1, sponsored by: Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,

_______________
31
32

A/70/136.
A/70/221.

35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
* In favour: Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Against: None
Abstaining: Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Chad, Cuba, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe

70/10.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency for 2014,33
Taking note of the statement by the Director General of the Agency, in which he provided additional
information on the main developments in the activities of the Agency during 2015,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency,
Recognizing also the cooperation between the United Nations and the Agency and the Agreement governing
the relationship between the United Nations and the Agency as approved by the General Conference of the Agency
on 23 October 1957 and by the General Assembly in the annex to its resolution 1145 (XII) of 14 November 1957,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency;33

2. Takes note of resolutions GC(59)/RES/9 on measures to strengthen international cooperation in nuclear,
radiation, transport and waste safety; GC(59)/RES/10 on nuclear security; GC(59)/RES/11 on the strengthening of
the Agency’s technical cooperation activities; GC(59)/RES/12 on strengthening the Agency’s activities related to
nuclear science, technology and applications, comprising GC(59)/RES/12 A on non-power nuclear applications and
GC(59)/RES/12 B on nuclear power applications; GC(59)/RES/13 on strengthening the effectiveness and
improving the efficiency of Agency safeguards; GC(59)/RES/14 on the implementation of the Agreement between
the Agency and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for the application of safeguards in connection with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; GC(59)/RES/15 on the application of Agency safeguards in
the Middle East; and GC(59)/RES/16 on personnel matters, comprising GC(59)/RES/16 A on the staffing of the
Agency’s secretariat and GC(59)/RES/16 B on women in the secretariat; and decisions GC(59)/DEC/10 on the
amendment to article XIV.A of the Statute of the Agency; GC(59)/DEC/11 on the promotion of efficiency and
effectiveness of the Agency’s decision-making process; and GC(59)/DEC/12 on the amendment to article VI of the
Statute, adopted by the General Conference of the Agency at its fifty-ninth regular session, held from 14 to
18 September 2015;
3. Reaffirms its strong support for the indispensable role of the Agency in encouraging and assisting the
development and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses, in technology transfer to developing
countries and in nuclear safety, verification and security;
4.

Appeals to Member States to continue to support the activities of the Agency;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Director General of the Agency the records of the
seventieth session of the General Assembly relating to the activities of the Agency.

_______________
33

36

See A/70/219.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/11
A/RES/70/11

Adopted at the 58th plenary meeting, on 19 November 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.9 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zambia

70/11. Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of
Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1759 (XVII) of 26 October 1962 and 69/246 of 29 December 2014,
Underlining the shared responsibility to pursue the full truth concerning the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him,
Recognizing that a further inquiry or investigation would be necessary to finally establish the facts of the matter,
Expressing appreciation for the continued commitment of the Secretary-General to the search for the truth in
this regard,
Acknowledging the letter dated 2 July 2015 from the Secretary-General to the President of the General
Assembly conveying the report of the Independent Panel of Experts established pursuant to Assembly resolution
69/246, together with his assessment of the way forward,34
Welcoming the report of the Independent Panel of Experts, and recognizing the contributions by Member
States to the work of the Independent Panel of Experts,
Welcoming the progress made by the Independent Panel of Experts, in particular, in interviewing witnesses to
the final stages of flight SE-BDY and in examining and assessing the probative value of new information conveyed
by the Commission of Jurists on the Inquiry into the Death of Dag Hammarskjöld35 and obtained from Member
States and other sources,
Noting, in particular, new information, considered by the Independent Panel of Experts to have moderate
probative value, relating to the hypothesis of an aerial attack or other interference as a possible cause or causes of
the crash,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue the pending requests for information made by the Independent
Panel of Experts established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 69/246 to Member States and to explore the
feasibility of the establishment of a central archival holding or other holistic arrangement in line with the
recommendations of the Independent Panel of Experts;34
2. Urges all Member States, in particular those addressed in the report of the Independent Panel of
Experts,34 to release any relevant records in their possession and to provide to the Secretary-General relevant
information related to the death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly before the end of its seventieth session
of any further progress made;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Investigation
into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the
party accompanying him”.
_______________
34
35

A/70/132.
A/68/800, annex.

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/12
A/RES/70/12

Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 24 November 2015, by a recorded vote of 102 to 8, with 57 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/70/L.10 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa,
Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

70/12. Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 3236 (XXIX) of
22 November 1974, 3375 (XXX) and 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/20 of 24 November 1976 and all its
subsequent relevant resolutions, including those adopted at its emergency special sessions and its resolution 69/20 of
25 November 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,36
Recalling the mutual recognition between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, as well as the existing agreements between the two sides
and the need for full compliance with those agreements,
Affirming its support for a comprehensive, just, lasting and peaceful settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by the Council of the League of Arab
States at its fourteenth session37 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003,38
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,39 and recalling also its resolutions
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,

_______________
36

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/70/35).
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
38
S/2003/529, annex.
39
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
37

38

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking note of the application of Palestine for admission to membership in the United Nations, submitted on
23 September 2011,40
Recalling its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, by which, inter alia, Palestine was accorded non-member
observer State status in the United Nations, and taking note of the follow-up report of the Secretary-General,41
Taking note of the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law
conventions, as well as other international treaties,
Reaffirming that the United Nations has a permanent responsibility towards the question of Palestine until the
question is resolved in all its aspects in a satisfactory manner in accordance with international legitimacy,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the General Assembly, and takes note of its annual
report,36 including the conclusions and valuable recommendations contained in chapter VII thereof;
2. Requests the Committee to continue to exert all efforts to promote the realization of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination, to support the achievement without delay of an
end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and of the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders
and the just resolution of all final status issues and to mobilize international support for and assistance to the
Palestinian people, and in this regard authorizes the Committee to make such adjustments in its approved
programme of work as it may consider appropriate and necessary in the light of developments and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session and thereafter;
3. Also requests the Committee to continue to keep under review the situation relating to the question of
Palestine and to report and make suggestions to the General Assembly, the Security Council or the SecretaryGeneral, as appropriate;
4. Further requests the Committee to continue to extend its cooperation and support to Palestinian and
other civil society organizations and to continue to involve additional civil society organizations and
parliamentarians in its work in order to mobilize international solidarity and support for the Palestinian people,
particularly during this critical period of political instability, humanitarian hardship and financial crisis, with the
overall aim of promoting the achievement by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights and a just, lasting and
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative37 and the Quartet road map;38
5. Commends the efforts and activities of the Committee in upholding its mandate, including through
cooperative initiatives with Governments, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
organizations and civil society organizations;
6. Also commends the efforts of the Working Group of the Committee in coordinating the efforts of
international and regional civil society organizations regarding the question of Palestine;
7. Requests the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, established under General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), and other United Nations bodies associated with the question of Palestine to continue
to cooperate fully with the Committee and to make available to it, at its request, the relevant information and
documentation that they have at their disposal;
8. Invites all Governments and organizations to extend their cooperation to the Committee in the
performance of its tasks, recalling its repeated call for all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system to continue to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their right to
self-determination, including the right to their independent State of Palestine;
9. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
compile a report to the General Assembly, pursuant to resolution 69/20, on the economic costs of the Israeli
_______________
40
41

A/66/371-S/2011/592, annex I.
A/67/738.

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

occupation for the Palestinian people, and, while drawing attention to the alarming findings, as reflected in the
recent report on United Nations Conference on Trade and Development assistance to the Palestinian people:
developments in the economy of the Occupied Palestinian Territory,42 calls for the exertion of all efforts for the
provision of necessary resources to expedite completion of the report;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the report of the Committee to all the competent bodies of
the United Nations, and urges them to take the necessary action, as appropriate;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Committee with all the facilities
necessary for the performance of its tasks.
RESOLUTION 70/13
A/RES/70/13

Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 24 November 2015, by a recorded vote of 99 to 8, with 59 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/70/L.11 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa,
Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

70/13. Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,43
Taking note, in particular, of the action taken by the Committee and the Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat in accordance with their mandates,
Recalling its resolution 32/40 B of 2 December 1977 and all its subsequent relevant resolutions, including its
resolution 69/21 of 25 November 2014,
1. Notes with appreciation the action taken by the Secretary-General in compliance with its
resolution 69/21;
2. Considers that, by providing substantive support to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People in the implementation of its mandate, the Division for Palestinian Rights of the
_______________
42
43

40

TD/B/62/3.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/70/35).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Secretariat continues to make a most useful and constructive contribution to raising international awareness of the
question of Palestine and of the urgency of a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine in all its aspects on the
basis of international law and United Nations resolutions and the efforts being exerted in this regard and to
generating international support for the rights of the Palestinian people;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Division with the necessary resources and to
ensure that it continues to effectively carry out its programme of work as detailed in relevant earlier resolutions, in
consultation with the Committee and under its guidance;
4. Requests the Division, in particular, to continue to monitor developments relevant to the question of
Palestine, to organize international meetings and conferences in various regions with the participation of all sectors
of the international community and to ensure, within existing resources, the continued participation of eminent
persons and international renowned experts in these meetings and conferences, to be invited on a par with the
members of the Committee, to liaise and cooperate with civil society and parliamentarians, including through the
Working Group of the Committee and its associated “UN Platform for Palestine”, to develop and expand the
“Question of Palestine” website and the documents collection of the United Nations Information System on the
Question of Palestine, to prepare and widely disseminate the publications listed in paragraph 72 of the report of the
Committee,43 in the relevant official languages of the United Nations, and information materials on various aspects
of the question of Palestine and to develop and enhance the annual training programme for staff of the Palestinian
Government in contribution to Palestinian capacity-building efforts;
5. Also requests the Division, as part of the observance of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People on 29 November, to continue to organize, under the guidance of the Committee, an annual
exhibit on Palestinian rights or a cultural event in cooperation with the Permanent Observer Mission of the State of
Palestine to the United Nations, and encourages Member States to continue to give the widest support and publicity
to the observance of the Day of Solidarity;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the continued cooperation with the Division of the United
Nations system entities with programme components addressing various aspects of the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
7. Invites all Governments and organizations to extend their cooperation to the Division in the performance
of its tasks.
RESOLUTION 70/14
A/RES/70/14

Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 24 November 2015, by a recorded vote of 155 to 7, with 7 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/70/L.12 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Honduras, Nauru, Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga

41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

70/14. Special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department of Public Information
of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,44
Taking note, in particular, of the information contained in chapter VI of that report,
Recalling its resolution 69/22 of 25 November 2014,
Convinced that the worldwide dissemination of accurate and comprehensive information and the role of civil
society organizations and institutions remain of vital importance in heightening awareness of and support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination and independence, and for the
efforts to achieve a just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,
Recalling the mutual recognition between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, as well as the existing agreements between the two sides,
Affirming its support for a comprehensive, just, lasting and peaceful settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by the Council of the League of Arab
States at its fourteenth session,45 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003,46
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,47
Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Reaffirming that the United Nations has a permanent responsibility towards the question of Palestine until the
question is resolved in all its aspects in a satisfactory manner in accordance with international legitimacy,
1. Notes with appreciation the action taken by the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat in
compliance with resolution 69/22;
2. Considers that the special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department is very
useful in raising the awareness of the international community concerning the question of Palestine and the situation
in the Middle East and that the programme is contributing effectively to an atmosphere conducive to dialogue and
supportive of peace efforts and should receive the necessary support for the fulfilment of its tasks;
3. Requests the Department, in full cooperation and coordination with the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to continue, with the necessary flexibility as may be required by
developments affecting the question of Palestine, its special information programme for 2016–2017, in particular:
(a) To disseminate information on all the activities of the United Nations system relating to the question of
Palestine and peace efforts, including reports on the work carried out by the relevant United Nations organizations,
as well as on the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy vis-à-vis the objective of peace;
(b) To continue to issue, update and modernize publications and audiovisual and online materials on the
various aspects of the question of Palestine in all fields, including materials concerning relevant recent
developments, in particular the efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine;

_______________
44

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/70/35).
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
46
S/2003/529, annex.
47
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
45

42

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(c) To expand its collection of audiovisual material on the question of Palestine, to continue the production
and preservation of such material and to update, on a periodic basis, the public exhibit on the question of Palestine
displayed in the General Assembly Building as well as at United Nations headquarters in Geneva and Vienna;
(d) To organize and promote fact-finding news missions for journalists to the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and Israel;
(e) To organize international, regional and national seminars or encounters for journalists aimed in particular
at sensitizing public opinion to the question of Palestine and peace efforts and at enhancing dialogue and
understanding between Palestinians and Israelis for the promotion of a peaceful settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, including by fostering and encouraging the contribution of the media in support of peace between the
two sides;
(f) To continue to provide assistance to the Palestinian people in the field of media development, in
particular through its annual training programme for Palestinian broadcasters and journalists;
4. Encourages the Department to formulate ways for the media and representatives of civil society to
engage in open and positive discussions to explore means for encouraging people-to-people dialogue and promoting
peace and mutual understanding in the region.
RESOLUTION 70/15
A/RES/70/15

Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 24 November 2015, by a recorded vote of 155 to 7, with 7 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/70/L.13 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Honduras, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Tonga

70/15.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including those adopted at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling also its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Recalling further relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967, 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002, 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003,
1544 (2004) of 19 May 2004 and 1850 (2008) of 16 December 2008,
Recalling the affirmation by the Security Council of the vision of a region where two States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side within secure and recognized borders,
43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with concern that it has been 68 years since the adoption of its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November
1947 and 48 years since the occupation of Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in 1967,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to the request made in its resolution
69/23 of 25 November 2014,48
Reaffirming the permanent responsibility of the United Nations with regard to the question of Palestine until
the question is resolved in all its aspects in accordance with international law and relevant resolutions,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,49 and recalling also its resolutions
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Convinced that achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine, the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, is imperative for the attainment of comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East,
Stressing that the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples is among the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war,
Reaffirming also the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,50 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Recalling its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and reiterating the importance of maintaining and
strengthening international peace founded upon freedom, equality, justice and respect for fundamental human rights
and of developing friendly relations among nations irrespective of their political, economic and social systems or the
level of their development,
Reaffirming the illegality of the Israeli settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem,
Expressing grave concern about the extremely detrimental impact of Israeli settlement policies, decisions and
activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, including on the contiguity, integrity and
viability of the Territory, the viability of the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders and the efforts to
advance a peaceful settlement in the Middle East,
Expressing grave concern also about all acts of violence, intimidation and provocation by Israeli settlers
against Palestinian civilians, including children, and properties, including homes, mosques, churches and
agricultural lands, condemning acts of terror by several extremist Israeli settlers, and calling for accountability for
the illegal actions perpetrated in this regard,
Reaffirming the illegality of Israeli actions aimed at changing the status of Jerusalem, including settlement
construction and expansion, home demolitions, evictions of Palestinian residents, excavations in and around
religious and historic sites, and all other unilateral measures aimed at altering the character, status and demographic
composition of the city and of the Territory as a whole, and demanding their immediate cessation,
Expressing its grave concern, in particular, about tensions, provocations and incitement regarding the holy
places of Jerusalem, including the Haram al-Sharif, and urging restraint and respect for the sanctity of the holy sites
by all sides,
Reaffirming that the construction by Israel, the occupying Power, of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and its associated regime are contrary to international law,
Encouraging all States and international organizations to continue to actively pursue policies to ensure respect
for their obligations under international law with regard to all illegal Israeli practices and measures in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly Israeli settlements,
_______________
48

A/70/354-S/2015/677.
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
50
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
49

44

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Expressing deep concern about the continuing Israeli policies of closures and severe restrictions on the
movement of persons and goods, including medical and humanitarian, via the imposition of prolonged closures and
severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade, as well as of checkpoints and a
permit regime throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Expressing deep concern also about the consequent negative impact of such policies on the contiguity of the
Territory and the serious socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people, which is a disastrous
humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip, and on the efforts aimed at rehabilitating and developing the damaged
Palestinian economy, while taking note of developments regarding the situation of access there based on the
trilateral agreement facilitated by the United Nations in this regard and on the resumption of some trade from Gaza
to the West Bank for the first time since 2007, and calling for the full lifting of restrictions,
Recalling the mutual recognition 22 years ago between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people,51 and the need for full compliance with the
agreements concluded between the two sides,
Recalling also the endorsement by the Security Council, in resolution 1515 (2003), of the Quartet road map to
a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict52 and the call in Council resolution 1850 (2008) for
the parties to fulfil their obligations under the road map and to refrain from any steps that could undermine
confidence or prejudice the outcome of negotiations on a final peace settlement,
Stressing the road map obligation upon Israel to freeze settlement activity, including so-called “natural
growth”, and to dismantle all settlement outposts erected since March 2001,
Recalling the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at its fourteenth
session, held in Beirut on 27 and 28 March 2002,53
Urging renewed efforts by the international community aimed at advancing and accelerating the conclusion of
a peace treaty to attain without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 by resolving all outstanding
issues, including all core issues, without exception, for a just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, in accordance with the internationally recognized basis of the two-State solution, and ultimately
of the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole for the realization of a comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
Reiterating support for the convening of an international conference in Moscow, as envisioned by the Security
Council in resolution 1850 (2008) and the Quartet statement of 23 September 2011, for the advancement and
acceleration of the peace efforts towards the fulfilment of its stated objectives,
Noting the important contribution to peace efforts of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the Palestinian Authority, including within the framework of the activities of the Quartet and with regard to the
recent trilateral agreement regarding the Gaza Strip,
Welcoming the ongoing efforts of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, under the chairmanship of Norway, and noting its recent meeting at United Nations
Headquarters on 30 September 2015, at which donor countries reaffirmed the necessity of continued and increased
donor support in this critical period for urgently addressing the immense humanitarian, reconstruction and recovery
needs in the Gaza Strip and furthering Palestinian economic recovery and development,
Recognizing the efforts being undertaken by the Palestinian Government, with international support, to
reform, develop and strengthen its institutions and infrastructure, emphasizing the need to preserve and further
develop Palestinian institutions and infrastructure, despite the obstacles presented by the ongoing Israeli occupation,
and commending in this regard the ongoing efforts to develop the institutions of an independent Palestinian State,
including through the implementation of the Palestinian National Development Plan on governance, economy,
social development and infrastructure (2014–2016), including the National Strategic Framework for Development
_______________
51

See A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
S/2003/529, annex.
53
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
52

45

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Policies and Interventions in Area C, and the significant achievements made, as confirmed by the positive
assessments made by international institutions regarding readiness for statehood, including by the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the United Nations and the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, while also expressing
concern about the negative impact of the current instability and financial crisis being faced by the Palestinian
Government,
Recognizing also the positive contribution of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, which
is aimed, inter alia, at enhancing development support and assistance to the Palestinian people and strengthening
institutional capacity in line with Palestinian national priorities,
Welcoming the convening of the Cairo International Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, on
12 October 2014, and urging the timely and full disbursement of pledges for expediting the provision of
humanitarian assistance and the reconstruction process,
Welcoming also the ministerial meetings of the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development convened in Tokyo in February 2013 and Jakarta in March 2014 as a forum for the
mobilization of political and economic assistance, including via exchanges of expertise and lessons learned, in
support of Palestinian development,
Recognizing the continued efforts and tangible progress made in the Palestinian security sector, noting the
continued cooperation that benefits both Palestinians and Israelis, in particular by promoting security and building
confidence, and expressing the hope that such progress will be extended to all major population centres,
Recognizing also that security measures alone cannot remedy the tensions, instability and violence, and calling
for full respect for international law, including for the protection of civilian life, as well as the promotion of human
security, the de-escalation of the situation, the exercise of restraint, including from provocative actions and rhetoric,
and the establishment of a stable environment conducive to the pursuit of peace,
Gravely concerned over the negative developments that have continued to occur in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, including the escalation of violence and any excessive use of force, resulting in
a large number of deaths and injuries, mostly among Palestinian civilians, including children and women, the
construction and expansion of settlements and the wall, the arbitrary arrest and detention of more Palestinian
civilians, the acts of violence, vandalism and brutality committed against Palestinian civilians by Israeli settlers in
the West Bank, the widespread destruction of public and private Palestinian property, including religious sites, and
infrastructure and including the demolition of homes, including if carried out as a means of collective punishment,
the internal forced displacement of civilians, especially among the Bedouin community, and the consequent
deterioration of the socioeconomic and humanitarian conditions of the Palestinian people,
Deploring the conflict in and around the Gaza Strip in July and August 2014 and the civilian casualties caused,
including the killing and injury of thousands of Palestinian civilians, including children, women and the elderly, and
the widespread destruction of thousands of homes and civilian infrastructure, including schools, hospitals, water,
sanitation and electricity networks, economic, industrial and agricultural properties, public institutions, religious
sites and United Nations schools and facilities, as well as the internal displacement of hundreds of thousands of
civilians and any violations of international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, in this regard,
Taking note of the report and findings of the independent commission of inquiry established pursuant to
Human Rights Council resolution S-21/1,54 and stressing the need to ensure accountability for all violations of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law in order to end impunity, ensure justice, deter
further violations, protect civilians and promote peace,
Expressing grave concern over the persisting disastrous humanitarian situation and socioeconomic conditions
in the Gaza Strip as a result of the prolonged Israeli closures and severe economic and movement restrictions that in
effect amount to a blockade and the continuing negative repercussions of the military operations in the Gaza Strip in
July and August 2014, in November 2012 and between December 2008 and January 2009, particularly as a result of
the widespread destruction and trauma inflicted and delays in reconstruction and recovery,
_______________
54

46

A/HRC/29/52.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the statement of the President of the Security Council of 28 July 2014,55
Stressing the need for calm and restraint by the parties, including by consolidating the ceasefire agreement of
26 August 2014, achieved under the auspices of Egypt, to avert the deterioration of the situation,
Reiterating the need for the full implementation by all parties of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of
8 January 2009 and General Assembly resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009,
Stressing that the situation in the Gaza Strip is unsustainable and that a durable ceasefire agreement must lead
to a fundamental improvement in the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, including through
the sustained and regular opening of crossing points, and ensure the safety and well-being of civilians on both sides,
Expressing concern over the continued imposition of hundreds of checkpoints and obstacles to movement in
and around Palestinian population centres by the Israeli occupying forces, and emphasizing in this regard the need
for the implementation by both sides of the Sharm el-Sheikh understandings,
Expressing grave concern about the imprisonment and detention by Israel of thousands of Palestinians,
including children, under harsh conditions, and all violations of international humanitarian law and human rights
law which have occurred in this regard,
Emphasizing the importance of the safety, protection and well-being of all civilians in the whole Middle East
region, and condemning all acts of violence and terror against civilians on both sides, including the firing of rockets,
Stressing the need for measures to be taken to guarantee the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilian
population throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, consistent with the provisions and obligations of
international humanitarian law,
Stressing also the need to respect the right of peaceful assembly,
Welcoming the formation of the Palestinian Government of national consensus under the leadership of the
President, Mahmoud Abbas, consistent with Palestine Liberation Organization commitments and the Quartet
principles, and emphasizing the need for respect for and the preservation of the territorial integrity and unity of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Affirming the need to support the Palestinian Government of national consensus in its assumption of full
government responsibilities in both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, in all fields, as well as through its presence at
Gaza’s crossing points,
Stressing the urgent need for sustained and active international involvement, including by the Quartet, and
welcoming in this regard its statement of 30 September 2015, and for concerted initiatives to support the parties in
building a climate for peace, to assist the parties in advancing and accelerating the peace process negotiations for the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement that ends the occupation which began in 1967
and results in the independence of a democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security with Israel and its other neighbours, on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of
reference of the Madrid Conference, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative,
Taking note of the application of Palestine for admission to membership in the United Nations, submitted on
23 September 2011,56
Taking note also of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, by which, inter alia, Palestine was accorded
non-member observer State status in the United Nations, and taking note of the follow-up report of the SecretaryGeneral,57
Noting the accession by Palestine, on 1 April 2014, to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian
law conventions,
Acknowledging the efforts being undertaken by civil society to promote a peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine,
_______________
55

S/PRST/2014/13; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2013–31 July 2014 (S/INF/69).
A/66/371-S/2011/592, annex I.
57
A/67/738.
56

47

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the findings by the International Court of Justice, in its advisory opinion, including on the urgent
necessity for the United Nations as a whole to redouble its efforts to bring the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
continues to pose a threat to international peace and security, to a speedy conclusion, thereby establishing a just and
lasting peace in the region,58
Stressing the urgency of achieving without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967,
Affirming once again the right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders,
1. Reaffirms the necessity of achieving a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine, the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, in all its aspects, and of intensifying all efforts towards that end, and stresses in this regard the
urgency of salvaging the prospects for realizing the two-State solution of Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967 borders;
2. Calls for the intensification of efforts by the parties, including through negotiations, with the support of
the international community, towards the conclusion of a final peace settlement;
3. Urges the undertaking of renewed international efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace, based on the relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at its
fourteenth session,53 the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,52 and
the existing agreements between the Israeli and Palestinian sides;
4. Stresses the need for a resumption of negotiations based on clear parameters and with a defined time
frame aimed at expediting the realization of a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement, and in this regard
encourages serious efforts by the United States of America, the European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United Nations, as members of the Quartet, and by the League of Arab States and all other concerned States;
5. Encourages continued serious regional and international efforts to follow up and promote the Arab
Peace Initiative, including by the Ministerial Committee formed at the Riyadh summit in March 2007;
6. Calls for, in this regard, the timely convening of an international conference in Moscow, as envisioned
by the Security Council in resolution 1850 (2008), for the advancement and acceleration of the achievement of a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement;
7. Calls upon both parties to act responsibly on the basis of international law and their previous agreements
and obligations, in particular adherence to the road map, irrespective of reciprocity, in order to create the conditions
necessary for the advancement of peace efforts;
8. Calls upon the parties themselves, with the support of the Quartet and other interested parties, to exert all
efforts necessary to halt the deterioration of the situation, to reverse all unilateral and unlawful measures taken on
the ground since 28 September 2000, to take every possible step to promote conditions conducive to the success of
peace negotiations and to refrain from actions that undermine trust or prejudge final status issues;
9. Calls upon the parties to observe calm and restraint and to refrain from provocative actions, incitement
and inflammatory rhetoric, especially in areas of religious and cultural sensitivity, including in East Jerusalem, and
calls for respect for the historic status quo at the holy places of Jerusalem, including the Haram al-Sharif, in word
and in practice, and for immediate and serious efforts to defuse tensions;
10. Underscores the need for the parties to take confidence-building measures aimed at improving the
situation on the ground, promoting stability, building trust and fostering the peace process, including an immediate
halt to all settlement activities and home demolitions, the undertaking of measures to address settler violence and
ensure accountability, the further release of prisoners and an end to arbitrary arrests and detentions;
11. Stresses the need for the removal of checkpoints and other obstructions to the movement of persons and
goods throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the need for respect and
preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem;
_______________
58

48

A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1, advisory opinion, para. 161.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Also stresses the need for an immediate and complete cessation of all acts of violence, including military
attacks, destruction and acts of terror;
13. Reiterates its demand for the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009);
14. Reiterates the need for the full implementation by both parties of the Agreement on Movement and
Access and of the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, of 15 November 2005, and the need, specifically, to
allow for the sustained opening of all crossings into and out of the Gaza Strip for humanitarian supplies, movement
and access, as well as for commercial flows and all necessary construction materials, and stresses the urgent need to
promote reconstruction and address the alarming unemployment rate, including among youth, including through the
implementation of United Nations-led projects and civilian reconstruction activities, all of which are essential for
alleviating the disastrous humanitarian situation, including the impact of the large-scale displacement of civilians in
July and August 2014, improving the living conditions of the Palestinian people and promoting the recovery of the
Palestinian economy;
15. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply strictly with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law, and to cease all of its measures that are contrary to international law and
all unilateral actions in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, that are aimed at altering the
character, status and demographic composition of the Territory, including the confiscation and de facto annexation
of land, and thus at prejudging the final outcome of peace negotiations, with a view to achieving without delay an
end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967;
16. Reiterates its demand for the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan, and calls for the full
implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions;
17. Stresses, in this regard, the need for Israel forthwith to abide by its road map obligation to freeze all
settlement activity, including so-called “natural growth”, and to dismantle settlement outposts erected since
March 2001;
18. Calls for the cessation of all provocations, including by Israeli settlers, in East Jerusalem, including in
and around religious sites;
19. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal obligations under international law, as
mentioned in the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice49 and as demanded
in General Assembly resolutions ES-10/13 of 21 October 2003 and ES-10/15, and, inter alia, that it immediately
cease its construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and calls upon all
States Members of the United Nations to comply with their legal obligations, as mentioned in the advisory opinion;
20. Reaffirms its commitment, in accordance with international law, to the two-State solution of Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967 borders;
21. Calls for:
(a)

The withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem;

(b) The realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, primarily the right to selfdetermination and the right to their independent State;
22. Stresses the need for a just resolution of the problem of Palestine refugees in conformity with its
resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948;
23. Urges Member States to expedite the provision of economic, humanitarian and technical assistance to
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian Government during this critical period in order to help to alleviate the
serious humanitarian situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, which is disastrous in
the Gaza Strip, to rehabilitate the Palestinian economy and infrastructure and to support the development and
strengthening of Palestinian institutions and Palestinian State-building efforts in preparation for independence;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts with the parties concerned, and in consultation
with the Security Council, towards the attainment of a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine and the
promotion of peace in the region and to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on these
efforts and on developments on this matter.
49

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/16
A/RES/70/16

Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 24 November 2015, by a recorded vote of 153 to 7, with 8 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/70/L.14 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga

70/16. Jerusalem
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, in particular its provisions regarding the City of
Jerusalem,
Recalling also its resolution 36/120 E of 10 December 1981 and all its subsequent relevant resolutions,
including resolution 56/31 of 3 December 2001, in which it, inter alia, determined that all legislative and
administrative measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, which have altered or purported to alter
the character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in particular the so-called “Basic Law” on Jerusalem and the
proclamation of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, were null and void and must be rescinded forthwith,
Recalling further the Security Council resolutions relevant to Jerusalem, including resolution 478 (1980) of
20 August 1980, in which the Council, inter alia, decided not to recognize the “Basic Law” on Jerusalem,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,59 and recalling its resolution
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,
Expressing its grave concern about any action taken by any body, governmental or non-governmental, in
violation of the above-mentioned resolutions,
Expressing its grave concern also, in particular, about the continuation by Israel, the occupying Power, of
illegal settlement activities, including measures regarding the so-called E-1 plan, its construction of the wall in and
around East Jerusalem, its restrictions on Palestinian access to and residence in East Jerusalem and the further
isolation of the city from the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, which are having a detrimental effect on the
lives of Palestinians and could prejudge a final status agreement on Jerusalem,
Expressing its grave concern further about the continuing Israeli demolition of Palestinian homes, the
revocation of residency rights and the eviction and displacement of numerous Palestinian families from East
_______________
59

50

See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Jerusalem neighbourhoods, including Bedouin families, as well as other acts of provocation and incitement,
including by Israeli settlers, in the city, including desecration of mosques and churches,
Expressing its concern about the Israeli excavations undertaken in the Old City of Jerusalem, including in and
around religious sites,
Expressing its grave concern, in particular, about tensions, provocations and incitement regarding the holy
places of Jerusalem, including the Haram al-Sharif, and urging restraint and respect for the sanctity of the holy sites
by all sides,
Reaffirming that the international community, through the United Nations, has a legitimate interest in the
question of the City of Jerusalem and in the protection of the unique spiritual, religious and cultural dimensions of
the city, as foreseen in relevant United Nations resolutions on this matter,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Middle East,60
1. Reiterates its determination that any actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the Holy City of Jerusalem are illegal and therefore null and void and have no
validity whatsoever, and calls upon Israel to immediately cease all such illegal and unilateral measures;
2. Stresses that a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question of the City of Jerusalem should
take into account the legitimate concerns of both the Palestinian and Israeli sides and should include internationally
guaranteed provisions to ensure the freedom of religion and of conscience of its inhabitants, as well as permanent,
free and unhindered access to the holy places by people of all religions and nationalities;
3. Also stresses the need for the parties to observe calm and restraint and to refrain from provocative
actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, especially in areas of religious and cultural sensitivity, and expresses
its grave concern in particular about the recent series of negative incidents in East Jerusalem;
4. Calls for respect for the historic status quo at the holy places of Jerusalem, including the Haram
al-Sharif, in word and practice, and urges all sides to work immediately and cooperatively to defuse tensions and
halt all provocations, incitement and violence at the holy sites in the City;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/17
A/RES/70/17

Adopted at the 64th plenary meeting, on 24 November 2015, by a recorded vote of 105 to 6, with 56 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/70/L.17 and Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zimbabwe, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,

_______________
60

A/70/353.

51

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

70/17. The Syrian Golan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “The situation in the Middle East”,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Middle East,61
Recalling Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
Reaffirming the fundamental principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming once more the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,62 to the occupied Syrian Golan,
Deeply concerned that Israel has not withdrawn from the Syrian Golan, which has been under occupation
since 1967, contrary to the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
Stressing the illegality of the Israeli settlement construction and other activities in the occupied Syrian Golan
since 1967,
Noting with satisfaction the convening in Madrid on 30 October 1991 of the Peace Conference on the Middle
East, on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973
and 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 and the formula of land for peace,
Expressing grave concern over the halt in the peace process on the Syrian track, and expressing the hope that
peace talks will soon resume from the point they had reached,
1.

Declares that Israel has failed so far to comply with Security Council resolution 497 (1981);

2. Also declares that the Israeli decision of 14 December 1981 to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration on the occupied Syrian Golan is null and void and has no validity whatsoever, as confirmed by the
Security Council in its resolution 497 (1981), and calls upon Israel to rescind it;
3. Reaffirms its determination that all relevant provisions of the Regulations annexed to the Hague
Convention of 1907, and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,62 continue to apply to the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since 1967, and calls upon the parties
thereto to respect and ensure respect for their obligations under those instruments in all circumstances;
4. Determines once more that the continued occupation of the Syrian Golan and its de facto annexation
constitute a stumbling block in the way of achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the region;
5. Calls upon Israel to resume the talks on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks and to respect the commitments
and undertakings reached during the previous talks;
6. Demands once more that Israel withdraw from all the occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967
in implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions;
7. Calls upon all the parties concerned, the co-sponsors of the peace process and the entire international
community to exert all the necessary efforts to ensure the resumption of the peace process and its success by
implementing Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973);
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
_______________
61
62

52

A/70/353.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/18
A/RES/70/18

Adopted at the 66th plenary meeting, on 3 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of the report of the Credentials
Committee (A/70/573)

70/18. Credentials of representatives to the seventieth session of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Credentials Committee63 and the recommendation contained therein,
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee.63
RESOLUTION 70/19
A/RES/70/19

Adopted at the 66th plenary meeting, on 3 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.20 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Chile, China, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Madagascar, Morocco, Myanmar, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, United Republic of Tanzania

70/19. Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,64 in particular the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Recalling its resolution 69/140 of 15 December 2014 on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace and its other related resolutions,
Recalling also that in its resolution 67/104 of 17 December 2012, the General Assembly proclaimed the
period 2013–2022 the International Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures and invited the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in this context to be the lead agency in the United Nations system,
Encouraging, in this regard, activities aimed at promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue in order to
enhance peace and social stability, respect for diversity and mutual respect and to create, at the global level, and also
at the regional, national and local levels, an environment conducive to peace and mutual understanding,
Recalling its resolution 69/312 of 6 July 2015 on the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, in which it
reaffirmed its support for the Alliance and reiterated the valuable role of the Alliance in promoting greater
understanding and respect among civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs,
Recalling also its resolution 68/127 of 18 December 2013 on a world against violence and violent extremism,
Recalling further its resolution 53/22 of 4 November 1998, by which it declared 2001 the United Nations Year
of Dialogue among Civilizations and expressed its firm determination to facilitate and promote dialogue among
civilizations,
Bearing in mind the valuable contribution that interreligious and intercultural dialogue can make to an
improved awareness and understanding of the common values shared by all humankind,
Noting that interreligious and intercultural dialogue has made significant contributions to mutual
understanding, tolerance and respect, as well as to the promotion of a culture of peace and an improvement of
overall relations among people from different cultural and religious backgrounds and among nations,
Recognizing that cultural diversity and the pursuit of cultural development by all peoples and nations are
sources of mutual enrichment for the cultural life of humankind,
_______________
63
64

A/70/573.
Resolution 217 A (III).

53

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the Unite for Heritage campaign launched by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in March 2015 which aims to celebrate and safeguard cultural heritage and diversity around the world,
Recalling its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it proclaimed the Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Bearing in mind that tolerance of cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic diversities contributes towards peace,
mutual understanding and friendship among people of different cultures and nations and that these diversities should
be made part of intercultural and interreligious dialogue efforts, as appropriate,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,65 and acknowledging that the
Agenda includes the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
Noting the various initiatives at the local, national, regional and international levels for enhancing dialogue,
understanding and cooperation among religions, beliefs, cultures and civilizations, which are mutually reinforcing
and interrelated,
Noting also the fifth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, held in Astana in June 2015,
Welcoming the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as
the work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, in promoting intercultural dialogue,
Welcoming also the declaration of the High-level Conference on Intercultural and Interfaith Dialogue adopted
by the Asia-Europe Meeting, with the theme “Harmony between civilizations as a prerequisite for sustainable
development”, held in St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, on 3 and 4 July 2014,
Welcoming further the work of the Anna Lindh Foundation and the ongoing work of the King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna,
Noting the international symposium to launch the African initiative on education for peace and development
through interreligious and intercultural dialogue, held in Cotonou, Benin, in May 2015,
Acknowledging the positive contribution of individuals and of relevant civil society organizations to the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and the culture of peace,
Recognizing the contributions of the media and of new information and communications technology to
promoting peoples’ understanding of different cultures and religions, including through the promotion of dialogue,
Reaffirming the importance of sustaining the process of engaging all stakeholders, including young men and
women as relevant actors, in interreligious and intercultural dialogue within the appropriate initiatives at various
levels, which aims to challenge prejudices and improve mutual understanding,
Recognizing the commitment of all religions to peace and the need for voices of moderation from all religions
and beliefs to work together in order to build a more secure and peaceful world,
Noting the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization conference on the theme “Youth
and the Internet: fighting radicalization and extremism”, held in Paris in June 2015,
1. Reaffirms that mutual understanding and interreligious and intercultural dialogue constitute important
dimensions of the dialogue among civilizations and of the culture of peace;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace;66
3. Recognizes the importance of interreligious dialogue and its valuable contribution to promoting social
cohesion, peace and development, and calls upon Member States to consider, as appropriate and where applicable,
interreligious and intercultural dialogue as an important tool in efforts aimed at achieving peace and social stability
and the full realization of internationally agreed development goals;

_______________
65
66

54

Resolution 70/1.
A/70/373.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Also recognizes the efforts by relevant stakeholders to foster peaceful and harmonious coexistence
within societies by promoting respect for religious and cultural diversity, including by engendering sustained and
robust interaction among various segments of society;
5. Further recognizes the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on intercultural dialogue and its contribution to interreligious dialogue, as well as its activities related
to the culture of peace and non-violence and its focus on concrete actions at the global, regional and subregional
levels;
6. Encourages Member States and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
further consider and carry out activities in support of the Action Plan for the International Decade for the
Rapprochement of Cultures (2013–2022), adopted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,67 which provides a framework for enhancing interreligious and intercultural dialogue and promoting
tolerance and mutual understanding, while placing emphasis on the involvement of women and youth in such
dialogue;
7. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any other means;
8. Reaffirms the solemn commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote universal respect for
and observance and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights64 and other instruments relating to human rights
and international law, the universal nature of these rights and freedoms being beyond question;
9. Welcomes the Bali Declaration adopted at the Sixth Global Forum of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, with the theme “Unity in diversity: celebrating diversity for common and shared values”, held in Bali,
Indonesia, on 29 and 30 August 2014, encourages relevant stakeholders to continue their efforts to promote mutual
understanding among different civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs, and in this regard looks forward to the
next meeting of the Global Forum, in Azerbaijan in 2016;
10. Underlines the importance of moderation as a value within societies for countering extremism in all its
aspects and for further contributing to the promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, tolerance,
understanding and cooperation, and encourages efforts, as appropriate, to enable voices of moderation to be heard;
11. Welcomes the efforts by the media to promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue, encourages the
further promotion of dialogue among the media from all cultures and civilizations, emphasizes that everyone has the
right to freedom of expression, and reaffirms that the exercise of this right carries with it special duties and
responsibilities and may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but that these shall be only such as are provided
by law and necessary for respect of the rights or reputations of others, protection of national security or of public
order, or of public health or morals;
12. Also welcomes the efforts to use information and communications technology, including the Internet, to
promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue, including through the Interfaith Dialogue e-Portal established
following the Special Non-Aligned Movement Ministerial Meeting on Interfaith Dialogue and Cooperation for
Peace and Development, held in Manila in 2010, as well as the Peace and Dialogue e-Portal of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and encourages relevant stakeholders to utilize the opportunity to
disseminate their best practices and experiences on interreligious and intercultural dialogue by contributing to the
Interfaith Dialogue e-Portal and to the Peace and Dialogue e-Portal;
13. Encourages Member States to consider, as and where appropriate, initiatives that identify areas for
practical action in all sectors and levels of society for the promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
tolerance, understanding and cooperation, inter alia, the ideas suggested during the High-level Dialogue on
Interreligious and Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for Peace, held in New York in October 2007,
including the idea of an enhanced process of dialogue among world religions, as well as the ideas suggested during
the third High Panel on Peace and Dialogue among Cultures, held in Paris in November 2012;
_______________
67

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Executive Board decision 194 EX/10.

55

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14. Acknowledges the active engagement of the United Nations system with faith-based organizations and
relevant non-governmental organizations in the promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue and in
bringing together people of different cultures, religions, faiths or beliefs to discuss common issues and objectives;
15. Also acknowledges the important role of civil society, including academia and volunteer groups, in
fostering interreligious and intercultural dialogue, and encourages support for practical measures that mobilize civil
society, including building capacities, opportunities and frameworks for cooperation;
16. Invites Member States to further promote reconciliation to help to ensure durable peace and sustained
development, including by working with faith leaders and communities and through reconciliatory measures and
acts of service and by encouraging forgiveness and compassion among individuals;
17. Recognizes that the Office for Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination in the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat plays a valuable role as focal point within the
Secretariat on the issue, and encourages it to continue to interact and coordinate with the relevant entities of the
United Nations system and coordinate their contribution to the intergovernmental process aimed at promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/20
A/RES/70/20

Adopted at the 66th plenary meeting, on 3 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.24 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe

70/20. Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Charter of the United Nations, including the purposes and principles contained therein,
and especially the dedication to saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recalling the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which
states that, “since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed”,
Recognizing the importance of the Declaration68 and Programme of Action69 on a Culture of Peace, which
serve as the universal mandate for the international community, particularly the United Nations system, for the
promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence that benefits humanity, in particular future generations,
Recalling its previous resolutions on a culture of peace, in particular resolution 52/15 of 20 November 1997
proclaiming 2000 the International Year for the Culture of Peace, resolution 53/25 of 10 November 1998
proclaiming the period 2001–2010 the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the
Children of the World, and resolutions 56/5 of 5 November 2001, 57/6 of 4 November 2002, 58/11 of 10 November
2003, 59/143 of 15 December 2004, 60/3 of 20 October 2005, 61/45 of 4 December 2006, 62/89 of 17 December
_______________
68
69

56

Resolution 53/243 A.
Resolution 53/243 B.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2007, 63/113 of 5 December 2008, 64/80 of 7 December 2009, 65/11 of 23 November 2010, 66/116 of
12 December 2011, 67/106 of 17 December 2012, 68/125 of 18 December 2013 and 69/139 of 15 December 2014,
adopted under its agenda item entitled “Culture of peace”,
Recalling also its resolution 68/127 of 18 December 2013 on a world against violence and violent extremism,
Reaffirming the United Nations Millennium Declaration,70 which calls for the active promotion of a culture
of peace,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”,
Taking note of the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly,71
Welcoming the observance of 2 October as the International Day of Non-Violence, as proclaimed by the
United Nations,72
Recognizing that all efforts made by the United Nations system in general and the international community at
large for peacekeeping, peacebuilding, the prevention of conflicts, disarmament, sustainable development, the
promotion of human dignity and human rights, democracy, the rule of law, good governance and gender equality at
the national and international levels contribute greatly to the culture of peace,
Recognizing also the importance of respect and understanding for religious and cultural diversity throughout
the world, of choosing dialogue and negotiations over confrontation and of working together and not against
each other,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,73 which provides an overview of the activities that have
been carried out by the main United Nations entities working in the areas of a culture of peace and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace since the adoption by the General Assembly of its
resolutions 68/125 and 68/126 of 18 December 2013,
Recalling the proclamation by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of
21 February as International Mother Language Day, which aims at protecting, promoting and preserving linguistic
and cultural diversity and multilingualism, in order to foster and enrich a culture of peace, social harmony, crosscultural dialogue and mutual understanding,
Recalling also the proclamation by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of
30 April as International Jazz Day, which aims to develop and increase intercultural exchanges and understanding
between cultures for the purpose of mutual comprehension, tolerance and the promotion of a culture of peace,
Welcoming the efforts of the international community to enhance understanding through constructive dialogue
among civilizations,
Expressing its appreciation for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in
promoting a culture of peace through a number of practical projects in the areas of youth, education, media and
migrations, in collaboration with Governments, international organizations, foundations and civil society groups, as
well as media and the private sector,
Welcoming the successful holding on 9 September 2015 of the General Assembly High-level Forum on the
Culture of Peace, convened by the President of the Assembly, the greater participation, in particular of Member
States, and the wide-ranging partnership and inclusive collaboration among Member States, international
organizations and civil society, as evidenced at the Forum, and welcoming also with appreciation the observance in
2015 by the Forum of the anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration and Programme of Action,

_______________
70

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
72
Resolution 61/271.
73
A/70/373.
71

57

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the role of women and young people in advancing the culture of peace and, in particular, the
importance of greater involvement of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in activities
promoting a culture of peace, including in post-conflict situations,
Welcoming the adoption by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its thirty-sixth session of a programme of action for a culture of peace and non-violence, and noting
that the objectives of that programme of action are in line with the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace adopted by the General Assembly,
Recalling the Yamoussoukro Declaration on Peace in the Minds of Men, and acknowledging the observance
in 2014 of the twenty-fifth anniversary of its adoption,
Noting the initiatives of civil society, in collaboration with Governments, to strengthen civilian capacities to
enhance the physical safety of vulnerable populations under threat of violence and to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes,
Encouraging the continued and increasing efforts and activities on the part of civil society organizations
throughout the world in advancing the culture of peace as envisaged in the Declaration and Programme of Action,
1. Reiterates that the objective of the effective implementation of the Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace69 is to strengthen further the global movement for a culture of peace following the observance of the
International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World, 2001–2010, and calls
upon all concerned to renew their attention to this objective;
2. Welcomes the inclusion of the promotion of a culture of peace in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;74
3. Invites Member States to continue to place greater emphasis on and expand their activities promoting a
culture of peace at the national, regional and international levels and to ensure that peace and non-violence are
fostered at all levels;
4. Invites the entities of the United Nations system, within their existing mandates, to integrate, as
appropriate, the eight action areas of the Programme of Action into their programmes of activities, focusing on
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence at the national, regional and international levels;
5. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for strengthening
efforts to mobilize all relevant stakeholders within and outside the United Nations system in support of a culture of
peace, and invites the Organization to continue to enhance communication and outreach, including through the
culture of peace website and in the context of the celebration of its seventieth anniversary;
6. Commends the practical initiatives and actions by relevant United Nations bodies, including the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the University for Peace, as well as their activities in further promoting a culture of peace and
non-violence, including the promotion of peace education and activities related to specific areas identified in the
Programme of Action and encourages them to continue and further strengthen and expand their efforts, and in this
context notes with appreciation the global launch of the United Nations Children’s Fund Early Childhood Peace
Consortium in September 2013;
7. Encourages the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to continue to promote peacebuilding
activities and to advance a culture of peace and non-violence in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts at the
country level;
8. Urges the appropriate authorities to provide age-appropriate education in children’s schools that builds a
culture of peace, including lessons in mutual understanding, tolerance, active citizenship and human rights;
9. Encourages the involvement of media, especially the mass media, in promoting a culture of peace and
non-violence, with particular regard to children and young people;

_______________
74

58

Resolution 70/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

10. Commends civil society, non-governmental organizations and young people for their activities in further
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence, including through their campaign to raise awareness on a culture of
peace and the peaceful settlement of disputes;
11. Encourages civil society and non-governmental organizations to further strengthen their efforts to
promote a culture of peace, inter alia, by adopting their own programme of activities to complement the initiatives
of Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and other international and regional
organizations, in line with the Declaration68 and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace;
12. Invites Member States, all parts of the United Nations system and civil society organizations to accord
increasing attention to their observance of the International Day of Peace on 21 September each year as a day of
global ceasefire and non-violence, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 55/282 of 7 September 2001;
13. Requests the President of the General Assembly to consider convening a high-level forum, as
appropriate and within existing resources, devoted to the implementation of the Programme of Action on the
occasion of the anniversary of its adoption, on or around 13 September;
14. Invites the Secretary-General, within existing resources, in consultation with the Member States and
taking into account the observations of civil society organizations, to explore mechanisms and strategies, in
particular strategies in the sphere of information and communications technology, for the implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action and to initiate outreach efforts to increase global awareness of the
Programme of Action and its eight areas of action aimed at their implementation;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report,
within existing resources, on actions taken by Member States, on the basis of information provided by them, and
those taken system-wide by all concerned entities of the United Nations to implement the present resolution and on
heightened activities by the Organization and its affiliated agencies to implement the Programme of Action and to
promote the culture of peace and non-violence;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Culture
of peace”.
RESOLUTION 70/75
A/RES/70/75

Adopted at the 69th plenary meeting, on 8 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.19 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, Fiji, Greece, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Maldives,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Nauru, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Portugal,
Samoa, Trinidad and Tobago, United States of America

70/75. Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its annual resolutions on sustainable fisheries, including resolution 69/109 of 9 December 2014,
and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (the Convention),75
and bearing in mind the relationship between the Convention and the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (the Agreement),76

_______________
75
76

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
Ibid., vol. 2167, No. 37924.

59

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the ratifications of and accessions to the Agreement and the fact that a growing number of States,
entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement, and subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, have taken measures, as appropriate, towards the
implementation of the provisions of the Agreement, in order to improve their management regimes,
Noting with satisfaction the twentieth anniversary of the opening for signature of the Agreement on
4 December 1995 at New York, as well as the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Code of Conduct for
Responsible Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (the Code), and noting in this
regard that a conference was held in 2015 in Vigo, Spain, for this purpose,
Welcoming the work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and its Committee on
Fisheries, and recognizing in particular the Code and other related instruments, including the international plans of
action, which set out principles and global standards of behaviour for responsible practices for conservation of
fisheries resources and the management and development of fisheries, as well as the 2005 Rome Declaration on
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing,
Recognizing the importance of data collection through accurate and reliable reporting and monitoring of
catches, including by-catch and discards, as a fundamental element of effective fisheries management that provides
a basis for scientific stock assessment, and ecosystem approaches to fisheries management,
Noting with concern that effective management of marine capture fisheries has been made difficult in some
areas by unreliable and incomplete information and data caused by, inter alia, unreported and misreported fish catch
and fishing effort and that this lack of accurate data contributes to overfishing in some areas, and in this regard
recalling that members of regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements must fully comply with
their associated data collection and reporting obligations, including to ensure that required data submissions are
complete, reliable and submitted in a timely manner,
Recognizing the significant contribution of sustainable fisheries to food security, income, wealth and poverty
alleviation for present and future generations,
Welcoming in this regard the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”, as endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012,
Welcoming the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, held from 25 to 27 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, and in
this regard reaffirming the commitment to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development, as reflected in Goal 14 of the outcome document,
Welcoming in this regard the continuous attention given by the international community to the role of fish and
fish products in nutrition and food security, including by the Committee on World Food Security of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, especially noting the importance of the availability of highly
nutritious food for low-income populations,
Recalling that in “The future we want”,77 States were encouraged to give due consideration to implementing
the Committee on World Food Security Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security,
Recalling also the Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-scale Fisheries in the Context of Food
Security and Poverty Eradication,
Recognizing the urgent need for action at all levels, relying on scientific advice, to ensure the long-term
sustainable use and management of fisheries resources through the wide application of the precautionary approach
and ecosystem approaches,

_______________
77

60

Resolution 66/288, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Expressing concern over the current and projected adverse effects of climate change on food security and the
sustainability of fisheries, and noting in that regard the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the United Nations Environment Programme,
Reaffirming its commitment to ensuring that conservation and management measures adopted by regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements are based on the best available scientific information,
Deploring the fact that fish stocks, including straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, in many
parts of the world are overfished or subject to sparsely regulated and heavy fishing efforts, as a result of, inter alia,
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, inadequate flag State control and enforcement, including monitoring,
control and surveillance measures, inadequate regulatory measures, harmful fisheries subsidies and overcapacity, as
well as inadequate port State control, as highlighted in the report of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations entitled The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2014,
Expressing its support for accelerating work to complete the ongoing negotiations in the World Trade
Organization to strengthen disciplines on subsidies in the fisheries sector, including through the prohibition of
certain forms of fisheries subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing,
Concerned that only a limited number of States have taken measures to implement, individually and through
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, the International Plan of Action for the
Management of Fishing Capacity adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Recalling the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated
Fishing adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Particularly concerned that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing continues to constitute a serious threat
to fish stocks and marine habitats and ecosystems, to the detriment of sustainable fisheries as well as the food
security and the economies of many States, particularly developing States,
Concerned that some operators increasingly take advantage of the globalization of fishery markets to trade
fishery products stemming from illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and make economic profits from those
operations, which constitutes an incentive for them to pursue their activities,
Recognizing that effective deterrence and combating of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing has
significant financial and other resource implications,
Recognizing also the role of the Global Record of Fishing Vessels, Refrigerated Transport Vessels and Supply
Vessels in the concerted fight against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
Recognizing further the duty provided in the Convention, the Agreement to Promote Compliance with
International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas (the Compliance
Agreement),78 the Agreement and the Code for flag States to exercise effective control over fishing vessels flying
their flag, and vessels flying their flag which provide support to fishing vessels, to ensure that the activities of such
fishing and support vessels do not undermine the effectiveness of conservation and management measures taken in
accordance with international law and adopted at the national, subregional, regional or global levels,
Noting the advisory opinion of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea on the request for an advisory
opinion submitted by the Subregional Fisheries Commission, issued on 2 April 2015,
Recognizing the importance of adequately regulating, monitoring and controlling trans-shipment at sea to
contribute to combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities,
Noting the obligation of all States, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the relevant provisions
of the Convention, to cooperate in the conservation and management of living marine resources, and recognizing
the importance of coordination and cooperation at the global, regional, subregional and national levels in the areas,
inter alia, of marine scientific research, data collection, information-sharing, capacity-building and training for the
conservation, management and sustainable development of living marine resources,
_______________
78

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2221, No. 39486.

61

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Acknowledging the importance of ocean data buoy systems moored in areas beyond national jurisdiction to
sustainable development, promoting safety at sea and limiting human vulnerability to natural disasters, due to their
use in weather and marine forecasts, fisheries management, tsunami forecasts and climate prediction, and
expressing concern that most damage to ocean data buoys, such as moored buoys and tsunameters, frequently
results from actions taken by some fishing operations which render the buoys inoperable,
Welcoming in this regard the adoption of measures by States, individually or through regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, to protect ocean data buoy systems from the impacts of fishing
activities,
Encouraging States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to cooperate to ensure that interactions between fishing operations and ocean data buoys on the high seas are
minimized,
Recognizing the need for States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to continue to develop and implement, consistent with international law, effective port State measures
to combat overfishing and illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, the critical need for cooperation with
developing States to build their capacity, and the importance of cooperation between the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the International Maritime Organization in this regard,
Noting with satisfaction the ratifications, acceptances and approval of and accessions to the Agreement on Port
State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,79
Recognizing the efforts of States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to implement its resolution 46/215 of 20 December 1991, in which the General Assembly called for a
global moratorium on all large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing, including collaborative fisheries enforcement
activities,
Concerned that marine pollution from all sources constitutes a serious threat to human health and safety,
endangers fish stocks, marine biodiversity and marine and coastal habitats and has significant costs to local and
national economies,
Recognizing that marine debris is a global transboundary pollution problem and that, owing to the many
different types and sources of marine debris, different approaches to its prevention and removal are necessary,
including identification of such sources and environmentally sound techniques for its removal,
Reaffirming the importance of sustainable aquaculture to food security, noting that aquaculture is already
making a significant contribution to the global seafood supply and that a further increase in that contribution is
anticipated,
Noting that the contribution of sustainable aquaculture to global fish supplies continues to respond to
opportunities in developing countries to enhance local food security and nutrition and poverty alleviation and,
together with the efforts of other aquaculture-producing countries, will make a significant contribution to meeting
future demands in fish consumption, bearing in mind article 9 of the Code,
Noting in this regard the concern about the potential effects of genetically engineered aquatic fish species on
the health and sustainability of wild fish stocks,
Calling attention to the particular vulnerabilities of small island developing States, other developing coastal
States and subsistence fishing communities whose livelihoods, economic development and food security are heavily
dependent on sustainable fisheries and will suffer disproportionately if sustainable fisheries are negatively affected,
Calling attention also to the circumstances affecting fisheries in many developing States, in particular African
States and small island developing States, and recognizing the urgent need for capacity-building, including the
_______________
79

62

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2009/REP and Corr.1–3, appendix E.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

transfer of marine technology and in particular fisheries- and aquaculture-related technology, to enhance the ability
of such States to exercise their rights in order to realize the benefits from fisheries resources and fulfil their
obligations under international instruments,
Recognizing the need to adopt, implement and enforce appropriate measures to minimize waste, by-catch and
discards, including high-grading, loss of fishing gear and other factors that adversely affect the sustainability of fish
stocks and ecosystems and, consequently, can also have harmful effects on the economies and food security of small
island developing States, other developing coastal States and subsistence fishing communities,
Recognizing also the need to further integrate ecosystem approaches into fisheries conservation and
management and, more generally, the importance of applying ecosystem approaches to the management of human
activities in the ocean, and noting in this regard the Reykjavik Declaration on Responsible Fisheries in the Marine
Ecosystem,80 the work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations related to guidelines for the
implementation of the ecosystem approach to fisheries management and the importance of this approach to relevant
provisions of the Agreement and the Code, as well as decision VII/1181 and other relevant decisions of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity,
Recognizing further the economic and cultural importance of sharks in many countries, the biological
importance of sharks in the marine ecosystem as key predatory species, the vulnerability of certain shark species to
overexploitation, the fact that some are threatened with extinction, the need for measures to promote the long-term
conservation, management and sustainable use of shark populations and fisheries, and the relevance of the
International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, adopted by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in 1999, in providing guidance on the development of such measures,
Welcoming in this regard the review by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations of the
implementation of the International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, and its ongoing
work in this regard,
Noting with concern that basic data on shark stocks and harvests continue to be lacking and that not all
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements have adopted conservation and management
measures for directed shark fisheries and for the regulation of by-catch of sharks from other fisheries,
Welcoming science-based measures taken by States to conserve and sustainably manage sharks, and noting in
this respect management measures taken by coastal States, including limits on catch or fishing effort, technical
measures, including by-catch reduction measures, sanctuaries, closed seasons and areas and monitoring, control and
surveillance,
Noting that the addition in 2013 of five shark species and two species of manta ray to appendix II to the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora82 entered into force on
14 September 2014, and noting also the ongoing work of the secretariat of that Convention and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on capacity-building in this regard,
Noting also that the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of
Wild Animals, at its eleventh meeting, held in Quito from 4 to 9 November 2014, adopted the listing of 21 species
of sharks and rays under the appendices to that Convention,83
Noting with concern the continuing practice of the removal of fins from sharks, with the remainder of the
carcass being discarded at sea,
Recognizing the importance of marine species occupying low trophic levels in the ecosystem and for food
security, and the need to ensure their long-term sustainability,
Expressing concern over continued incidental mortality, in fishing operations, of seabirds, particularly
albatrosses and petrels, as well as other marine species, including sharks, fin-fish species, marine mammals and
_______________
80

E/CN.17/2002/PC.2/3, annex.
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex.
82
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
83
Ibid., vol. 1651, No. 28395.
81

63

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

marine turtles, while recognizing considerable efforts by States and through various regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to reduce incidental mortality as a result of by-catch,
Noting with concern the significant threat that invasive alien species pose to marine ecosystems and resources,
I
Achieving sustainable fisheries
1. Reaffirms the importance it attaches to the long-term conservation, management and sustainable use of
the living marine resources of the world’s oceans and seas and the obligations of States to cooperate to this end, in
accordance with international law, as reflected in the relevant provisions of the Convention,75 in particular the
provisions on cooperation set out in Part V and Part VII, section 2, of the Convention, and where applicable, the
Agreement;76
2. Calls upon all States that have not done so, in order to achieve the goal of universal participation, to
become parties to the Convention, which sets out the legal framework within which all activities in the oceans and
seas must be carried out, taking into account the relationship between the Convention and the Agreement;
3. Notes with satisfaction that in “The future we want”,77 States addressed the sustainable development of
fisheries, recognized the significant contribution of fisheries to the three dimensions of sustainable development and
stressed the crucial role of healthy marine ecosystems, sustainable fisheries and sustainable aquaculture for food
security and nutrition and in providing for the livelihoods of millions of people, and encourages States to implement
the commitments made in “The future we want”;
4. Encourages States to give due priority to the implementation of the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)84 in relation to achieving sustainable
fisheries, especially restoring depleted stocks to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield on an urgent
basis and, where possible, not later than 2015, and recalls that in “The future we want”, States committed
themselves to intensify their efforts to meet that target and to urgently take the measures necessary to maintain or
restore all stocks at least to levels that can produce the maximum sustainable yield, with the aim of achieving those
goals in the shortest time feasible, as determined by their biological characteristics, and in order to achieve this, to
urgently develop and implement science-based management plans, including by reducing or suspending fishing
catch and fishing effort commensurate with the status of the stock, consistent with international law, the applicable
international instruments and relevant General Assembly resolutions and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations;
5. Emphasizes the need for the full implementation of the outcome document of the third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, entitled “SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway”;85
6. Urges States, either directly or through appropriate subregional, regional or global organizations or
arrangements, to intensify efforts to assess and address, as appropriate, the impacts of global climate change and
ocean acidification on the sustainability of fish stocks and the habitats that support them, in particular the most
affected ones;
7. Emphasizes the obligations of flag States to discharge their responsibilities, in accordance with the
Convention and the Agreement, to ensure compliance by vessels flying their flag with the conservation and
management measures adopted and in force with respect to fisheries resources on the high seas;
8. Calls upon all States, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to apply widely, in accordance with international law and the Code, the precautionary approach and ecosystem
approaches to the conservation, management and exploitation of fish stocks, and also calls upon States parties to the
Agreement to implement fully the provisions of article 6 of the Agreement as a matter of priority;

_______________
84

Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
85
Resolution 69/15, annex.

64

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Urges States to increase their reliance on scientific advice in developing, adopting and implementing
conservation and management measures, and to increase their efforts, including through international cooperation,
to promote science for conservation and management measures that apply, in accordance with international law, the
precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches to fisheries management, enhancing understanding of ecosystem
approaches, in order to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources, and in this
regard encourages the implementation of the Strategy for Improving Information on Status and Trends of Capture
Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as a framework for the improvement and
understanding of fishery status and trends;
10. Calls upon all States, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to apply stock-specific target and limit precautionary reference points, which for target reference points are intended
to meet management objectives, as described in annex II to the Agreement and in the Code, to ensure that
populations of harvested stocks and, where necessary, associated or dependent species, are maintained at or restored
to sustainable levels, and to use these reference points for triggering conservation and management action;
11. Encourages States to apply the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches in adopting and
implementing conservation and management measures addressing, inter alia, by-catch, pollution and overfishing,
and protecting habitats of specific concern, taking into account existing guidelines developed by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
12. Also encourages States to enhance or develop observer programmes, individually or through regional
fisheries management organizations or arrangements, in order to improve data collection on, inter alia, target and
by-catch species, which could also assist monitoring, control and surveillance tools, and to take into account
standards, forms of cooperation and other existing structures for such programmes as described in article 25 of the
Agreement and article 5 of the Code;
13. Calls upon in this regard States, individually in line with their national legislation or through regional
fisheries management organizations or arrangements, to take steps as appropriate to ensure the safety of observers;
14. Encourages States to implement, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, accurate, complete, reliable and effective data collection and reporting of required data on
catches, including by-catch and discards, reviewing and validating the data, and providing catch information in
support of scientific stock assessment and ecosystem approaches to fisheries management;
15. Calls upon States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to collect and,
where appropriate, report to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations required catch and effort
data, and fishery-related information, in a complete, accurate and timely way, including for straddling fish stocks
and highly migratory fish stocks within and beyond areas under national jurisdiction, discrete high seas fish stocks,
and by-catch and discards; and, where they do not exist, to establish processes to strengthen data collection and
reporting by members of regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, including through regular
reviews of member compliance with such obligations, and, when such obligations are not met, require the member
concerned to rectify the problem, including through the preparation of plans of action with timelines;
16. Invites States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to cooperate with the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in the implementation and further development of the
Fisheries Resources Monitoring System initiative;
17. Reaffirms paragraph 10 of its resolution 61/105 of 8 December 2006, and calls upon States, including
through regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, to urgently adopt and implement measures to
fully implement the International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks for directed and
non-directed shark fisheries, based on the best available scientific information, through, inter alia, limits on catch or
fishing effort, by requiring that vessels flying their flag collect and regularly report data on shark catches, including
species-specific data, discards and landings, undertaking, including through international cooperation,
comprehensive stock assessments of sharks, reducing shark by-catch and by-catch mortality and, where scientific
information is uncertain or inadequate, not increasing fishing effort in directed shark fisheries and urgently
establishing science-based management measures to ensure the long-term conservation, management and
sustainable use of shark stocks and to prevent further declines of vulnerable or threatened shark stocks, and
encourages the full utilization of dead sharks caught in the context of sustainably managed fisheries;
65

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

18. Calls upon States to take immediate and concerted action to improve the implementation of and
compliance with existing regional fisheries management organization or arrangement and national measures that
regulate shark fisheries and incidental catch of sharks, in particular those measures which prohibit or restrict
fisheries conducted solely for the purpose of harvesting shark fins and, where necessary, to consider taking other
measures, as appropriate, such as requiring that all sharks be landed with each fin naturally attached;
19. Calls upon regional fisheries management organizations with the competence to regulate highly
migratory species to strengthen or establish precautionary, science-based conservation and management measures,
as appropriate, for sharks taken in fisheries within their convention areas consistent with the International Plan of
Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks;
20. Encourages range States and regional economic integration organizations that have not yet done so to
become signatories to the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks under the
Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals,83 and invites non-range States,
intergovernmental organizations and international and national non-governmental organizations or other relevant
bodies and entities to consider becoming cooperating partners;
21. Encourages States, as appropriate, to cooperate in establishing non-detriment findings for shared stocks
of marine species listed in appendices I and II to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora,82 consistent with the concepts and non-binding guiding principles contained in resolution
Conf. 16.7 on non-detriment findings adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora;
22. Urges States to eliminate barriers to trade in fish and fisheries products which are not consistent with
their rights and obligations under the World Trade Organization agreements, taking into account the importance of
the trade in fish and fisheries products, particularly for developing countries;
23. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States committed themselves to observing the need to ensure
access to fisheries and the importance of access to markets by subsistence, small-scale and artisanal fisherfolk and
women fish workers, as well as indigenous peoples and their communities, particularly in developing countries,
especially small island developing States;
24. Urges States and relevant international and national organizations to provide for the participation of
small-scale fishery stakeholders in related policy development and fisheries management strategies in order to
achieve long-term sustainability for such fisheries, consistent with the duty to ensure the proper conservation and
management of fisheries resources, and encourages States to consider promoting, as appropriate, participatory
management schemes for small-scale fisheries in accordance with national laws, regulations and practices, as well
as the Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-scale Fisheries in the Context of Food Security and
Poverty Eradication of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
25. Welcomes the convening by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations of Tenure and
Fishing Rights 2015: a global forum on rights-based approaches for fisheries, in Siem Reap, Cambodia, from 23 to
27 March 2015;
26. Encourages States, either directly or through competent and appropriate subregional, regional or global
organizations and arrangements, to analyse, as appropriate, the impact of fishing for marine species corresponding
to low trophic levels;
27. Welcomes, in this regard, the initiation of further studies by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations of the impact of industrial fishing activities on species corresponding to low trophic levels;
28. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to consider the potential effects of
genetically engineered fish species on the health and sustainability of wild fish stocks and on the biodiversity of the
aquatic environment and to provide guidance, consistent with the Code, on minimizing harmful impacts in
this regard;
29. Also invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in consultation with other
relevant international organizations, including the International Maritime Organization, to promote awareness and
cooperation to develop and strengthen capacity to prevent, minimize and mitigate the adverse impacts of invasive
alien species on biodiversity, including fish stocks;
66

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

II
Implementation of the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks
30. Calls upon all States, and entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the
Agreement, that have not done so to ratify or accede to the Agreement and in the interim to consider applying it
provisionally;
31. Notes the round-table discussion convened by the Secretary-General during the eleventh round of
informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement, on 17 March 2015, to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the Agreement;
32. Calls upon States parties to the Agreement to effectively implement, as a matter of priority, the
provisions of the Agreement through their national legislation and through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements in which they participate;
33. Emphasizes the importance of those provisions of the Agreement relating to bilateral, subregional and
regional cooperation in enforcement, and urges continued efforts in this regard;
34. Urges States parties to the Agreement, in accordance with article 21, paragraph 4, thereof, to inform,
either directly or through the relevant subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement, all
States whose vessels fish on the high seas in the same subregion or region of the form of identification issued by
those States parties to officials duly authorized to carry out boarding and inspection functions in accordance with
articles 21 and 22 of the Agreement;
35. Also urges States parties to the Agreement, in accordance with article 21, paragraph 4, thereof, to
designate an appropriate authority to receive notifications pursuant to article 21 and to give due publicity to such
designation through the relevant subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement;
36. Invites regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements which have not yet done so to
adopt procedures for high seas boarding and inspection that are consistent with articles 21 and 22 of the Agreement,
including, inter alia, those to ensure the safety of the crew and the inspectors;
37. Calls upon States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements with competence over discrete high seas fish stocks, to adopt the
measures necessary to ensure the long-term conservation, management and sustainable use of such stocks in
accordance with the Convention and consistent with the Code and the general principles set forth in the Agreement;
38. Invites States to assist developing States in enhancing their participation in regional fisheries
management organizations or arrangements, including by facilitating access to fisheries for straddling fish stocks
and highly migratory fish stocks, in accordance with article 25, paragraph 1 (b), of the Agreement, taking into
account the need to ensure that such access benefits the developing States concerned and their nationals;
39. Urges States parties to the Agreement, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, to take into account the special requirements of developing States, including small island
developing States as highlighted in the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, in giving effect
to the duty to cooperate in the establishment of conservation and management measures for straddling fish stocks
and highly migratory fish stocks, including the need to ensure, where appropriate, in accordance with article 24,
paragraph 2 (c), of the Agreement, that such measures do not transfer a disproportionate burden of conservation
action onto developing States, and notes in this regard ongoing efforts to better develop a common understanding of
this concept;
40. Calls upon States and international financial institutions and organizations of the United Nations system
to provide assistance according to Part VII of the Agreement, including, if appropriate, the development of special
financial mechanisms or instruments to assist developing States, in particular the least developed among them and
small island developing States, to enable them to develop their national capacity to exploit fishery resources,
including developing their domestically flagged fishing fleet, value-added processing and the expansion of their
economic base in the fishing industry, consistent with the duty to ensure the proper conservation and management of
fisheries resources;
67

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

41. Urges States, intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions, national institutions
and non-governmental organizations, as well as natural and juridical persons, to make voluntary financial
contributions to the Assistance Fund established under Part VII of the Agreement;
42. Encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat (the Division) to continue their efforts
to publicize the availability of assistance through the Assistance Fund;
43. Encourages accelerated progress by States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, regarding the recommendations of the Review
Conference on the Agreement, held in New York from 22 to 26 May 2006,86 and the identification of emerging priorities;
44. Encourages States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, to consider implementing, as appropriate, the recommendations of
the resumed Review Conference, held in New York from 24 to 28 May 2010;87
45. Recalls paragraph 40 of resolution 69/109, and requests the Secretary-General to resume the Review
Conference, convened pursuant to article 36 of the Agreement, in New York from 23 to 27 May 2016, and to render the
necessary assistance and provide such services as may be required for the resumption of the Review Conference;
46. Encourages wide participation in the resumed Review Conference, in accordance with article 36 of the
Agreement;
47. Recalls its request in paragraph 41 of resolution 69/109 that the Secretary-General submit to the
resumed Review Conference an updated report to assist the Review Conference in discharging its mandate under
article 36, paragraph 2, of the Agreement;
48. Recalls paragraph 6 of resolution 56/13 of 28 November 2001, takes note of the report on the eleventh
round of informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement, and requests the Secretary-General to convene in
March 2016 a twelfth round of informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement for a duration of two days,
to serve primarily as a preparatory meeting for the resumed Review Conference;
49. Requests the Secretary-General to invite States, and entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1,
paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement, not parties to the Agreement, as well as the United Nations Development
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other specialized agencies, the World
Bank, the Global Environment Facility and other relevant international financial institutions, subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, other fisheries bodies, other relevant
intergovernmental bodies and relevant non-governmental organizations, in accordance with past practice, to attend
the twelfth round of informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement as observers;
50. Reaffirms its request that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations initiate
arrangements with States for the collection and dissemination of data on fishing in the high seas by vessels flying
their flag at the subregional and regional levels where no such arrangements exist;
51. Also reaffirms its request that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations revise its
global fisheries statistics database to provide information on straddling fish stocks, highly migratory fish stocks and
discrete high seas fish stocks on the basis of where the catch is taken;
III
Related fisheries instruments
52. Emphasizes the importance of the effective implementation of the provisions of the Compliance
Agreement,78 and urges continued efforts in this regard;
53. Calls upon all States and other entities referred to in article X, paragraph 1, of the Compliance
Agreement that have not yet become parties to that Agreement to do so as a matter of priority and, in the interim, to
consider applying it provisionally;
_______________
86
87

68

See A/CONF.210/2006/15, annex.
See A/CONF.210/2010/7, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

54. Urges States and subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
implement and promote the application of the Code within their areas of competence;
55. Urges States to develop and implement, as a matter of priority, national and, as appropriate, regional
plans of action to put into effect the international plans of action of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations;
56. Welcomes in this regard the work undertaken by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations to improve the response rate for monitoring implementation of the Code and the international plans of action
and strategies by developing a web-based questionnaire, and highlights the importance of responding to the questionnaire;
57. Encourages the development of best-practice guidelines for safety at sea in connection with marine
fisheries by the competent international organizations;
58. Encourages States to consider signing, ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the Cape Town
Agreement of 2012 on the Implementation of the Provisions of the Torremolinos Protocol of 1993 relating to the
Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977;
IV
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
59. Emphasizes once again its serious concern that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing remains one
of the greatest threats to fish stocks and marine ecosystems and continues to have serious and major implications for
the conservation and management of ocean resources, as well as the food security and the economies of many
States, particularly developing States, and renews its call upon States to comply fully with all existing obligations
and to combat such fishing and urgently to take all steps necessary to implement the International Plan of Action to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing;
60. Recalls in this regard that in “The future we want”, States acknowledged that illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing deprive many countries of a crucial natural resource and remain a persistent threat to their
sustainable development and recommitted to eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing as advanced in
the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, and to prevent and combat those practices, including by developing and
implementing national and regional action plans in accordance with the International Plan of Action to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, implementing, in accordance with international
law, effective and coordinated measures by coastal States, flag States, port States, chartering nations and the States
of nationality of the beneficial owners and others who support or engage in illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing by identifying vessels engaged in such fishing and by depriving offenders of the benefits accruing from it, as
well as by cooperating with developing countries to systematically identify needs and build capacity, including
support for monitoring, control, surveillance, compliance and enforcement systems;
61. Notes with satisfaction the development of an increasing number of national plans of action to prevent,
deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, and calls upon States that have not yet done so to
consider developing such plans;
62. Urges States to exercise effective control over their nationals, including beneficial owners, and vessels
flying their flag, in order to prevent and deter them from engaging in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
activities or supporting vessels engaging in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, including those
vessels listed by regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements as engaged in those activities, and to
facilitate mutual assistance to ensure that such actions can be investigated and proper sanctions imposed;
63. Encourages States that have not yet done so to establish penalties for non-compliance by vessels
involved in fishing or fishing-related activities and their nationals, as appropriate, in accordance with applicable
national law and consistent with international law, that are adequate in severity for effectively securing compliance,
deterring further violations and depriving offenders of the benefits from their illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing activities;
64. Urges States to take effective measures, at the national, subregional, regional and global levels, to deter
the activities, including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, of any vessel which undermines conservation
and management measures that have been adopted by subregional and regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements in accordance with international law;
69

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

65. Calls upon States not to permit vessels flying their flag to engage in fishing on the high seas or in areas
under the national jurisdiction of other States, unless duly authorized by the authorities of the States concerned and
in accordance with the conditions set out in the authorization, and to take specific measures, including deterring the
reflagging of vessels by their nationals, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention, the Agreement
and the Compliance Agreement, to control fishing operations by vessels flying their flag;
66. Urges States, individually and collectively through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to develop appropriate processes to assess the performance of States with respect to implementing the
obligations regarding fishing vessels flying their flag set out in relevant international instruments;
67. Reaffirms the need to strengthen, where necessary, the international legal framework for intergovernmental
cooperation, in particular at the subregional and regional levels, in the management of fish stocks and in combating
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, in a manner consistent with international law, and for States and entities
referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement to collaborate in efforts to address
these types of fishing activities;
68. Urges regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to further coordinate measures for
combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, such as through the development of a common list
of vessels identified as engaged in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing or the mutual recognition of the
illegal, unreported and unregulated vessel lists established by each organization or arrangement;
69. Reaffirms its call upon States to take all necessary measures consistent with international law, without
prejudice to a State’s sovereignty over ports in its territory and to reasons of force majeure or distress, including the
prohibition of vessels from accessing their ports followed by a report to the flag State concerned, when there is clear
evidence that they are or have been engaged in or have supported illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, or
when they refuse to give information either on the origin of the catch or on the authorization under which the catch
has been made;
70. Reaffirms paragraph 53 of its resolution 64/72 of 4 December 2009 with regard to eliminating illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing by vessels flying “flags of convenience” and requiring that a “genuine link” be
established between States and fishing vessels flying their flags, and urges States operating open registry to
effectively control all fishing vessels flying their flag, as required by international law, or otherwise stop open
registry for fishing vessels;
71. Encourages States, either directly or through competent and appropriate subregional, regional or global
organizations and arrangements, to consider adopting rules, consistent with international law, to ensure that chartering
arrangements and practices related to fishing vessels enable compliance with and enforcement of relevant conservation
and management measures, so as not to undermine efforts to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
72. Recognizes the need for enhanced port State measures to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, and urges States to cooperate, in particular at the regional level and through subregional and regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to adopt all necessary port measures, consistent with
international law taking into account article 23 of the Agreement, and to further promote the development and
application of standards at the regional level;
73. Encourages, in this regard, States and regional economic integration organizations that have not yet
done so to consider ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing79 with a view to its early entry into force;
74. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States that have signed the Agreement on Port State Measures to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing were called upon to expedite procedures
for its ratification with a view to its early entry into force;
75. Notes the capacity development programme of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations to assist developing countries in strengthening and harmonizing port State measures, including through
bilateral, subregional and/or regional coordination;
76. Also notes, in this regard, the workshops held for the Caribbean region in Port of Spain from 24 to
28 March 2014, for the South American region in Montevideo from 29 September to 3 October 2014, for North
West Indian Ocean States in Colombo from 1 to 5 June and for the western coast of the African continent in Praia
from 20 to 24 July 2015;
70

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

77. Encourages strengthened collaboration between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the International Maritime Organization, taking into account the respective competencies, mandates
and experience of the two organizations, to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, particularly in
improving the implementation of flag State responsibilities and port State measures;
78. Also encourages States, with respect to vessels flying their flag, and port States, to make every effort to
share data on landings and catch quotas, and in this regard encourages regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements to consider developing open databases containing such data for the purpose of enhancing the
effectiveness of fisheries management;
79. Calls upon States to take all measures necessary to ensure that vessels flying their flag do not engage in
trans-shipment of fish caught by fishing vessels engaged in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, through
adequate regulation, monitoring and control of trans-shipment of fish at sea, including through additional national
measures applicable to vessels flying their flag to prevent such trans-shipment;
80. Urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to adopt and implement internationally agreed market-related measures in accordance with international law,
including principles, rights and obligations established in World Trade Organization agreements, as called for in the
International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing;
81. Welcomes the ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on the
development of best-practice guidelines for catch documentation schemes and traceability, in accordance with its
agreed terms of reference and framework principles;
82. Calls upon States to continue working within the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations on the elaboration, in accordance with international law, including the agreements established under the
World Trade Organization, of guidelines and other relevant criteria relating to catch documentation schemes,
including possible formats;
83. Notes with satisfaction, in this regard, that the Committee on Fisheries, at its thirty-first session,
recognized that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations would undertake to elaborate
guidelines and other relevant criteria relating to catch documentation schemes, including possible formats, based on
the following principles: conformity with the provisions of international law; not creating unnecessary barriers to
trade; equivalence; risk-based; reliable; simple, clear and transparent; and electronic if possible, with the aim of
adoption at the thirty-second session of the Committee, and that the assessment of schemes and formats would
include cost-benefit considerations and take into account catch documentation schemes already implemented by
certain of its members as well as regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;88
84. Encourages information-sharing regarding emerging market- and trade-related measures by States and
other relevant actors with appropriate international forums, given the potential implications of these measures for all
States, consistent with the established plan of work of the Committee on Fisheries, and taking into account the
Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fish Trade of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
85. Acknowledges the development of participatory surveillance activities at sea involving fishing
communities in West Africa as a cost-effective way of detecting illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
86. Notes the concern expressed by the Committee on Fisheries at the proliferation of private standards and
ecolabelling schemes potentially leading to the creation of trade barriers and restrictions, and also notes the work by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to develop an evaluation framework to assess the
conformity of public and private ecolabelling schemes through the Guidelines for the Ecolabelling of Fish and
Fishery Products from Marine Capture Fisheries;
87. Also notes the concerns about possible connections between transnational organized crime and illegal
fishing in certain regions of the world, and encourages States, including through the appropriate international forums
and organizations, to study the causes and methods of and contributing factors to illegal fishing to increase
knowledge and understanding of those possible connections, and to make the findings publicly available, and in this
_______________
88

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/23.

71

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

regard takes note of the study issued by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on transnational organized
crime in the fishing industry, bearing in mind the distinct legal regimes and remedies under international law
applicable to illegal fishing and transnational organized crime;
V
Monitoring, control and surveillance and
compliance and enforcement
88. Calls upon States, in accordance with international law, to strengthen implementation of or, where they
do not exist, adopt comprehensive monitoring, control and surveillance measures and compliance and enforcement
schemes individually and within those regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements in which they
participate, in order to provide an appropriate framework for promoting compliance with agreed conservation and
management measures, and further urges enhanced coordination among all relevant States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in these efforts;
89. Welcomes the fact that the Committee on Fisheries has urged its members to start implementing the
Voluntary Guidelines for Flag State Performance89 as soon as possible;
90. Encourages further work by competent international organizations, including subregional and regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to develop guidelines on flag State control of fishing vessels;
91. Urges States, individually and through relevant regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to establish mandatory vessel monitoring, control and surveillance systems, in particular to require
that vessel monitoring systems be carried by all vessels fishing on the high seas as soon as practicable, recalling that
in paragraph 62 of resolution 63/112 of 5 December 2008 it urged that large-scale fishing vessels be required to
carry vessel monitoring systems no later than December 2008, and to share information on fisheries enforcement
matters;
92. Calls upon States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations or
arrangements, to strengthen or establish, consistent with national and international law, positive or negative lists of
vessels fishing within the areas covered by relevant regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements
in order to promote compliance with conservation and management measures and to identify products from illegal,
unreported and unregulated catches, and encourages improved coordination among all States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in sharing and using this information, taking into account the forms of
cooperation with developing States as set out in article 25 of the Agreement;
93. Encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in cooperation with States,
regional economic integration organizations, the International Maritime Organization and, as appropriate, regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to expedite efforts to develop and manage a comprehensive
global record of fishing vessels, refrigerated transport vessels and supply vessels, including with a unique vessel
identifier system, using, as a first step, the International Maritime Organization Ship Identification Number Scheme
for fishing vessels of 100 gross tonnage and above, adopted by the Assembly of the International Maritime
Organization in its resolution A.1078 (28) of 4 December 2013;
94. Welcomes the continued development of the Global Record of Fishing Vessels, Refrigerated Transport
Vessels and Supply Vessels by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, including its efforts to
keep it cost-effective, and encourages States, including through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to provide the necessary data to the Global Record;
95. Also welcomes the agreement that the International Maritime Organization ship identification number
should be used as the unique vessel identifier for phase I of the Global Record of Fishing Vessels, Refrigerated
Transport Vessels and Supply Vessels and the fact that several regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements have made provisions for the International Maritime Organization number to be compulsory in their
convention areas for all eligible vessels, and encourages those regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements which have not yet done so to do the same;
_______________
89

72

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document COFI/2014/4.2/Rev.1, appendix II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

96. Requests States and relevant international bodies to develop, in accordance with international law, more
effective measures to trace fish and fishery products to enable importing States to identify fish or fishery products
caught in a manner that undermines international conservation and management measures agreed in accordance
with international law, taking into account the special requirements of developing States and the forms of
cooperation with developing States as set out in article 25 of the Agreement, and at the same time to recognize the
importance of market access, in accordance with provisions 11.2.4, 11.2.5 and 11.2.6 of the Code, for fish and
fishery products caught in a manner that is in conformity with such international measures;
97. Requests States to take the necessary measures, consistent with international law, to help to prevent fish
and fishery products caught in a manner that undermines applicable conservation and management measures
adopted in accordance with international law from entering international trade;
98. Encourages States to establish and undertake cooperative surveillance and enforcement activities in
accordance with international law to strengthen and enhance efforts to ensure compliance with conservation and
management measures, and prevent and deter illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
99. Urges States, directly and through regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, to
develop and adopt effective monitoring, control and surveillance measures for trans-shipment, as appropriate, in
particular at-sea trans-shipment, in order to, inter alia, monitor compliance, to collect and verify fisheries data, and to
prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, in accordance with international
law and, in parallel, to encourage and support the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in
studying the current practices of trans-shipment and produce a set of guidelines for this purpose;
100. Expresses its appreciation for financial contributions from States to improve the capacity of the existing
voluntary International Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Network for Fisheries-related Activities, and
encourages States to join and actively participate in the Network and to consider supporting, when appropriate, its
transformation in accordance with international law into an international unit with dedicated resources to further
assist Network members, taking into account the forms of cooperation with developing States as set out in article 25
of the Agreement;
101. Encourages participation in the fifth Global Fisheries Enforcement Training Workshop, to be held in
Auckland, New Zealand, in March 2016, hosted by the International Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Network
for Fisheries-related Activities, in order to share information, experiences and technologies, foster coordination and
improve skills among enforcement officials;
102. Encourages States, individually and through relevant international bodies, to improve the understanding
of the causes and impacts of forced labour and human trafficking in the fishing and aquaculture industries, including
processing and related industries, and to further consider actions to combat these practices, including raising
awareness of the issue;
VI
Fishing overcapacity
103. Calls upon States to commit themselves to urgently reducing the capacity of the world’s fishing fleets to
levels commensurate with the sustainability of fish stocks, through the establishment of target levels and plans or
other appropriate mechanisms for ongoing capacity assessment, while avoiding the transfer of fishing capacity to
other fisheries or areas in a manner that undermines the sustainable management of fish stocks, including those
areas where fish stocks are overexploited or in a depleted condition, and recognizing in this context the legitimate
rights of developing States to develop their fisheries for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks
consistent with article 25 of the Agreement, article 5 of the Code and paragraph 10 of the International Plan of
Action for the Management of Fishing Capacity of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
104. Reiterates its call upon States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, to ensure that the urgent actions required in the International Plan of Action for the Management
of Fishing Capacity are undertaken expeditiously and that its implementation is facilitated without delay;
105. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to report on the state of progress in
the implementation of the International Plan of Action for the Management of Fishing Capacity, as provided for in
paragraph 48 of the Plan of Action;
73

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

106. Calls upon States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements with competence to regulate highly migratory species, urgently to
address global fishing capacity for tunas, inter alia, in a way that recognizes the legitimate rights of developing
States, in particular small island developing States, to participate in and benefit from such fisheries, taking into
account the recommendations of the 2010 Joint Tuna Regional Fisheries Management Organizations International
Workshop on RFMO Management of Tuna Fisheries, held in Brisbane, Australia, and the recommendations of the
2011 third joint meeting of tuna regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
107. Encourages those States which are cooperating to establish subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, taking into account the best scientific information available as well as
ecosystem approaches and the precautionary approach, to exercise voluntary restraint of fishing effort levels in those
areas that will come under the regulation of the future organizations and arrangements until adequate regional
conservation and management measures are adopted and implemented, taking into account the need to ensure the
long-term conservation, management and sustainable use of the relevant fish stocks and to prevent significant
adverse impacts on vulnerable marine ecosystems;
108. Urges States to eliminate subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity and to illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, including by accelerating work to complete World Trade Organization
negotiations on fisheries subsidies in accordance with the 2001 Doha Ministerial Declaration90 to clarify and
improve and the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to strengthen disciplines on fisheries subsidies, taking
into account the importance of the fisheries sector to developing countries;
109. Recalls in this regard that in “The future we want”, States reaffirmed their commitment in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation to eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing and overcapacity, taking into account the importance of that sector to developing countries, reiterated their
commitment to conclude multilateral disciplines on fisheries subsidies that would give effect to the mandates of the
World Trade Organization Doha Development Agenda90 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to strengthen
disciplines on subsidies in the fisheries sector, including through the prohibition of certain forms of fisheries
subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and
differential treatment for developing and least developed countries should be an integral part of World Trade
Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation, taking into account the importance of the sector to development
priorities, poverty reduction and livelihood and food security concerns, and encouraged one another to further
improve the transparency and reporting of existing fisheries subsidies programmes through the World Trade
Organization and, given the state of fisheries resources, and without prejudicing the Doha and Hong Kong
ministerial mandates on fisheries subsidies or the need to conclude those negotiations, to eliminate subsidies that
contribute to overcapacity and overfishing and to refrain from introducing new such subsidies or from extending or
enhancing existing ones;
VII
Large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing
110. Expresses concern that, despite the adoption of General Assembly resolution 46/215, the practice of
large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing still exists and remains a threat to living marine resources;
111. Urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to adopt effective measures, or strengthen existing measures, to implement and enforce the provisions of resolution
46/215 and subsequent resolutions on large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing in order to eliminate the use of large-scale
pelagic drift nets in all seas and oceans, which means that efforts to implement resolution 46/215 should not result in
the transfer to other parts of the world of drift nets that contravene the resolution;
112. Also urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to adopt effective measures, or strengthen existing measures, to implement and enforce the present
global moratorium on the use of large-scale pelagic drift nets on the high seas, and calls upon States to ensure that
vessels flying their flag that are duly authorized to use large-scale drift nets in waters under their national jurisdiction
do not use such gear for fishing while on the high seas;
_______________
90

74

A/C.2/56/7, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

VIII
Fisheries by-catch and discards
113. Urges States, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and other
relevant international organizations that have not done so to take action, including with consideration of the interests
of developing coastal States and, as appropriate, subsistence fishing communities, to minimize by-catch, as well as
to reduce or eliminate catch by lost or abandoned gear, fish discards and post-harvest losses, including of juvenile
fish, consistent with international law and relevant international instruments, including the Code, and in particular to
consider measures including, as appropriate, technical measures related to fish size, mesh size or gear, discards,
closed seasons and areas and zones reserved for selected fisheries, particularly artisanal fisheries, the establishment
of mechanisms for communicating information on areas of high concentration of juvenile fish, taking into account the
importance of ensuring the confidentiality of such information, and support for studies and research that will minimize
by-catch of juvenile fish, and to ensure that these measures are implemented so as to optimize their effectiveness;
114. Encourages in this regard States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, as appropriate, to ensure proper implementation and enforcement of the measures they have
taken with regard to by-catch and discards;
115. Welcomes the commitment of States in “The future we want” to enhance action to manage by-catch,
discards and other adverse ecosystem impacts from fisheries, including by eliminating destructive fishing practices,
consistent with international law, the applicable international instruments and relevant General Assembly resolutions
and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
116. Calls upon States, either individually, collectively or through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, to further study, develop and adopt effective management measures, taking into
account the best available scientific information on fishing methods, including fish aggregating devices, to minimize
by-catch;
117. Also calls upon States, either individually, collectively or through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, to collect the necessary data in order to evaluate and closely monitor the use of
large-scale fish aggregating devices and other devices, as appropriate, and their effects on tuna resources and tuna
behaviour and associated and dependent species, to improve management procedures to monitor the number, type
and use of such devices and to mitigate possible negative effects on the ecosystem, including on juveniles and the
incidental by-catch of non-target species, particularly sharks and turtles, and notes in this regard the measures
adopted by different regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
118. Notes in this regard that some regional fisheries management organizations, including the InterAmerican Tropical Tuna Commission, the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, the
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission and the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, have established their
own working groups to assess the use and impact of large-scale fish aggregating devices;
119. Encourages States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to promote, as appropriate, the use of environmentally friendly fish aggregating devices while
ensuring compliance with measures that they have taken relating to such devices;
120. Urgently calls upon States, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements and, where appropriate, other relevant international organizations to develop and implement effective
management measures to reduce the incidence of catch and discards of non-target species, including the utilization
of selective fishing gear, where appropriate, and to take appropriate measures to minimize waste;
121. Calls upon States and subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
adopt or improve measures to assess the impact of their fisheries on species caught as by-catch and to improve the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of information and reporting on incidental catch of species caught as by-catch,
including through adequate observer coverage and the use of modern technologies, and to provide assistance to
developing States to meet data-collection and reporting obligations;
122. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, as appropriate, to
strengthen or establish data-collection programmes to obtain reliable species-specific estimates of shark, marine
turtle, fin-fish, marine mammal and seabird by-catch, and to promote further research on selective fishing gear and
practices and on the use of appropriate by-catch mitigation measures;
75

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

123. Encourages States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to coordinate in
the development and implementation of clear and standardized by-catch data-collection and reporting protocols for
non-target species, in particular endangered, threatened and protected species, taking into account best-practice
advice from appropriate international organizations and arrangements, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels;91
124. Encourages States and entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the
Agreement to give due consideration to participation, as appropriate, in subregional and regional instruments and
organizations with mandates to conserve non-target species taken incidentally in fishing operations;
125. Encourages States to strengthen, if necessary, the capacity of those subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in which they participate to ensure the adequate conservation of nontarget species taken incidentally in fishing operations, taking into consideration best practices for non-target species
management, and to expedite their ongoing efforts in this regard;
126. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements urgently to
implement, as appropriate, the measures recommended in the 2004 Guidelines to Reduce Sea Turtle Mortality in
Fishing Operations and the International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline
Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in order to prevent the decline of sea
turtles and seabird populations by minimizing by-catch and increasing post-release survival in their fisheries,
including through research and development of gear and bait alternatives, promoting the use of available by-catch
mitigation technology, and establishing and strengthening data-collection programmes to obtain standardized
information to develop reliable estimates of the by-catch of these species;
127. Urges States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
implement the International Guidelines on Bycatch Management and Reduction of Discards of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;92
128. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to continue to take
urgent action to reduce the by-catch of seabirds, including albatrosses and petrels, in fisheries by adopting and
implementing conservation measures consistent with the 2009 best practices technical guidelines of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to support implementation of the International Plan of Action for
Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries and taking into account the work of the Agreement on
the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels and of organizations such as the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources;
IX
Subregional and regional cooperation
129. Urges coastal States and States fishing on the high seas, in accordance with the Convention, the
Agreement and other relevant instruments, to pursue cooperation in relation to straddling fish stocks and highly
migratory fish stocks, either directly or through appropriate subregional or regional fisheries management
organizations or arrangements, to ensure the effective conservation and management of such stocks;
130. Urges States fishing for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks on the high seas, and
relevant coastal States, where a subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement has the
competence to establish conservation and management measures for such stocks, to give effect to their duty to
cooperate by becoming members of such an organization or participants in such an arrangement, or by agreeing to
apply the conservation and management measures established by such an organization or arrangement, or to
otherwise ensure that no vessel flying their flag is authorized to access the fisheries resources to which regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements or conservation and management measures established by
such organizations or arrangements apply;
_______________
91
92

76

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2258, No. 40228.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document FIRO/R957 (En), appendix E.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

131. Invites, in this regard, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
ensure that all States having a real interest in the fisheries concerned may become members of such organizations or
participants in such arrangements, in accordance with the Convention, the Agreement and the Code;
132. Encourages relevant coastal States and States fishing on the high seas for a straddling fish stock or a
highly migratory fish stock, where there is no subregional or regional fisheries management organization or
arrangement to establish conservation and management measures for such stocks, to cooperate to establish such an
organization or enter into another appropriate arrangement to ensure the conservation and management of such
stocks, and to participate in the work of the organization or arrangement;
133. Welcomes in this regard the convening of the second regional consultation on regional cooperation for
sustainable fisheries and aquaculture in the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden, in Cairo, from 22 to 24 June 2014;
134. Urges signatory States and other States whose vessels fish within the area of the Convention on the
Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources in the South-East Atlantic Ocean93 for fishery resources
covered by that Convention to become parties to that Convention as a matter of priority and, in the interim, to ensure
that vessels flying their flags fully comply with the measures adopted;
135. Encourages further ratifications of, accessions to, acceptances and approvals of the Southern Indian
Ocean Fisheries Agreement;94
136. Also encourages further ratifications of, accessions to, acceptances and approvals of the Convention on
the Conservation and Management of High Seas Fishery Resources in the South Pacific Ocean;
137. Welcomes the entry into force on 19 July 2015 of the Convention on the Conservation and Management
of High Seas Fisheries Resources in the North Pacific Ocean, and encourages further ratifications, accessions,
acceptances and approvals of that Convention;
138. Encourages States that participated in the negotiation of the Convention on the Conservation and
Management of High Seas Fisheries Resources in the North Pacific Ocean to fully implement interim voluntary
measures adopted in accordance with paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of resolution 61/105 and paragraphs 117, 119,
120, 122 and 123 of resolution 64/72;
139. Welcomes the endorsement of the Agreement for the establishment of the General Fisheries Commission
for the Mediterranean, as amended, by the Commission at its thirty-eighth session, held in Rome from 19 to 24 May
2014, and urges those Contracting Parties to the Commission that need to accept the amended Agreement to do so
with a view to its early entry into force;
140. Notes the ongoing efforts of the members of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission to strengthen the
functioning of the Commission so that it can more effectively discharge its mandate, and invites the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to provide members of the Commission with the necessary
assistance to this end;
141. Encourages signatory States and States having a real interest to become parties to the Convention for the
Strengthening of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission Established by the 1949 Convention between the
United States of America and the Republic of Costa Rica;
142. Urges the Contracting Parties to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest
Atlantic Fisheries95 that have not yet done so to approve the 2007 Amendment to that Convention with a view to its
early entry into effect;
143. Urges further efforts by regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, as a matter of
priority, in accordance with international law, to strengthen and modernize their mandates and the measures adopted
by such organizations or arrangements, and to implement modern approaches to fisheries management, as reflected
in the Agreement and other relevant international instruments, relying on the best scientific information available
_______________
93

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2221, No. 39489.
Ibid., vol. 2835, No. 49647.
95
Ibid., vol. 1135, No. 17799.
94

77

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and application of the precautionary approach and incorporating an ecosystem approach to fisheries management
and biodiversity considerations, including the conservation and management of ecologically related and dependent
species and protection of their habitats, where these aspects are lacking, to ensure that they effectively contribute to
long-term conservation and management and sustainable use of living marine resources, and welcomes those
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements that have taken steps in this direction;
144. Calls upon regional fisheries management organizations with the competence to conserve and manage
highly migratory fish stocks that have not yet adopted effective conservation and management measures in line with
the best scientific information available to conserve and manage stocks falling under their mandate to do so
urgently;
145. Urges States to strengthen and enhance cooperation among existing and developing regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in which they participate, including increased communication and
further coordination of measures, such as through the holding of joint consultations, and to strengthen integration,
coordination and cooperation by such regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with other
relevant fisheries organizations, regional seas arrangements and other relevant international organizations;
146. Urges the five regional fisheries management organizations with competence to manage highly
migratory species to continue to take measures to implement the Course of Actions adopted at the second joint
meeting of tuna regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and to consider the
recommendations of the third joint meeting of tuna regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
147. Invites States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with competence to
manage straddling fish stocks to share experiences and good practices, for example by considering organizing joint
meetings, where appropriate;
148. Urges regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to improve transparency and to
ensure that their decision-making processes are fair and transparent, rely on the best scientific information available,
incorporate the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches, and address participatory rights, including
through, inter alia, the development of transparent criteria for allocating fishing opportunities which reflects, where
appropriate, the relevant provisions of the Agreement, taking due account, inter alia, of the status of the relevant
stocks and the respective interests in the fishery;
149. Welcomes the fact that a number of regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements have
completed performance reviews, and encourages the implementation, as appropriate, of the recommendations of
their respective reviews as a matter of priority;
150. Urges States, through their participation in regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements that have not done so, to undertake, on an urgent basis, performance reviews of those regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, initiated either by the organization or arrangement itself or
with external partners, including in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
using transparent criteria based on the provisions of the Agreement and other relevant instruments, and taking into
account the best practices of regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements and, as appropriate, any
set of criteria developed by States or other regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, and
encourages that such performance reviews include some element of independent evaluation and propose means for
improving the functioning of the regional fisheries management organization or arrangement, as appropriate;
151. Calls upon States, through their participation in regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to undertake performance reviews of those regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements on a regular basis, and to make the results publicly available, to implement the recommendations of
such reviews and to strengthen the comprehensiveness of those reviews over time, as necessary;
152. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States recognized the need for transparency and accountability in
fisheries management by regional fisheries management organizations and the efforts already made by those
regional fisheries management organizations that had undertaken independent performance reviews, called upon all
regional fisheries management organizations to regularly undertake such reviews and make the results publicly
available, encouraged implementation of the recommendations of such reviews and recommended that the
comprehensiveness of those reviews be strengthened over time, as necessary;
78

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

153. Urges States to cooperate, taking into account those performance reviews, to develop best-practice
guidelines for regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and to apply, to the extent possible,
those guidelines to organizations and arrangements in which they participate;
154. Encourages the development of regional guidelines for States to use in establishing sanctions for noncompliance by vessels flying their flag and by their nationals, to be applied in accordance with national law, that are
adequate in severity for effectively securing compliance, deterring further violations and depriving offenders of the
benefits deriving from their illegal activities, as well as in evaluating their systems of sanctions to ensure that they
are effective in securing compliance and deterring violations;
155. Recognizes the importance of ensuring transparency of reporting of fishing activities within regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements in order to facilitate efforts to combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, as well as the importance of respecting the reporting obligations within those organizations and
arrangements, notes in this regard the measures adopted by the International Commission for the Conservation of
Atlantic Tunas96 and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission,97 and encourages other regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to consider establishing similar measures;
X
Responsible fisheries in the marine ecosystem
156. Urges States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
enhance their efforts to apply an ecosystem approach to fisheries, taking into account paragraph 30 (d) of the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
157. Encourages States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements and other relevant international organizations, to work to ensure that fisheries and other ecosystem
data collection is performed in a coordinated and integrated manner, facilitating incorporation into global
observation initiatives, where appropriate;
158. Calls upon States and regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, working in
cooperation with other relevant organizations, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the World Meteorological Organization, to adopt,
as appropriate, measures to protect ocean data buoy systems moored in areas beyond national jurisdiction from
actions that impair their operation;
159. Encourages States to increase scientific research on the marine ecosystem in accordance with
international law;
160. Calls upon States, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other specialized
agencies, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, where appropriate, and
other appropriate intergovernmental bodies to cooperate in achieving sustainable aquaculture, including through
information exchange, developing equivalent standards on such issues as aquatic animal health and human health
and safety concerns, assessing the potential positive and negative impacts of aquaculture, including socioeconomics,
on the marine and coastal environment, including biodiversity, and adopting relevant methods and techniques to
minimize and mitigate adverse effects, and in this regard encourages the implementation of the 2007 Strategy and
Outline Plan for Improving Information on Status and Trends of Aquaculture of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, as a framework for the improvement and understanding of aquaculture status
and trends;
161. Calls upon States to take action immediately, individually and through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, and consistent with the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches, to
continue to implement the 2008 International Guidelines for the Management of Deep-sea Fisheries in the High
Seas of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (the Guidelines) in order to sustainably
_______________
96
97

International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, recommendation 11–16.
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, resolutions 12/07 and 13/07.

79

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

manage fish stocks and protect vulnerable marine ecosystems, including seamounts, hydrothermal vents and cold
water corals, from destructive fishing practices, recognizing the immense importance and value of deep-sea
ecosystems and the biodiversity they contain;
162. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States committed to enhance actions to protect vulnerable marine
ecosystems from significant adverse impacts, including through the effective use of impact assessments, consistent
with international law, the applicable international instruments and relevant General Assembly resolutions and
guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
163. Reaffirms the importance of paragraphs 80 to 90 of resolution 61/105, paragraphs 113 to 127 of
resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121 to 136 of resolution 66/68 of 6 December 2011 addressing the impacts of
bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems and the long-term sustainability of deep-sea fish stocks and the
actions called for in those resolutions, and emphasizes the need for full implementation by all States and relevant
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements of their commitments under those paragraphs on an
urgent basis;
164. Recalls that nothing in the paragraphs of resolutions 61/105, 64/72 and 66/68 addressing the impacts of
bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems prejudices the sovereign rights of coastal States over their
continental shelf or the exercise of the jurisdiction of coastal States with respect to their continental shelf under
international law as reflected in the Convention, in particular article 77 thereof;
165. Notes in this regard the adoption by coastal States of conservation measures regarding their continental
shelf to address the impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems, as well as their efforts to ensure
compliance with those measures;
166. Welcomes the important progress made by States, regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements and those States participating in negotiations in establishing a regional fisheries management
organization or arrangement competent to regulate bottom fisheries to implement paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of
resolution 61/105, paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and
132 to 134 of resolution 66/68 and address the impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems;
167. Urges States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to ensure that their
actions in sustainably managing deep-sea fisheries and implementing paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of resolution
61/105, paragraphs 113 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of
resolution 66/68 are consistent with the Guidelines;
168. Welcomes the substantial ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
related to the management of deep-sea fisheries in the high seas and the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems,
affirms the importance of the work undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 135 and 136 of resolution 66/68, notes in
particular the support provided by that Organization to States in implementing the Guidelines, and welcomes the
launch of the Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems database in December 2014;
169. Recalls its decision in paragraph 162 of resolution 69/109 to conduct in 2016 a further review of the actions
taken by States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in response to paragraphs 113, 117
and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of resolution 66/68, with a view
to ensuring effective implementation of the measures therein and to make further recommendations, where necessary,
and also recalls the value of preceding such a review with a two-day workshop as in 2011;
170. Requests the Secretary-General to convene, with full conference services, without prejudice to future
arrangements, a two-day workshop on 1 and 2 August 2016 in order to discuss implementation of paragraphs 113,
117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of resolution 66/68, and to
invite States, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other relevant specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, other
fisheries bodies, other relevant intergovernmental bodies and relevant non-governmental organizations and relevant
stakeholders, in accordance with United Nations practice, to attend the workshop;
171. Recalls its request in paragraph 164 of resolution 69/109 to the Secretary-General to prepare a report
similar in scope, length and detail to his report to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session,98 in cooperation
_______________
98

80

A/66/307.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and with the assistance of an expert consultant to
be hired by the Division to provide information and analysis on relevant technical and scientific issues to be covered
in the report, for consideration by the Assembly at its seventy-first session, on the actions taken by States and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in response to paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124
of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of resolution 66/68, and invites States and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to consider making such information publicly
available;
172. Encourages accelerated progress to establish criteria on the objectives and management of marine
protected areas for fisheries purposes, and in this regard welcomes the development by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations of technical guidelines on marine protected areas and fisheries, and urges
coordination and cooperation among all relevant international organizations and bodies;
173. Urges all States to implement the 1995 Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine
Environment from Land-based Activities99 and to accelerate activity to safeguard the marine ecosystem, including
fish stocks, against pollution and physical degradation, taking into account the increase in oceanic dead zones;
174. Acknowledges the serious environmental impacts on the marine environment caused by abandoned, lost
or otherwise discarded fishing gear, and encourages States and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, as appropriate, to take action to reduce such gear, noting the recommendations of the 2009 report by
the United Nations Environment Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
175. Reaffirms the importance it attaches to paragraphs 77 to 81 of resolution 60/31 of 29 November 2005
concerning the issue of lost, abandoned or discarded fishing gear and related marine debris and the adverse impacts
such debris and derelict fishing gear have on, inter alia, fish stocks, habitats and other marine species, and urges
accelerated progress by States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in implementing
those paragraphs of the resolution;
176. Encourages further studies, including by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
on the impacts of underwater noise on fish stocks and fishing catch rates, as well as associated socioeconomic
effects;
177. Calls upon States, including through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
play an active role in global efforts to conserve and sustainably use living marine resources, so as to contribute to
marine biological diversity;
178. Encourages States, either individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, as appropriate, to identify any spawning and nursery areas for fish stocks under their jurisdiction or
competence and, where required, to adopt science-based measures to conserve such stocks during these critical
life stages;
179. Expresses concern about the recent massive influx of sargassum seaweed into the waters of the
Caribbean and its impact on aquatic resources, fisheries, shorelines, waterways and tourism, and encourages States
and relevant regional organizations to cooperate to better understand the causes and impacts of the influx, with a
view to protecting the livelihoods of fishers and fishing communities and finding ways of beneficially utilizing the
seaweed and environmentally friendly ways of disposing of sargassum washed up on shore;
180. Recognizes the wide range of impacts of ocean acidification on marine ecosystems, and calls upon States
to tackle the causes of ocean acidification and to further study its impacts;
181. Emphasizes the importance of developing adaptive marine resource management strategies and
enhancing capacity-building to implement such strategies in order to enhance the resilience of marine ecosystems to
minimize the wide range of impacts on marine organisms and threats to food security caused by ocean acidification,
in particular the impacts on the ability of calciferous plankton, coral reefs, shellfish and crustaceans to build shells
and skeletal structures and the threats this could pose to protein supply;
_______________
99

A/51/116, annex II.

81

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

XI
Capacity-building
182. Reiterates the crucial importance of cooperation by States directly or, as appropriate, through the
relevant subregional and regional organizations, and by other international organizations, including the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations through its FishCode programme, including through financial
and/or technical assistance, in accordance with the Agreement, the Compliance Agreement, the Code and its
associated international plans of action, to increase the capacity of developing States to achieve the goals and
implement the actions called for in the present resolution;
183. Welcomes the ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in
developing guidance on, and assisting in the implementation of, the strategies and measures required for the creation
of an enabling environment for sustainable small-scale fisheries, and encourages studies for creating possible
alternative livelihoods for coastal communities;
184. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States recognized the importance of building the capacity of
developing countries to be able to benefit from the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and seas and their
resources, and in this regard emphasized the need for cooperation in marine scientific research to implement the
provisions of the Convention and the outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development, as well as for the
transfer of technology, taking into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and
Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology;
185. Also recalls that in “The future we want”, States urged the identification and mainstreaming by 2014 of
strategies that further assist developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, in developing their national capacity to conserve, sustainably manage and realize the benefits of
sustainable fisheries, including through improved market access for fish products from developing countries;
186. Encourages increased capacity-building and technical assistance by States, international financial
institutions and relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies for fishers, in particular small-scale fishers, in
developing countries, and in particular small island developing States, consistent with environmental sustainability,
in recognition of the fact that food security and livelihoods may depend on fisheries;
187. Encourages States to cooperate closely, directly or through the United Nations system, including the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, with a view to enhancing capacity-building of developing
States, including coastal States, in particular small island developing States, in the field of fisheries and aquaculture
through education and training;
188. Recognizes, in this regard, the work of the United Nations University Fisheries Training Programme in
Iceland and its contribution to training for developing States, in particular small island developing States, and
emphasizes the need for the continuation and strengthening of this training for developing States;
189. Encourages the international community to enhance the opportunities for sustainable development in
developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, small island developing States and coastal African
States, by encouraging greater participation of those States in authorized fisheries activities being undertaken within
areas under their national jurisdiction, in accordance with the Convention, by distant-water fishing nations in order
to achieve better economic returns for developing countries from their fisheries resources within areas under their
national jurisdiction and an enhanced role in regional fisheries management, as well as by enhancing the ability of
developing countries to develop their own fisheries, as well as to participate in high seas fisheries, including access
to such fisheries, in conformity with international law, in particular the Convention and the Agreement, and taking
into account article 5 of the Code;
190. Requests distant-water fishing nations, when negotiating access agreements and arrangements with
developing coastal States, to do so on an equitable and sustainable basis and to take into account their legitimate
expectation to fully benefit from the sustainable use of the natural resources of their exclusive economic zones, to
ensure that vessels flying their flag comply with the laws and regulations of the developing coastal States adopted in
accordance with international law and to give greater attention to fish processing and fish-processing facilities
within the national jurisdiction of the developing coastal State to assist the realization of the benefits from the
82

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

development of fisheries resources and also to the transfer of technology and assistance for monitoring, control and
surveillance and compliance and enforcement within areas under the national jurisdiction of the developing coastal
State providing fisheries access, taking into account the forms of cooperation set out in article 25 of the Agreement
and article 5 of the Code;
191. Encourages States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to provide greater assistance and to promote coherence in such assistance for developing States in
designing, establishing and implementing relevant agreements, instruments and tools for the conservation and
sustainable management of fish stocks, including in designing and strengthening their domestic regulatory fisheries
policies and those of regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements in their regions, and the
enhancement of research and scientific capabilities through existing funds, such as the Assistance Fund under
Part VII of the Agreement, bilateral assistance, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements
assistance funds, the FishCode programme, the World Bank’s global programme on fisheries and the Global
Environment Facility;
192. Encourages States to provide technical and financial support to developing countries to address their
special requirements and challenges in implementing the Guidelines;
193. Calls upon States to promote, through continuing dialogue and the assistance and cooperation provided
in accordance with articles 24 to 26 of the Agreement, further ratifications of or accessions to the Agreement by
seeking to address, inter alia, the issue of lack of capacity and resources that might stand in the way of developing
States becoming parties;
194. Notes with appreciation the compilation, prepared by the Secretariat and available on the website of the
Division, of the needs of developing States for capacity-building and assistance in the conservation and
management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks and the sources of available assistance for
developing States to address such needs;
195. Encourages States, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and other relevant
bodies to assist developing States in the implementation of the actions called for in paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of
resolution 61/105, paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and
132 to 134 of resolution 66/68;
196. Urges States and regional economic integration organizations, individually and through regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to mainstream efforts to assist developing States, in
particular the least developed and small island developing States, with other relevant international development
strategies with a view to enhancing international coordination to enable them to develop their national capacity to
exploit fishery resources, consistent with the duty to ensure the conservation and management of those resources,
and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to fully mobilize and coordinate the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system, including at the level of the regional economic commissions, within
their respective mandates;
197. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations to develop strategies to further assist
developing States, in particular the least developed and small island developing States, in fully realizing the benefits
from the catch of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks and in strengthening regional efforts to
sustainably conserve and manage such stocks, and, in this regard, to make available such information;
XII
Cooperation within the United Nations system
198. Requests the relevant parts of the United Nations system, international financial institutions and donor
agencies to support increased enforcement and compliance capabilities for regional fisheries management
organizations and their member States;
199. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to continue its cooperative
arrangements with United Nations agencies on the implementation of the international plans of action and to report
to the Secretary-General, for inclusion in his annual report on sustainable fisheries, on priorities for cooperation and
coordination in this work;
83

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

XIII
Activities of the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea
200. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the activities of the Division, which reflect the
high standard of assistance provided to Member States by the Division;
201. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to carry out the responsibilities and functions entrusted to
him by the Convention, the Agreement and the related resolutions of the General Assembly and to ensure the
allocation of appropriate resources to the Division for the performance of its activities under the approved budget for
the Organization;
XIV
Seventy-first session of the General Assembly
202. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all States, relevant
intergovernmental organizations, the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and relevant non-governmental organizations, and, in connection with
the report requested in paragraph 164 of resolution 69/109, recalls its request to the Secretary-General to invite
States and regional economic integration organizations and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements to submit detailed information to the Secretary-General in a timely manner on actions taken pursuant
to paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of
resolution 66/68, to facilitate a further review of such actions;
203. Notes the desire to further improve the efficiency of and the effective participation of delegations in the
informal consultations concerning the annual General Assembly resolution on sustainable fisheries, decides that the
informal consultations on this resolution will be held in a single round of consultations in November for a period of
seven days, and invites States to submit proposals for inclusion in the text of the resolution to the Coordinator of the
informal consultations no later than five weeks before the start of the consultations;
204. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”, the sub-item entitled “Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and
related instruments”, and to consider the possibility of including this sub-item in future provisional agendas on a
biennial basis.
RESOLUTION 70/76
A/RES/70/76

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.28 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Italy, Lebanon, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Myanmar, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam

70/76. Return or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3187 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of 19 November 1975, 31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/18 of
11 November 1977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of 29 November 1979, 35/127 and 35/128 of 11 December
1980, 36/64 of 27 November 1981, 38/34 of 25 November 1983, 40/19 of 21 November 1985, 42/7 of 22 October
84

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1987, 44/18 of 6 November 1989, 46/10 of 22 October 1991, 48/15 of 2 November 1993, 50/56 of 11 December
1995, 52/24 of 25 November 1997, 54/190 of 17 December 1999, 56/97 of 14 December 2001, 58/17 of
3 December 2003, 61/52 of 4 December 2006, 64/78 of 7 December 2009 and 67/80 of 12 December 2012,
Recalling also the 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,100 the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported
Cultural Objects,101 the 1954 Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict102
and the two Protocols thereto,103 the 1972 Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural
Heritage,104 the 2001 Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage,105 the 2003 Convention for
the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage106 and the 2005 Convention on the Protection and Promotion of
the Diversity of Cultural Expressions,107
Appreciating the positive results of the second meeting of States parties to the 1970 Convention on the Means
of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, in June
2012, which adopted rules of procedure of the meeting of States parties that, inter alia, stipulate that the meeting of
States parties shall be convened every two years, and also established a subsidiary committee, which will be
convened every year,
Welcoming the positive results of the third meeting of States parties to the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, in May 2015,
and, in particular, the adoption of the operational guidelines for the implementation of the Convention,
Noting the adoption of the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their
Property on 2 December 2004,108 as it might apply to cultural property,
Recalling the adoption by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on 17 October 2003 of the Declaration concerning the Intentional Destruction of Cultural Heritage,109
Noting the adoption by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on 17 November 2015 of the Recommendation concerning the preservation of, and access to,
documentary heritage including in digital form,
Noting also the adoption of the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity and the Action Plan for its
implementation by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
on 2 November 2001,110
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development111 includes, inter alia, a pledge to foster intercultural understanding, tolerance, mutual respect and an ethic of global citizenship and shared responsibility, an
acknowledgement of the natural and cultural diversity of the world and a recognition that all cultures and
civilizations can contribute to, and are crucial enablers of, sustainable development, as well as targets related to the
protection and restitution of cultural property,

_______________
100

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 823, No. 11806.
Ibid., vol. 2421, No. 43718.
102
Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511.
103
Ibid., vols. 249 and 2253, No. 3511.
104
Ibid., vol. 1037, No. 15511.
105
Ibid., vol. 2562, No. 45694.
106
Ibid., vol. 2368, No. 42671.
107
Ibid., vol. 2440, No. 43977.
108
Resolution 59/38, annex.
109
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-second Session, Paris,
29 September–17 October 2003, vol. 1, Resolutions, sect. IV, resolution 33, annex.
110
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-first Session, Paris,
15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25, annexes I and II.
111
Resolution 70/1.
101

85

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also its resolution 69/196 of 18 December 2014, by which it adopted the International Guidelines
for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other
Related Offences,
Recalling further the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider
United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels, and Public Participation, adopted on 19 April 2015,112 and noting the
commitment expressed by Member States therein to strengthen and implement comprehensive crime prevention
and criminal justice responses to illicit trafficking in cultural property for the purpose of providing the widest
possible international cooperation to address such crime, to review and strengthen domestic legislation to counter
trafficking in cultural property, where appropriate, in accordance with their commitments under international
instruments, and to continue to gather and share information and statistical data on trafficking in cultural property, in
particular on trafficking that involves organized criminal groups and terrorist organizations,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General submitted in cooperation with the Director General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,113
Aware of the importance attached by the countries of origin to the return of cultural property that is of
fundamental spiritual, historical and cultural value to them, so that they may constitute collections representative of
their cultural heritage,
Commending Member States, cultural and educational institutions, museums and civil society for their efforts
to combat the illicit trade in cultural property, and welcoming all initiatives, whether by States, institutions or private
persons, for the voluntary return of cultural property that has been illicitly appropriated,
Expressing deep concern about the continuing illicit traffic in cultural property and its damage to the cultural
heritage of nations,
Expressing deep concern also that cultural property, including religious sites and objects, is increasingly
targeted by terrorist attacks, often resulting in damage, theft or complete destruction, and condemning such attacks,
Expressing deep concern further about the loss, destruction, theft, pillage, illicit removal or misappropriation
of cultural property from archaeological sites, museums, libraries, archives and other sites and any acts of vandalism
or damage directed against cultural property, in particular in areas of armed conflict, including territories that are
occupied, whether such armed conflicts are international or non-international,
Reaffirming, in this regard, the necessity of strengthened international cooperation in preventing and
combating all aspects of trafficking in cultural property, which is particularly at risk in the Middle East, and noting
that such cultural property is often transferred either through illicit markets worldwide or through licit markets such
as auctions, including through the Internet,
Recalling its resolution 69/281 of 28 May 2015, entitled “Saving the cultural heritage of Iraq”,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1483 (2003) of 22 May 2003, in particular paragraph 7, relating to
the restitution of the cultural property of Iraq, and Council resolution 2056 (2012) of 5 July 2012 on the situation
in Mali,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 2199 (2015) of 12 February 2015, in particular paragraphs 15
to 17 thereof,
1. Recognizes the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
combating trafficking in cultural property, including its specific mandate within the context of Security Council
resolution 2199 (2015), and encourages the Organization to continue to strengthen cooperation and synergies in this
field with other international bodies, including the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
_______________
112
113

86

Adopted by the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (see A/CONF.222/17).
A/70/365.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation on the work they have accomplished, in particular through the promotion
of bilateral negotiations, for the return or restitution of cultural property, the preparation of inventories of movable
cultural property and the implementation of the Object-ID standard related thereto, as well as for the reduction of
illicit traffic in cultural property and the dissemination of information and tools to the public, institutions, Member
States and others, and encourages the continuation of such endeavours;
3. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the launch of its
international awareness-raising and training campaigns for museum experts, police forces, customs services and
legal experts from Member States in the groups of African, Asia-Pacific, Eastern European, Latin America and
Caribbean, and Western European and other States, from 2012 to 2015, aimed at preventing the illicit import, export
and transfer of ownership of cultural property by providing the legal and operational knowledge and directly
applicable skills to strengthen the protection of cultural property;
4. Also commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the launch of
the Unite for Heritage campaign to raise the awareness of young people regarding the value of cultural heritage and
the necessity to protect it, and calls upon Member States to promote and support such campaigns;
5. Calls upon all relevant bodies, agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other
relevant intergovernmental organizations to work in coordination with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, within their mandates and in cooperation with Member States, in order to continue to
address the issue of return or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin and to provide appropriate
support accordingly;
6. Reaffirms the importance of the 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,100 the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or
Illegally Exported Cultural Objects,101 the 1954 Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict102 and the two Protocols thereto,103 the 1972 Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural
and Natural Heritage,104 the 2001 Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage,105 the 2003
Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage106 and the 2005 Convention on the Protection
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions,107 and invites Member States that have not already done so
to consider becoming parties to the aforementioned conventions and protocols that specifically address the return
and restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin;
7. Takes note of the declarations and recommendations of the international forums on the return of cultural
property, held in Seoul in July 2011 and October 2012, in Olympia, Greece, in October 2013, in Dunhuang, China,
in September 2014 and in Nevşehir, Turkey, in October 2015;
8. Notes with appreciation the conference to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the 1995 UNIDROIT
Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects, held in Rome on 8 May 2015;
9. Welcomes the decision of the second meeting of States parties to the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, which adopted
the rules of procedure of the meeting of States parties, by which, inter alia, it was decided that the meeting of States
parties should be convened every two years, and which established a subsidiary committee that is convened every
year in order to, inter alia, promote the purposes of the Convention, review national reports and prepare and submit
to the meeting of States parties recommendations and guidelines that can help in the implementation of the
Convention and identify problems arising from its implementation;
10. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and
Their Property,108 notes that the Convention has still not entered into force, and invites Member States that have not
already done so to consider becoming parties to the Convention;
11. Deplores damage to the cultural heritage of countries in situations of crisis, conflict and post-conflict, in
particular recent attacks on world cultural heritage sites, calls for an immediate end to such acts, and reminds States
parties to the 1954 Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict of the
provisions contained therein to safeguard and respect cultural property and to prohibit, prevent and, if necessary, put
a stop to any form of theft, pillage or misappropriation of and any acts of vandalism directed against cultural
property;
87

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Calls upon all Member States in a position to do so to assist the affected States in combating trafficking
in cultural property illegally excavated from archaeological sites and taken from museums, libraries, archives and
manuscript collections, including through international cooperation in the restitution of stolen or illicitly exported
cultural property, as appropriate;
13. Welcomes the most recent efforts made by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization for the protection of the cultural heritage of countries in conflict, including the safe return to those
countries of cultural property and other items of archaeological, historical, cultural, rare scientific and religious
importance that have been illegally removed, and calls upon the international community to contribute to these
efforts;
14. Urges Member States to introduce effective national and international measures to prevent and combat
illicit trafficking in cultural property, including by publicizing legislation and offering special training for police,
customs and border services, and invites Member States to make trafficking in cultural property, including stealing
from and looting of archaeological and other cultural sites, a serious crime, as defined in article 2 of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,114 with a view to fully utilizing that Convention for the
purpose of extensive international cooperation in fighting all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property
and related offences;
15. Urges all States to take appropriate measures to ensure that all actors involved in the trade of cultural
property, including but not limited to auction houses, art dealers, art collectors and museum professionals, are
required to provide verifiable documentation of provenance as well as export certificates, as applicable, related to
any cultural property imported, exported or offered for sale, including through the Internet;
16. Invites States parties to the 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property to apply the operational guidelines for the
implementation of the 1970 Convention, which represent a useful tool to guide and assist States parties in
implementing the Convention, including by learning from the best practices of States parties geared to enhancing
the effective implementation of the Convention, and to identify ways and means to further the achievement of the
goals of the Convention through strengthened international cooperation;
17. Reiterates its strong encouragement to Member States to apply, to the maximum extent possible, where
appropriate, with a view to strengthening international cooperation in this field, the International Guidelines for
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other
Related Offences,115 which represent a useful framework to guide Member States in the development and
strengthening of their criminal justice policies, strategies, legislation and cooperation mechanisms in the area of
protection against trafficking in cultural property and other related offences;
18. Invites Member States, in cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, to continue to draw up systematic inventories of their cultural property;
19. Invites States to consider establishing and developing national, regional and international databases
inventorying cultural property, which would also register trafficked, illicitly exported or imported, stolen, looted or
illicitly excavated, and illicitly dealt-in, cultural property, and encourages States to enhance the exchange of
information by sharing or interconnecting inventories of cultural property and databases on trafficked, illicitly
exported or imported, stolen, looted or illicitly excavated, and illicitly dealt-in, cultural property and contributing to
international inventories and databases;
20. Recognizes the advancement of the Database of National Cultural Heritage Laws of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which includes legislation from 188 Member States, and invites
Member States to provide their legislation in electronic format for inclusion in the database if they have not yet done
so, to provide regular updates to the database and to promote it;
21. Applauds the efforts of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to promote
the use of identification and inventory systems, in particular the application of the Object-ID standard, and to
_______________
114
115

88

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Resolution 69/196, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

encourage the linking of identification systems and existing databases, including the one developed by INTERPOL,
to allow for the electronic transmission of information in order to reduce illicit trafficking in cultural property, and
encourages the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to make further efforts in this
regard in cooperation with Member States, where appropriate;
22. Notes the adoption by the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation, at its sixteenth session, of the rules of
procedure on mediation and conciliation,116 and invites Member States to consider the possibility of using such
processes, as appropriate;
23. Welcomes the presentation by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law of model provisions on State ownership of
undiscovered cultural objects, and encourages Member States to consider using these model provisions and
adopting effective legislation for the establishment and recognition of States’ ownership of their heritage, as
appropriate under national laws, with a view to facilitating restitution in cases of unlawful removal;
24. Notes with appreciation the Model Export Certificate for Cultural Objects developed by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the World Customs Organization as a tool to combat
illicit trafficking in cultural property, and invites Member States to consider adopting the Model Export Certificate
as their national export certificate, in accordance with domestic law and procedures;
25. Takes note of the resolution adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirty-eighth session, in November 2015, on the reports by Member States
on the measures taken for the implementation of the 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property;
26. Recognizes the public awareness and increased mobilization and action in favour of heritage values
achieved in 2002, the United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage, and on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of
the Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, and calls upon the international
community and the United Nations to continue to cooperate with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization on the basis of that work;
27. Invites those who deal with trade in cultural property and their associations, where they exist, to
encourage the effective implementation of the International Code of Ethics for Dealers in Cultural Property, as
endorsed by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on
16 November 1999,117 the International Council of Museums Code of Ethics for Museums and other existing codes;
28. Welcomes the recently launched partnerships between the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and cultural institutions, encompassing several lines of action aimed at combating illicit
trafficking in cultural property, in order to implement awareness-raising activities for the general public, close
collaboration and information exchange and cooperation on training and capacity-building initiatives, and
encourages the development of further partnerships;
29. Recognizes the importance of the continued efforts of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization to enhance discussions with art market professionals in order to improve practices and raise
awareness in areas such as provenance investigations, ethics, restitution procedures and knowledge of the
international legal framework;
30. Also recognizes the importance of the International Fund for the Return of Cultural Property to its
Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation, launched in November 2000, and invites
Member States to increase further their voluntary contributions to the Fund in order to enhance its efficiency, and to
make use of the Fund;
31. Further recognizes the importance of cooperation among States in the fight against illicit trafficking in
cultural property, as well as its illegal removal from the countries of origin, through, inter alia, the conclusion of
_______________
116

A/67/219, annex I, recommendation No. 4.
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirtieth Session, Paris,
26 October–17 November 1999, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. IV, resolution 27.
117

89

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

bilateral agreements and mutual legal assistance, including the prosecution of persons involved in such activities and
extradition, in accordance with the laws of cooperating States and under applicable international law;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to cooperate with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization in its efforts to bring about the attainment of the objectives of the present resolution;
33. Also requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Return or
restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin”.
RESOLUTION 70/77
A/RES/70/77

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.23 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

70/77. The situation in Afghanistan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/18 of 20 November 2014 and all its previous relevant resolutions,
Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions and statements by the President of the Council on
the situation in Afghanistan, in particular resolutions 2189 (2014) of 12 December 2014 and 2210 (2015) of
16 March 2015,
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and respecting its multicultural, multi-ethnic and historical heritage,
Recalling the long-term commitment of the international community to Afghanistan, with the aim of
strengthening national ownership and leadership consistent with the Kabul process, and taking into account the
evolving nature of the presence of the international community,
Welcoming the beginning of the transformation decade (2015–2024), in which Afghanistan envisages
consolidating its sovereignty through strengthening a fully functioning, sustainable State in the service of its people,
with the goal of becoming fully self-reliant,
Welcoming also the Tokyo Declaration: Partnership for Self-Reliance in Afghanistan – From Transition to
Transformation, adopted at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan held on 8 July 2012,118 including the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework,119 which reaffirms the partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community based on their mutual commitments, the London Conference on Afghanistan, held on
4 December 2014, and the sixth Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, held in Kabul
on 3 and 4 September 2015,
Reaffirming the long-term partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community based on their renewed mutual commitments, as laid down in the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework adopted at the second Senior Officials Meeting of the Joint Coordination and
_______________
118
119

90

A/66/867-S/2012/532, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Monitoring Board of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, in Kabul on 5 September 2015, and looking
forward to the next international conference on Afghanistan, in Brussels in 2016,
Welcoming and supporting the outcomes of the high-level meeting on Afghanistan’s peaceful development
and regional cooperation, convened in New York on 26 September 2015 by Afghanistan, China and the United
States of America on the margins of the seventieth session of the General Assembly,
Recognizing once again the interconnected nature of the challenges in Afghanistan, reaffirming that
sustainable progress on security, political stability, governance, financial sustainability, human rights, the rule of law
and development, as well as on the cross-cutting issues of counter-narcotics, anti-corruption and accountability, are
mutually reinforcing and that governance and development programmes prioritized for implementation in the
transformation decade should be consistent with the goals set forth in the Tokyo Declaration and with the reform
agenda of the Government of Afghanistan, commending the continuing efforts of the Government of Afghanistan,
and underlining the importance of the continuing support of the international community for the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan to address these challenges,
Welcoming and supporting the outcome of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia,
held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 2 November 2011,120 which launched the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan and the follow-up Heart of Asia Ministerial Conferences, held in
Kabul on 14 June 2012 and in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 26 April 2013, and the fourth Ministerial Conference, held in
Beijing on 31 October 2014, and the Beijing Declaration on Afghanistan, which furthered the Process whereby
Afghanistan and its regional partners, with the support of the international community, affirmed their commitment
to strengthen regional security and cooperation for a secure and stable Afghanistan, including through enhanced
regional dialogue and confidence-building measures, and looking forward to the fifth Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference, in Islamabad in December 2015,
Stressing the crucial importance of advancing regional cooperation as an effective means of promoting
security, stability and economic and social development in Afghanistan, recognizing in this regard the importance of
the contribution of neighbouring and regional partners, as well as regional organizations, recalling the importance of
the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly Relations of 22 December 2002,121 welcoming in this regard the
continued commitment of the international community to support stability and development in Afghanistan, and
noting international and regional initiatives, such as those of the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Central
Asian Regional Economic Cooperation Programme, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan process, the European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe,
Supporting the ongoing Afghan-led regional effort within the framework of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan aimed at fostering trust and confidencebuilding, strengthening regional efforts in promoting economic cooperation and integration in the region and
improving security and greater people-to-people relations,
Acknowledging that an Afghanistan firmly embedded in the economic life of the region and connected to
international markets will enjoy greater opportunities for peace and stability, as will the entire region, and in this
regard reiterating its support for Afghanistan’s ambition to use its geographic location to enhance and accelerate
connectivity with neighbouring countries and to become an integrated trade, transportation and energy hub within
the region,
Welcoming the process by which Afghanistan and its regional and international partners are entering into longterm strategic partnerships and other agreements aimed at achieving a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan,
Appreciating the assumption of full responsibility for security by the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces with the completion of the transition process at the end of 2014, reaffirming the commitment of the
international community to continue to support the training, equipping, financing and development of the capacity
_______________
120
121

A/66/601-S/2011/767, annex.
S/2002/1416, annex.

91

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces throughout the transformation decade, as agreed in the Chicago
Summit Declaration on Afghanistan in 2012 and the Wales Summit Declaration on Afghanistan in 2014, and
looking forward to the deliberations on Afghanistan at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization summit in Warsaw
in 2016,
Recalling the decision of the international community at the International Afghanistan Conference on
Afghanistan and the International Community: From Transition to the Transformation Decade, held in Bonn,
Germany, on 5 December 2011,122 to support the training, equipping, financing and development of the capacity of
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces beyond the end of the transition period, taking note of the Wales
Summit Declaration, which highlighted the role of the International Security Assistance Force and outlined the role
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and contributing partners in supporting lasting peace, security and stability
in Afghanistan beyond 2014, including through the Resolute Support Mission to train, advise and assist the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, the medium-term contribution to the financial sustainment of the Forces and
the commitment to strengthening the long-term enduring partnership with Afghanistan, noting the signing of the
security and defence cooperation agreement between the United States of America and Afghanistan (bilateral
security agreement) and the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization-Afghanistan status-of-forces
agreement, noting also that the bilateral agreement between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Afghanistan
and the invitation of the Government of Afghanistan to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to establish the
Mission provide a sound legal basis for the Mission, and acknowledging that the Mission is welcomed by the
Security Council in its resolution 2189 (2014),
Reiterating the urgent need to tackle the challenges facing Afghanistan, in particular the region-based violent
extremist activities of the Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups
and criminals, including those involved in the narcotics trade, the development of the institutions of the Government
of Afghanistan, including at the subnational level, the strengthening of the rule of law and democratic processes, the
fight against corruption, the continuation of justice sector reform, the promotion of the peace process, without
prejudice to the fulfilment of the measures introduced by the Security Council in its resolutions 1267 (1999) of
15 October 1999, 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011) of 17 June 2011, 2082 (2012) and 2083 (2012) of 17 December
2012, and 2160 (2014) and 2161 (2014) of 17 June 2014 and other relevant resolutions, an Afghan-led transitional
justice process, the safe and voluntary return of Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons in an orderly and
dignified manner, the promotion and protection of human rights and the advancement of economic and social
development,
Expressing serious concern regarding the increasing presence of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
(Da’esh) affiliates in Afghanistan, as referenced in the report of the Secretary General of 1 September 2015,123 and
their brutal acts, including the killing of Afghan nationals,
Deeply concerned about the continuous and high level of violence in Afghanistan, especially the number of
civilian casualties, condemning in the strongest terms all violent attacks, in particular the recent killings, Taliban
attacks, including on the city of Kunduz, and acts by international terrorists, recalling that the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other violent and extremist groups and illegal armed groups are responsible for the significant majority of the
civilian casualties in Afghanistan, expressing particularly serious concern about increased targeted killing of women
and girls, and calling for compliance with international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as
applicable, and for all appropriate measures to be taken to ensure the protection of civilians,
Calling for compliance with international humanitarian law and international human rights law and for all
appropriate measures to be taken to ensure the protection of humanitarian workers and aid and humanitarian
facilities,
Welcoming the start of the second year of the National Unity Government and its achievements in political,
economic, governance and social reforms, underlining the need to preserve past achievements, and urging further
improvement in this regard, in particular to address poverty and the delivery of services, stimulate economic growth,
create employment opportunities, increase domestic revenue and promote human rights, especially women’s rights
and the rights of minorities,
_______________
122
123

92

A/66/597-S/2011/762, annex.
A/70/359-S/2015/684.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the importance of the National Unity Government being inclusive and representative of the ethnic
diversity of the country, and also ensuring the full and equal participation of women,
Recognizing that the Afghan-led peace process, effectively supported by the international community and, in
particular, by the relevant neighbouring countries, is essential for achieving long-term peace and stability in
Afghanistan and the wider region,
Emphasizing the important and impartial role of the United Nations in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan, expressing its appreciation and strong support for all of the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for Afghanistan in this regard, expressing its appreciation also for the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in accordance with Security Council resolution 2210 (2015), and
stressing the important coordinating role of the Assistance Mission in seeking to further improve the coherence and
coordination of international civilian efforts, guided by the principle of reinforcing Afghan ownership and
leadership,
Welcoming the reports of the Secretary-General124 and the recommendations contained therein,
1. Pledges its continued support to the Government and people of Afghanistan as they rebuild a stable,
secure, economically self-sufficient State, free of terrorism and narcotics, and strengthen the foundations of a
constitutional democracy as a responsible member of the international community;
2. Encourages all partners to support constructively the Government of Afghanistan’s reform agenda,
including as envisaged in the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework, to ensure a secure,
prosperous and democratic Afghanistan, focusing on strengthening the constitutional checks and balances that
guarantee citizens’ rights and obligations and implementing structural reform to enable an accountable and effective
Government to deliver concrete progress to its people;
3. Supports the continuing and growing ownership of reconstruction and development efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan, emphasizes the crucial need to achieve ownership and accountability in all fields of
governance and to improve institutional capabilities, including at the subnational level, in order to use aid more
effectively, and underscores in this regard the importance of the commitments of the international community, as
reiterated in the Tokyo Declaration: Partnership for Self-Reliance in Afghanistan – From Transition to
Transformation118 and the Self-reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework;
Security
4. Recognizes the continued international commitment to support the training, equipping, financing and
development of the capacity of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces throughout the transformation
decade, as agreed in the Chicago Summit Declaration on Afghanistan in 2012 and the Wales Summit Declaration on
Afghanistan in 2014, including through the Resolute Support Mission, as welcomed by the Security Council in its
resolution 2189 (2014), as well as through midterm contributions for the financial support of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, and through the “enhanced enduring partnership” with Afghanistan, notes the statusof-forces agreement with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and looks forward to the deliberations on
Afghanistan at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization summit in Warsaw in 2016;
5. Reiterates once again its serious concern about the security situation in Afghanistan, stresses the need to
continue to address the threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan caused by the region-based violent
extremist activities by the Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups
and other illegal armed groups and criminals, including those involved in the narcotics trade, and reiterates in this
regard its call for the full implementation of measures and the application of procedures introduced in relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 1267 (1999), 1988 (2011), 1989 (2011), 2082 (2012),
2083 (2012), 2160 (2014) and 2161 (2014);
6. Expresses serious concern regarding the increasing presence of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da’esh) affiliates in Afghanistan, as referenced in the report of the Secretary General,123 and in this regard
affirms its support for the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to combat these threats in the country;
_______________
124

A/69/540-S/2014/656, A/69/801-S/2015/151 and A/70/359-S/2015/684.

93

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

7. Recognizes the threats that the Taliban, illegal armed groups and criminals, including those involved in
the narcotics trade, and the illicit exploitation of natural resources continue to pose to the security and stability of
Afghanistan, and urges the Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the international community, to
continue to address these threats;
8. Condemns in the strongest terms all unlawful acts of violence, intimidation and attacks, including
improvised explosive device attacks, suicide attacks, assassinations, including of public figures, abductions,
indiscriminate attacks against civilians, killings, attacks against individuals, media groups and organs of society
engaged in the promotion and protection of universally recognized human rights, attacks against humanitarian
workers and the targeting of Afghan and international forces, which have a deleterious effect on stabilization and
development efforts in Afghanistan, also condemns the use, by the Taliban, including the Haqqani Network,
Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and illegal armed groups, of civilians as human shields, and further
condemns the recent killings of civilians in Zabul, Taliban attacks, including on the city of Kunduz in northern
Afghanistan, and acts of international terrorists;
9. Stresses the need for the Government of Afghanistan and the international community to continue to
work closely together and to improve coordination in countering such acts, which are threatening peace and stability
in Afghanistan and the democratic process, the achievements and the continued implementation of the Afghanistan
development gains and process, as well as humanitarian aid measures, recognizes the achievements of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces in this regard, and calls upon all Member States, in particular neighbouring
countries, to deny those groups any form of sanctuary, freedom of operations, movement, recruitment and financial,
material or political support, which endangers the State system and regional peace and security;
10. Expresses deep regret at the resulting loss of life and physical harm inflicted upon Afghan civilians and
civilians of other nationalities, including the personnel of Afghan and international agencies and all other
humanitarian workers and the diplomatic corps and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well
as upon the personnel of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and of the Resolute Support Mission,
and pays homage to all those who have lost their lives;
11. Stresses the importance of providing the Afghan people with security, notes that the responsibility for
providing security and law and order throughout the country resides with the Government of Afghanistan, supported
by the international community, and underlines the importance of further strengthening the professionalism and the
operational capabilities of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces in all provinces of Afghanistan through
continued training and assistance, including enabling support;
12. Also stresses the importance of close coordination with the Resolute Support Mission;
13. Welcomes the assumption of full security responsibility by the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces, commends the resiliency and courage displayed in this regard, calls upon the international community to
provide the support necessary to increase security, including public order, law enforcement, the security of
Afghanistan’s borders and the preservation of the constitutional rights of Afghan citizens, as well as to provide
continued support by training, equipping and contributing to the financing of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces to take on the task of securing their country and fighting against international terrorism, and
underscores the importance of the joint Chicago and Wales Summit Declarations on Afghanistan and other relevant
agreements with regional and international partners;
14. Also welcomes, in this regard, the presence of the Resolute Support Mission, expresses its appreciation
to Member States for having contributed personnel, equipment and other resources to the Mission and for the
support provided to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces by all international partners, in particular by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization through its previous combat and current non-combat missions in
Afghanistan, as well as other bilateral training programmes, and encourages further coordination, where
appropriate;
15. Further welcomes the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan, with a view to ensuring stability
and providing conditions for the effective rule of law, to continue the implementation of the Afghan National Police
Strategy and the National Police Plan underpinning it, as well as the 10-year vision presented by the Ministry of the
Interior, focusing, inter alia, on community-based policing (Police-e Mardumi) to increase police accountability and
responsiveness, strengthening crime detection and prevention, safeguarding human rights and combating violence
against women and children to build a strong, professional police force evolving towards sustainable, credible and
94

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

accountable civilian law enforcement that will be capable of providing policing services to the Afghan population as
part of the broader rule of law system, with a focus on the ongoing institutional and administrative reforms of the
Ministry of the Interior, including the implementation of its anti-corruption action plan, and leadership development,
as well as to progressively enhance the quality of the Afghan National Police, with the necessary continued financial
and technical support of the international community, recognizes the significant contribution that has been made by
international and regional partners, including the International Police Coordination Board, to achieve that aim, and
also recognizes in this context the significant contribution of the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan;
16. Recognizes the commitments of the Afghan authorities, with the support of the international community,
to take all possible steps to ensure the safety, security and free movement of all United Nations, development and
humanitarian personnel and their full, safe and unhindered access to all affected populations, and to protect the
property of the United Nations and of development or humanitarian organizations, and notes the efforts made in
regulating private security contractors operating in Afghanistan;
17. Also recognizes the efforts of the Afghan authorities, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
69/133 of 12 December 2014 on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations
personnel, to bring to justice the perpetrators of attacks, and calls upon the Afghan authorities to continue its efforts
in this regard;
18. Remains deeply concerned about the persistent problem of anti-personnel landmines and explosive
remnants of war, which constitute a great danger to the population and a major obstacle to the resumption of social
and economic activities and to the delivery of humanitarian assistance, early recovery and reconstruction efforts,
welcomes the achievements to date in the implementation of the Mine Action Programme for Afghanistan,
underscores the importance of sustained international assistance for the implementation of the 10-year operational
workplan of the Mine Action Programme, aimed at declaring Afghanistan mine-free by 2023, encourages the
Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the United Nations and all relevant actors, to continue its efforts to
meet its responsibilities under the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,125 to eliminate all known or new stocks of anti-personal landmines,
and to cooperate fully with the Mine Action Programme, and to continue removal of anti-personnel landmines, antivehicle landmines and explosive remnants of war, and expresses the need to provide assistance for the care,
rehabilitation, and economic and social reintegration of victims, including persons with disabilities;
Peace process
19. Recognizes that an Afghan-led inclusive peace process backed by regional actors, in particular Pakistan,
supported by the international community, is essential for achieving long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan,
reiterates its firm commitment to support the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts in this regard with all those
who renounce violence, sever ties with international terrorist organizations, including Al-Qaida, respect the
Constitution, including its human rights provisions, notably the rights of women and girls, as well as the rights of
persons belonging to minorities, and are willing to join in building a peaceful Afghanistan, with full respect for the
implementation of measures and application of the procedures introduced by the Security Council in its resolutions
1267 (1999), 1988 (2011), 2082 (2012) and 2160 (2014), as well as other relevant resolutions of the Council, calls
upon all relevant States, especially neighbouring countries, and international organizations to remain engaged in the
Afghan-led peace process, and recognizes the impact terrorist attacks have on the Afghan people and risk having on
future prospects for a peace settlement;
20. Reiterates its firm commitment to support the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to advance the
peace process, in line with the Kabul Conference communiqué and the Bonn Conference conclusions,122 and within
the framework of the Afghan Constitution and the application of the procedures introduced by the Security Council
in its resolutions 1988 (2011), 2082 (2012) and 2160 (2014) as well as other relevant resolutions of the Council, and
recalls that women play a vital role in the peace process, as recognized by the Council in its resolutions 1325 (2000)
of 31 October 2000 and 2242 (2015) of 13 October 2015 and in related resolutions, including Council resolution
2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013;

_______________
125

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.

95

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

21. Welcomes, in this regard, the direct talks held in 2015 between the Government of Afghanistan and
representatives of the Taliban, facilitated by Pakistan and observed by China and the United States of America, as an
important first step, and encourages the continuation of the talks;
22. Encourages Afghanistan and Pakistan to enhance their relationship, which could lead to cooperation to
effectively combat terrorism and move forward the Afghan-led peace process;
23. Underlines the fact that the peace process should enjoy the support and participation of all Afghans,
including civil society, in particular women’s groups and minorities, as reinforced most recently in the Bonn
Conference conclusions and the Tokyo Declaration, welcomes the steps taken towards greater cooperation between
the High Peace Council and civil society, and encourages further cooperation in the future;
Governance, rule of law and human rights
24. Emphasizes that good governance, the rule of law and human rights form the foundation for the
achievement of a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, notes the importance of building the capacity of the
Government of Afghanistan to promote and protect human rights, the rule of law and good governance in an
accountable and effective manner, and calls upon the international community to support Afghanistan’s governance
objectives in this regard, including as outlined in the Self-reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework;
25. Welcomes the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan to its comprehensive reform agenda,
which, inter alia, has resulted in the creation of a series of policy-making councils chaired by the President,
strengthening the National Unity Government decision-making processes and follow-up, and the adoption of
100-day action plans by ministries to monitor the delivery of services and to enhance accountability and
transparency for citizens;
A.

Democracy

26. Welcomes the establishment of the National Unity Government, emphasizes the importance of all parties
in Afghanistan working together to achieve a unified, peaceful, democratic and prosperous future for all the people
of Afghanistan, and welcomes the achievements of the Government of Afghanistan in strengthening the democratic
institutions;
27. Recalls the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan, reiterated at the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan, to strengthen and improve Afghanistan’s electoral process through long-term electoral reform,
including by considering lessons learned in the light of previous elections, and to promote the participation of
women in order to ensure that future elections will be transparent, credible, inclusive and democratic, reaffirms that
Afghanistan’s peaceful future lies in strengthened and transparent democratic institutions, respect for the separation
of powers, reinforced constitutional checks and balances and the guarantee and enforcement of citizens’ rights and
obligations, and welcomes in this regard the establishment of the Special Electoral Reform Commission and its
work and the intention of the Government of Afghanistan to hold parliamentary elections and district council
elections as soon as possible;
B.

Justice

28. Welcomes the steps taken by the Government of Afghanistan on justice sector reform and the
commitment to improve access to the delivery of justice throughout Afghanistan made by the Government at the
London Conference on Afghanistan, held on 4 December 2014, urges the Government to implement its reform
agenda, as envisaged in its paper, entitled “Realizing Self-Reliance: Commitments to Reforms and Renewed
Partnership”, in a timely manner, in coordination with the relevant organizations and government departments,
urges the international community to continue to support the efforts of the Government in this regard, and welcomes
the selection and confirmation of the Chief Justice, who has already taken the first steps of reform, including by
ensuring the declaration of assets by the members of the Supreme Court, launching a systematic performance
review and further increasing the number of female judges;
29. Acknowledges the progress made by the Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the
international community, in devoting adequate resources to the reconstruction and reform of the prison sector in
order to improve respect for the rule of law and human rights therein, while reducing physical and mental health
risks to inmates, and calls for the establishment of an effective mechanism for preventing prison escapes and
recapturing escapees;
96

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

30. Welcomes and encourages further efforts by the Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the
Assistance Mission, the international community and other partners, including the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission, to protect and promote the human rights of all detainees and prevent violations thereof in all
Afghan prisons and detention facilities, consistent with the Afghan Constitution, Afghan laws and international
obligations, welcomes the cooperation of the Government, as well as the efforts of the international community to
provide support in this regard, takes note of the recommendations contained in the reports of the Assistance Mission
of 10 October 2011 and 20 January 2013, notes the progress made in this regard, welcomes and supports the
adoption of the national action plan to fully eliminate torture in Afghan detention facilities, encourages further
progress on addressing allegations of human rights abuses of detainees, and reiterates the importance of respecting
the rule of law and established legal processes and procedures;
31. Welcomes the commitment by the Government of Afghanistan to provide unimpeded access for relevant
organizations to all prisons in Afghanistan, emphasizes the importance of ensuring access for relevant organizations,
and calls for full respect for relevant international law, including humanitarian law and human rights law, where
applicable, including with regard to minors, if detained;
C.

Public administration

32. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to continue to effectively reform the public administration sector
in order to promote the rule of law and to ensure good governance and accountability, welcomes the efforts of the
Government and its commitments made in implementing its reform agenda, as envisioned in the Self-reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework, the Kabul process and the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,119
and also welcomes the efforts of the Government and its commitments made, most recently at the second Senior
Officials Meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
in 2015;
33. Encourages the international community, including all donor nations as well as international institutions
and organizations, governmental and non-governmental, to assist the Government of Afghanistan in making
sustainable capacity-building and human resources development a cross-cutting priority and to align, in a
coordinated manner, with efforts by the Government, including the work of the Independent Administrative Reform
and Civil Service Commission, to build administrative capacity at the national and subnational levels, and in this
respect welcomes the agreement reached between the Government of Afghanistan and international and partner
country organizations on salaries based on capacity-building for results, targeting training in critical civil service
positions;
34. Reiterates the importance of institution-building in complementing and contributing to the development
of an economy characterized by sound macroeconomic policies, targeting poverty reduction, job creation, the
development of a financial sector that provides services, inter alia, to microenterprises, small and medium-sized
enterprises and households, transparent business regulations and accountability, and emphasizes the connection
between generating economic growth, including through infrastructural projects, and the creation of job
opportunities in Afghanistan;
35. Recalls the ratification by the Government of Afghanistan of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption,126 reiterates its appreciation for the anti-corruption commitments made by the Government at the Tokyo
and London Conferences, calls for decisive action by the Government to fulfil those commitments in order to
establish a more effective, accountable and transparent administration at the national, provincial and local levels of
government, welcomes the efforts of the Government and the firm commitment of the new leadership of
Afghanistan to fight corruption, including the decision to pursue the Kabul Bank case, to reform procurement
processes and to address other drivers of corruption, calls upon the international community to support the efforts of
the Government in this regard, and welcomes the continued international support for Afghanistan’s governance
objectives, while noting with deep concern the effects of corruption with regard to security, good governance, the
combating of the narcotics industry and economic development;
36. Welcomes the subnational governance policy and the launch of the 100-day action plans by each of
the 34 provincial governors, underscores the importance of more visible, accountable and capable subnational
_______________
126

Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

97

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

institutions and actors in reducing the political space for insurgents, encourages capacity-building for and the
empowerment of local institutions in a phased and fiscally sustainable manner, and calls for the predictable and
regular allocation of more resources to provincial authorities, including continued vital support from the Assistance
Mission and the international community;
37. Also welcomes the establishment of the High Council on Land and Water, chaired by the President, and
the systematic efforts by the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority to ensure firm property rights and the
protection of public and community lands, urges the Government of Afghanistan to address, with the assistance of
the international community, the question of claims for land property through a comprehensive land-titling
programme, including the formal registration of all property and improved security of property rights, including for
women, and welcomes the steps already taken by the Government in this regard;
D.

Human rights

38. Recalls the constitutional guarantee of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
Afghans as a significant political achievement, calls for full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all, without discrimination of any kind, stresses the need to fully implement the human rights provisions of the
Afghan Constitution, in accordance with obligations under applicable international law, in particular those regarding
the full enjoyment by women and children of their human rights, and also stresses the importance of countering
violent extremism in a comprehensive way, recognizing the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in this
respect;
39. Acknowledges and encourages the efforts made by the Government of Afghanistan in promoting respect
for human rights, expresses its concern at the destructive consequences of violent and terrorist activities, including
against persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities, by the Taliban, including the Haqqani Network,
Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and other illegal armed groups and criminals for the enjoyment of
human rights and for the capacity of the Government to ensure human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
Afghans, notes with concern reports of incidents in which violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law have occurred, including violations and abuses committed against women and
children, in particular girls, stresses the need to further promote tolerance and religious freedom and to ensure
respect for the right to freedom of expression and the right to freedom of thought, conscience or belief in accordance
with the Afghan Constitution and the international covenants that Afghanistan adheres to, emphasizes the necessity
of investigating allegations of current and past violations and abuses, stresses the importance of facilitating the
provision of efficient and effective remedies to the victims and of bringing the perpetrators to justice in accordance
with national and international law, calls for full implementation of the mass media law, while noting with concern
and condemning the continuing intimidation and violence targeting Afghan media and journalists, such as recent
warnings by the Taliban to two private television stations and cases of abduction and even the killing of journalists
by terrorist and extremist and criminal groups, and urges that harassment and attacks on media outlets and
journalists be investigated by Afghan authorities and that those responsible be brought to justice;
40. Commends the Government of Afghanistan for its active participation in the universal periodic review
process, calls for continued active participation of Afghan civil society in this process, and encourages the timely
implementation of the recommendations addressed in the relevant report;
41. Reiterates the important role of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission in the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, stresses the need to guarantee its constitutional status and
implement its mandate, focusing on communities across Afghanistan, so as to foster a more informed public and
increase Government accountability, emphasizes the importance of the Government of Afghanistan’s reaffirmation
of its commitment to maintaining the standards regarding Human Rights Commissioners in accordance with
article 11 of the law on the Commission and the Paris Principles127 to retaining the Commission’s “A” status,
welcomes the decision of the Government to take full responsibility for the core funding of the Commission, urges
the Government to implement this decision, urges the Commission to cooperate closely with Afghan civil society,
and calls upon the international community for continued support in this regard;
_______________
127

98

Resolution 48/134, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

42. Recalls Security Council resolutions 1674 (2006) of 28 April 2006, 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006
and 1894 (2009) of 11 November 2009 and the midyear report of July 2015 on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, prepared by the Assistance Mission, expresses its serious concern at the continued high number of civilian
casualties, including, in particular, women and children, and their impact on local communities, notes that the
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and illegal armed groups
remain responsible for the significant majority of civilian casualties, reiterates its call for all feasible steps to be
taken to protect civilians, and calls for additional appropriate steps in this regard and for full compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law;
43. Recognizes the efforts made to protect the civilian population and to minimize civilian casualties, and
calls upon the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and international forces to continue to make enhanced
efforts in this regard, notably through the continuous review of tactics and procedures and the conduct of afteraction reviews and investigations in cases in which civilian casualties have occurred and when the Government of
Afghanistan finds these joint investigations appropriate;
44. Reiterates the importance of upholding international obligations for the advancement of women’s rights,
as enshrined in the Afghan Constitution, in this context also reiterates the importance of implementing Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), welcomes the adoption by the Government of Afghanistan in June 2015 of its
national action plan on women, peace and security, supports efforts towards its implementation, and recalls Council
resolutions 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008, 1888 (2009) of 30 September 2009, 1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009,
1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010, 2106 (2013) of 24 June 2013, 2122 (2013) and 2242 (2015) on women and
peace and security;
45. Emphasizes its steadfast and unwavering commitment and that of the Government of Afghanistan to
achieving the full and equal participation of women in all spheres of Afghan life, the need for absolute equality of
women before the law, equal access to education and employment and the participation and empowerment of
women in Afghan politics, public life, government administration and security sector at all levels, especially in
leadership positions;
46. Commends the achievements and efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to counter discrimination
and to mainstream gender issues, including into the national priority programmes, and to protect and promote the
equal rights of women and men as guaranteed, inter alia, by its ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women128 and by the Afghan Constitution as well as the National Action Plan
for the Women of Afghanistan and the law on the elimination of violence against women, notes the progress
reported by the Assistance Mission in the implementation of the law, stresses the importance of its full
implementation, a key commitment under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, and underlines the need
for continued progress on gender issues in accordance with the obligations of Afghanistan under international law;
47. Strongly condemns all incidents of discrimination and violence against women and girls and other forms
of gender-based and sexual violence, including “honour killings”, underscores the importance of countering
impunity for these incidents, especially against women activists and women prominent in public life, takes note of
the important progress made by the Government of Afghanistan in this regard, reiterates its strong commitment to
support the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to continue to address this issue, and also reiterates its
appreciation for all measures taken to address targeted violence against women, including prevention of forced
marriages, as well as the contribution of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women);
48. Stresses the need to ensure respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of children in
Afghanistan, and recalls the need for the full implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,129 its
Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography130 and its Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict131 by all States parties, as well as of Security Council resolution
_______________
128

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
130
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
131
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
129

99

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005, and all other subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, and takes note of
the reports of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in Afghanistan132 and the conclusions of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in Afghanistan;133
49. Expresses its strong concern, in this regard, about the ongoing recruitment and use of children by the
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, and other illegal armed groups and terrorist groups in Afghanistan, as well
as the killing and maiming of children as a result of the conflict, stresses in this regard the importance of ending the
recruitment and use of children in violation of applicable international law and all other violations and abuses
committed against children, expresses appreciation for the progress made by and the firm commitment of the
Government of Afghanistan to the protection of children, including its strong condemnation of any exploitation of
children, as indicated by the establishment of the Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee for the Protection of the
Rights of Children, the appointment of a focal point on child protection, the signing by the Government, in January
2011, of an action plan, including the annexes thereto, on children associated with national security forces in
Afghanistan and the endorsement by the Government of a road map in August 2014 to accelerate compliance with
the action plan, welcomes progress made in the implementation of the action plan, and reiterates the calls for the full
implementation of its provisions, in close cooperation with the Assistance Mission;
50. Recognizes the special needs of girls, strongly condemns continued terrorist attacks as well as threats of
attacks on educational facilities, especially on those for Afghan girls, and/or hospitals and protected persons in
relation to them in Afghanistan, in contravention of applicable international law, and expresses deep concern about
the high number of school closures as a result of terrorist attacks or threats of attacks;
51. Reiterates the importance of the Afghan National Plan of Action on Combating Child Trafficking, also
reiterates its calls for the comprehensive implementation of the Plan of Action, and welcomes the accession of
Afghanistan to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;134
Social and economic development
52. Welcomes the Government of Afghanistan’s strategy document entitled “Towards self-reliance: strategic
vision for the transformation decade”, as well as of the national priority programmes contained therein, with their
focus on economic growth, revenue generation, job creation, governance and human development;
53. Renews its commitment to long-term support for the economic development of Afghanistan on the basis
of mutual accountability and in accordance with the reform agenda of the Government, as agreed in the SelfReliance through Mutual Accountability Framework;
54. Welcomes the renewed version of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework, and the monitoring mechanism included therein, which will guide the
activities of the National Unity Government of Afghanistan and the international community at least to the end of
the term of the present Government, in which the Government reaffirmed its commitment to improve security and
political stability, fight corruption, improve governance, the rule of law and human rights, restore fiscal
sustainability and integrity of public finance and commercial banking, reform development planning and
management and ensure citizen’s development rights, create an enabling environment for private sector
development and inclusive growth and renew development partnerships and improve aid effectiveness, and in
which the international community committed to enhance the efficiency of development aid, align part of its
assistance with Afghan priorities and channel part of its assistance through the national budget of the Government;
55. Urgently appeals to all States, the United Nations system and international and non-governmental
organizations, including the international and regional financial institutions, to continue to provide, in close
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and in accordance with the strategy document entitled “Towards
self-reliance: strategic vision for the transformation decade”, as well as the national priority programmes contained
therein, all possible and necessary humanitarian, recovery, reconstruction, development, financial, educational,
_______________
132

A/68/878-S/2014/339, paras. 23–32, and S/2015/336.
S/AC.51/2011/3.
134
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
133

100

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

technical and material assistance for Afghanistan, and underlines the crucial importance of continued and sequenced
implementation of the reform agenda, national priority programmes and the development and governance goals as
agreed in the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework;
56. Recognizes the substantial development and the notable progress made by Afghanistan with the steadfast
support of the international community in the past years, expresses its support for the reaffirmation and
consolidation of the partnership between Afghanistan and the international community at the London Conference on
Afghanistan in 2014 at the outset of the transformation decade (2015–2024), during which Afghanistan will
consolidate its sovereignty through strengthening a fully functioning, sustainable State in the service of its people,
urges the Government of Afghanistan to involve all elements of Afghan society, in particular women, in the
development and implementation of relief, rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction programmes, and welcomes
the commitment of the Government to develop a national economic empowerment plan for women;
57. Also recognizes the challenges that lie ahead for Afghanistan, and welcomes the generous pledges
totalling over 16 billion United States dollars made by the international community during the Tokyo Conference
through 2015 and the commitment of the international community to sustain support through 2017 at or near levels
of the past decade, thereby renewing its commitment to long-term support for the economic development of
Afghanistan on the basis of mutual accountability, welcomes the continued resolve of the Government of
Afghanistan to fulfil the commitments made by the Government under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, and stresses that sustained international support in the years ahead requires resolute action by both the
international community and the Government;
58. Welcomes the continued progress in implementing the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework and the
monitoring mechanism included therein, in which the Government of Afghanistan reaffirmed its commitment to
strengthen governance, grounded in human rights, the rule of law and adherence to the Afghan Constitution, and
held it as integral to sustained growth and economic development, and in which the international community
committed to enhance efficiency of development aid by aligning assistance with the Afghan national priority
programmes and by channelling assistance through the national budget of the Government, as outlined in the Tokyo
Declaration;
59. Also welcomes the outcome of the second Senior Officials Meeting of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, in 2015, and the Co-Chairs’ statement thereon,
which acknowledged both the achievements of the Government of Afghanistan and the international community in
the implementation of their respective commitments under the Framework based on the principles of mutual
accountability and inclusiveness, stresses that sustained international support in the transformation decade requires
resolute action by both the international community and the Government, welcomes the ministerial meeting in 2014
co-chaired by the Governments of Afghanistan and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and
looks forward to its next meeting in 2016 in Brussels;
60. Further welcomes the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan to align its future development
programmes with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,135 acknowledges significant progress made by the
Government towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2020, and urges the international
community to assist the Government in completing its unfinished goals;
61. Expresses its appreciation for the humanitarian and development assistance work of the international
community in the stabilization and development of Afghanistan and to the United Nations system and to all States
and international and non-governmental organizations whose international and local staff continue to respond
positively to the humanitarian, transition and development needs of Afghanistan, despite security concerns and
difficulty of access in certain areas;
62. Recognizes the necessity for further improvement in the living conditions of the Afghan people, and
emphasizes the need to strengthen and support the development of the capacity of the Government of Afghanistan
to deliver basic social services at the national, provincial and local levels, in particular education and public health
services, and to promote development;
_______________
135

Resolution 70/1.

101

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

63. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to enhance efforts to reform key service delivery sectors, such as
energy and drinking water supply, as preconditions for progress in social and economic development;
64. Commends the Government of Afghanistan for improving budgetary transparency, its efforts to reach
fiscal sustainability and its efforts to date to implement its agreement with the International Monetary Fund, notes
the challenges ahead, and urges that continued efforts be made to meet revenue targets;
65. Encourages the international community and the corporate sector to support the Afghan economy as a
measure for long-term stability and to explore possibilities for increased trade and investments and enhanced local
procurement, and further encourages the Government of Afghanistan to continue to promote an economic
environment and legal framework favourable for private sector investments at both the national and subnational
levels, given that 36 per cent of the population has been living below the poverty line for many years and nearly
50 per cent of young persons are unemployed, and supports the commitment of the Government to develop and
implement a stimulus package that would lead to the type of sustainable growth that would make young persons and
the poor stakeholders in their country;
66. Emphasizes, in this regard, the importance of strengthening local and regional networks of transportation
that will facilitate connectivity for economic development, stability and self-sustainability, particularly the
completion and maintenance of local railroad and land routes, the development of regional projects to foster further
connectivity and the enhancement of international civil aviation capabilities;
67. Urgently encourages all States as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
expand agricultural and livestock cooperation with Afghanistan at the national level, consistent with the reform
agenda of the National Unity Government and the relevant national priority programme, respectively, with a view to
helping to eradicate poverty, create jobs and ensure social and economic development, including in rural
communities;
68. Reiterates the necessity of providing Afghan children, especially Afghan girls, with educational and
health facilities in all parts of the country, welcomes the progress achieved in the sector of public education, recalls
the National Education Strategic Plan as a promising basis for further achievements, encourages the Government of
Afghanistan, with the assistance of the international community, to expand those facilities, train professional staff
and promote full and equal access to them by all members of Afghan society, including in remote areas, and
reiterates further the need to provide vocational training for adolescents;
69. Commends the relief efforts by the Government of Afghanistan and donors, but continues to express its
concern at the overall humanitarian situation, stresses the continued need for cash-for-work programmes by relevant
actors and further improvement in food assistance, ensuring that the basic needs of internally displaced persons are
met, and calls for continued international support in this regard, as well as for the early fulfilment, before the
approaching winter, of the urgent humanitarian needs in the 2015 Common Humanitarian Action Plan for
Afghanistan;
70. Recognizes that underdevelopment and lack of capacity increase the vulnerability of Afghanistan to
natural disasters and to harsh climate conditions, and in this regard urges the Government of Afghanistan, with the
support of the international community, to increase its efforts aimed at strengthening disaster risk reduction at the
national and subnational levels and at modernizing the agricultural sector and strengthening its agricultural
production, thereby reducing the vulnerability of Afghanistan to adverse external conditions such as drought,
flooding and other natural disasters;
71. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that continue to host Afghan refugees, in particular
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran, acknowledging the huge burden they have so far shouldered in this
regard, and asks for continued generous support by the international community, with a view to facilitating their
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return, rehabilitation and reintegration;
72. Welcomes the outcome of the high-level segment on the Afghan refugee problem of the sixty-sixth
session of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
held in Geneva on 6 and 7 October 2015,136 also welcomes the outcome of the International Conference on the
_______________
136

102

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/70/12/Add.1), annex II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to Support Voluntary Repatriation, Sustainable Reintegration and
Assistance to Host Countries, held in Geneva on 2 and 3 May 2012, and looks forward to the further
implementation of the joint communiqué of the Conference, aimed at increased sustainability of returns and
continued support for host countries, through the sustained support and the directed efforts of the international
community;
73. Expresses its concern over the recent increase in the number of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Afghanistan, stresses that stability and development in Afghanistan can be achieved if its citizens can see a
future for themselves within their country, reiterates to host countries and the international community the
obligations under international refugee law with respect to the protection of refugees, the principle of voluntary
return and the right to seek asylum and to ensure full, safe and unhindered access for humanitarian relief agencies in
order to provide protection and assistance to the refugees, and calls upon countries to continue to accept an
appropriate number of Afghan refugees for resettlement, as a manifestation of their shared responsibility and
solidarity;
74. Welcomes the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan in making the repatriation and
reintegration of Afghan refugees one of its highest national priorities, including their voluntary, safe and dignified
return and their sustainable reintegration into national development planning and prioritization processes, and
encourages and supports all efforts of the Government towards the implementation of this commitment;
75. Reaffirms its firm support for the implementation of the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to
Support Voluntary Repatriation, Sustainable Reintegration and Assistance to Host Countries endorsed by the
international community in 2012, and acknowledges the Enhanced Voluntary Return and Reintegration Package for
Afghan Refugees as an innovative way to enhance sustainable return and reintegration;
76. Strongly supports the Government of Afghanistan in its commitment to create the necessary conditions
for the repatriation and sustainable reintegration of Afghan refugees in the country, with emphasis on youth
empowerment, education, livelihoods, social protection and infrastructure, and stresses in this regard the key
importance of attaining peace and stability for solving the refugee crisis, as well as of advances in social and
economic welfare leading to the improvement of the living conditions inside Afghanistan through the coordinated
efforts of the Government with the support of the international community;
77. Welcomes the continued return of Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons, in a voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable manner, while noting with concern that conditions in parts of Afghanistan are not yet
conducive to a safe and sustainable return to some places of origin;
78. Urges the Government of Afghanistan, acting with the support of the international community, to
continue to strengthen its efforts to create the conditions for sustainable return by continuing to strengthen its
absorption and integration capacity for the full rehabilitation and sustainable reintegration of the remaining Afghan
refugees and internally displaced persons;
79. Notes, in this regard, the continued constructive work between the countries of the region, as well as the
tripartite and quadripartite agreements between the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the Government of Afghanistan and the Governments of countries hosting refugees from Afghanistan, in particular
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran;
Regional cooperation
80. Stresses the crucial importance of advancing constructive regional cooperation as an effective means to
promote peace, security, stability and economic and social development in Afghanistan, encourages further
improved relations and enhanced engagement between Afghanistan and its neighbours, and calls for further efforts
in this regard, including within the frameworks of the two established Afghan-led regional processes, namely the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan120 and the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, as well as by regional organizations and long-term
strategic partnerships and other agreements aimed at achieving a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan, and
welcomes international and regional initiatives in this regard, such as the Economic Cooperation Organization, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Central Asian Regional Economic Cooperation Programme, the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the European Union and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
103

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

81. Acknowledges Afghanistan’s crucial role as the business hub and land bridge in the “Heart of Asia”,
connecting South Asia, Central Asia, Eurasia/Europe and the Middle East, and affirms its support to the
Government of Afghanistan in realizing its potential as a viable trade and transit hub for the development of the
region and playing its role as a constructive partner in enhancing regional security and stability and regional
economic cooperation between Afghanistan and the region through transit, trade, energy and investment that will
contribute to the prosperity and stability of Afghanistan and the wider region;
82. Commends the continuing efforts of the signatories to the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly
Relations121 to implement their commitments under the Declaration, calls upon all other States to respect and
support the implementation of those provisions, and welcomes the reaffirmation, in the Kabul Conference
communiqué, of the principles set out in the Declaration;
83. Welcomes and encourages further efforts by the Government of Afghanistan and its neighbouring
partners to foster trust and cooperation with each other, and looks forward, where appropriate, to increasing
cooperation between Afghanistan, all its neighbouring and regional partners and regional organizations against the
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida and other extremist and criminal groups and illegal armed
groups and in promoting peace and prosperity in Afghanistan, in the region and beyond;
84. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Government of Afghanistan, its neighbouring and regional partners
and international organizations, including the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to foster trust and cooperation
with each other, as well as recent cooperation initiatives developed by the countries concerned and by regional
organizations, including the trilateral summit of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey, the trilateral summit of
Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan, the trilateral summit of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the trilateral strategic dialogue between Afghanistan, China
and Pakistan and the trilateral high-level meeting of Afghanistan, China and the United States of America;
85. Reaffirms support to the ongoing Afghan-led regional effort within the framework of the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process, welcomes the outcomes of the Heart of Asia Ministerial Conferences held in Kabul in 2012, in
Almaty in 2013 and in Beijing in 2014, as follow-up to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in the Heart of
Asia, held in Istanbul in 2011, and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process Senior Officials Meeting held in Islamabad on
25 May 2015 and in New York on 27 September 2015, welcomes the adoption of the implementation plans of all
six confidence-building measures in the areas of disaster management, counter-terrorism, counter-narcotics, regional
infrastructure, and trade, commerce and investment opportunities as well as education, prioritized for
implementation, commends the progress of the Istanbul Process since its inception, looks forward to the fifth Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference, to be held in Pakistan in December 2015, notes with appreciation efforts to enhance
regional dialogue and confidence through the Istanbul Process, and recalls that the Istanbul Process is intended to
complement and cooperate with, and not substitute for, existing efforts of regional organizations, particularly where
they relate to Afghanistan;
86. Expresses its appreciation for all efforts to increase regional economic cooperation aimed at promoting
economic cooperation between Afghanistan, regional neighbours, international partners and financial institutions,
and recognizes, inter alia, the important role of the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, the
Delhi Investment Summit on Afghanistan and its recommendations for promoting foreign investment and private
sector development and partnerships of Afghanistan, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Central Asian
Regional Economic Cooperation Programme and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, as well as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in promoting the development of Afghanistan;
87. Reaffirms support to the ongoing Afghan-led regional economic efforts within the framework of the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan process, welcomes the decade-long achievements of
the process, anticipates closer linkages and complementarities between the prioritized projects of the sixth Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, also reaffirms that
coordinated regional economic development strategies should support the overall regional economic integration
vision, and emphasizes shared ownership of the work towards comprehensive regional connectivity and its
importance in promoting region-wide economic integration, confidence and prosperity;
88. Welcomes and urges further efforts to strengthen the process of regional economic cooperation,
including measures to facilitate regional trade and transit, including through regional and bilateral transit trade
agreements, expanded consular visa cooperation and facilitation of business travel, to expand trade, to increase
104

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

foreign investments and to develop infrastructure, including infrastructural connectivity, energy supply, transport
and integrated border management, with a view to promoting sustainable economic growth and the creation of jobs
in Afghanistan, noting the historical role of Afghanistan as a land bridge in Asia, and welcomes in this regard the
signing of an agreement by Afghanistan and Pakistan on electricity transit fees as an important step towards regional
electricity trade between Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Pakistan;
Counter-narcotics
89. Welcomes the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in fighting drug production in Afghanistan,
welcomes and supports the adoption of the Afghan National Drug Action Plan 2015–2019, takes note of the report
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime entitled “Afghanistan Opium Survey 2015”, released in October
2015, welcomes the recent decrease in production and cultivation of drugs as noted in the report, reiterates its deep
concern about the cultivation and production of illicit narcotic drugs in Afghanistan, mainly concentrated in areas
where the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and criminals are particularly active, as well as
the ongoing drug trafficking, stresses the need, based on the principle of common and shared responsibility, to
further strengthen joint, more coordinated and resolute efforts by the Government, supported by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and by international and regional actors, within their designated responsibilities, to fight
this menace, and encourages international and regional cooperation with Afghanistan in its sustained efforts to
address drug production and trafficking;
90. Stresses the importance of a comprehensive and balanced approach in addressing the drug problem of
Afghanistan, which, to be effective, must be integrated into the wider context of efforts carried out in the areas of
security, governance, the rule of law and human rights, and economic and social development, particularly in rural
areas, calls upon the international community to continue to assist the Government of Afghanistan in implementing
its National Drug Control Strategy137 and its National Drug Action Plan;
91. Also stresses, in this regard, that the development of alternative livelihood programmes is of key
importance in the success of the counter-narcotics efforts in Afghanistan and that sustainable strategies require
international cooperation, and urges the Government of Afghanistan, assisted by the international community, to
promote the development of sustainable livelihoods in the formal production sector, as well as in other sectors, and
to improve access to reasonable and sustainable credit and financing in rural areas, thus improving substantially the
lives, health and security of the people, particularly in rural areas;
92. Notes with great concern the strong nexus between the drug trade and terrorist activities by the Taliban,
including the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and criminal groups, which pose a
serious threat to security, the rule of law and development in Afghanistan, and stresses the importance of the full
implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions in this regard, including resolutions 2160 (2014)
and 2161 (2014);
93. Calls upon all Member States, in this regard, to further intensify their efforts to reduce the demand for
drugs in their respective countries and globally in order to contribute to the sustainability of the elimination of illicit
cultivation in Afghanistan;
94. Stresses the need to prevent trafficking in and diversion of chemical precursors used in the illicit
manufacturing of drugs in Afghanistan, and calls for the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1817 (2008) of 11 June 2008 in this regard;
95. Supports the fight against the illicit trafficking in drugs from and precursors to Afghanistan and
neighbouring States and countries along trafficking routes, including increased cooperation among them in
strengthening anti-narcotic controls and the monitoring of the international trade in chemical precursors, and
underlines the importance of technical assistance and support to the most affected transit States to support their
capacities in this regard;
96. Urges the Government of Afghanistan, supported by the international community, to work to
mainstream counter-narcotics throughout all the national programmes and to ensure that counter-narcotics is a
_______________
137

S/2006/106, annex.

105

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

fundamental part of the comprehensive approach, as well as to increase its efforts against opium cultivation and
drug trafficking in accordance with the balanced plan of the updated Afghan National Drug Control Strategy;
97. Commends the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan, in this regard, to develop and adopt the
National Drug Action Plan which outlines the actions necessary to counter the cultivation, production, trafficking in
and use of narcotics, the time frame, goals and metrics to evaluate progress on the plan and the ways in which the
international community can support this plan, and urges the Government and the international community to take
decisive action by pursuing the concrete steps set out in the plan;
98. Calls upon the international community to continue to assist the Government of Afghanistan in
implementing its National Drug Control Strategy and National Drug Action Plan aimed at eliminating the
cultivation, production, trafficking in and consumption of illicit drugs, including through increased support for
Afghan law enforcement and criminal justice agencies, agricultural and rural development for the creation of
alternative livelihoods for farmers, demand reduction, the elimination of illicit crops, increased public awareness
and the building of the capacity of drug control institutions and care and treatment centres for drug addicts, and
reiterates its call upon the international community to channel counter-narcotics funding through the Government, to
the extent possible;
99. Recalls the need to strengthen international and regional cooperation with Afghanistan in its sustained
efforts to address drug production, trade and trafficking, recognizes the threat they pose, encourages further
sustained efforts by the Government of Afghanistan in this regard, as well as the intent of the Government to
strengthen international and regional cooperation in this regard, and welcomes the progress made in the Heart of
Asia process in this regard;
100. Welcomes initiatives to enhance border management cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours in ensuring comprehensive measures for drug control, including the financial dimension, emphasizes the
importance of pursuing such cooperation, especially through bilateral arrangements and those launched by the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia,
the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Central Asian Anti-Drug
Quartet and others, and welcomes the intention of the Government of Afghanistan to strengthen international and
regional cooperation with relevant partners in the field of border control;
101. Stresses the importance of further, effective cooperative support by relevant international and regional
actors, including the United Nations, within its designated responsibilities, to Afghan-led sustained efforts to address
the threat posed by the illicit production of and trafficking in drugs, welcomes in this regard the regional programme
on Afghanistan and neighbouring countries of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and encourages the
respective countries to continue to participate;
102. Welcomes and supports the joint regional activities carried out by Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Pakistan within the framework of their triangular initiative to counter narcotics;
103. Pays homage to all those who have innocently lost their lives in the fight against drug traffickers, in
particular members of the security forces of Afghanistan and its neighbours;
Coordination
104. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the Assistance Mission, as mandated by the Security Council
in its resolution 2210 (2015), stresses the continued importance of the central and impartial coordinating role of the
United Nations in promoting a more coherent international engagement, including the role played by the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board in this regard, and looks forward to the next meeting of the Board in
early 2016;
105. Welcomes the evolving presence of the Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, which ensures that the United
Nations can fulfil its essential coordinating and support role, as requested by the Government of Afghanistan,
security conditions permitting;
106. Also welcomes the outcome of the Tripartite Review Commission on the United Nations in Afghanistan,
which was established in accordance with Security Council resolution 2210 (2015), with a view to fully examining
the role, structure and activities of all United Nations entities in Afghanistan, in accordance with the principles of
106

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Afghan national sovereignty, national leadership and national ownership, in the light of the completion of the
security transition and the beginning of the transformation decade, and supports efforts to promote greater mutual
accountability and transparency, effectiveness and capacity-building;
107. Stresses the need to ensure that the Assistance Mission is adequately resourced and protected by the
Afghan authorities, with international support, as appropriate, to fulfil its mandate;
108. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly every three months on developments
in Afghanistan, as well as on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
109. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “The situation
in Afghanistan”.
RESOLUTION 70/78
A/RES/70/78

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.16, as
orally revised, sponsored by South Africa (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the
Group of 77 and China)

70/78. Extension of the preparatory period preceding the graduation of the Republic of Vanuatu from the
least developed country category
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/209 of 20 December 2004, 67/221 of 21 December 2012 and 68/18 of
4 December 2013,
Reaffirming its commitment to the process of graduation from least developed country status and to
encouraging smooth transition measures for graduating countries,
Giving due consideration to the unprecedented human and material losses which Vanuatu suffered as a result
of Cyclone Pam on 13 and 14 March 2015, and to the serious disruption this natural disaster caused to the economic
and social progress Vanuatu had for several years been demonstrating,
Inviting the international community to continue to generously support the rehabilitation and disaster
preparedness efforts undertaken by the Government of Vanuatu in this context,
1. Expresses its deep concern at the severe consequences for Vanuatu of Cyclone Pam on 13 and
14 March 2015;
2. Decides to extend by an additional period of three years, until 4 December 2020, the preparatory period
that Vanuatu is currently benefiting from, before graduation from the least developed country category occurs;
3. Underlines the exceptional nature of this decision, taken in the context of the unique disruption caused to
the economic and social progress of Vanuatu by Cyclone Pam.
RESOLUTION 70/104
A/RES/70/104

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 10 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.25 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

70/104. Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 on the strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian emergency assistance of the United Nations,
107

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling all relevant resolutions on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel, including its resolution 69/133 of 12 December 2014, as well as Security Council
resolutions on the protection of humanitarian personnel, including resolution 2175 (2014) of 29 August 2014, and
relevant statements by the President of the Council,
Recalling also all Security Council resolutions and presidential statements and reports of the SecretaryGeneral to the Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
Reaffirming the principles, rules and relevant provisions of international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as all relevant treaties,138 and the need to further promote and
ensure respect thereof,
Recalling the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949139 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 8 June
1977, and the obligation of parties to armed conflict to respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian
law in all circumstances, and urging all such parties to comply with international humanitarian law and ensure
respect for and protection of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
140

Deeply concerned by the continuous erosion, in many cases, of respect for the principles and rules of
international law, in particular international humanitarian law,
Reaffirming the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of
humanitarian assistance,
Recalling that primary responsibility under international law for the security and protection of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel lies with the Government hosting a United Nations
operation conducted under the Charter of the United Nations or its agreements with relevant organizations,
Expressing its appreciation to those Governments which respect the internationally agreed principles on the
protection of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, while expressing concern over
the lack of respect for these principles in some areas,
Noting the fact that the number of States parties to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel,141 which entered into force on 15 January 1999, has reached 91, mindful of the need to
promote the universality of the Convention, and welcoming the entry into force on 19 August 2010 of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,142 which expands the scope
of legal protection under the Convention,
Expressing deep concern at the complex and dynamic security environment, marked by the diverse and
multifaceted threats and significant security risks faced by humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel, and the increase in the number of direct attacks against such personnel at the field level, as
they operate in increasingly high-risk environments,
Deeply concerned about the particular vulnerability of locally recruited humanitarian personnel and United
Nations associated personnel to safety and security-related incidents, including road traffic accidents, arrest and
detention, and abduction,
Expressing deep concern that the occurrence of attacks and threats against humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel is a factor that severely restricts the provision of assistance and protection to
_______________
138

These include, notably, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations of 13 February 1946, the Convention
on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies of 21 November 1947, the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 9 December 1994, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel of 8 December 2005, the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949
and the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of 8 June 1977, and Amended Protocol II of 3 May 1996 to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects of 10 October 1980, as applicable.
139
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
140
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
141
Ibid., vol. 2051, No. 35457.
142
Resolution 60/42, annex.

108

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

populations in need, and commending the commitment of United Nations and other humanitarian personnel to stay
and deliver effectively the most critical programmes even in dangerous environments,
Stressing the need to uphold the respect and protection which the flag of the United Nations, and the nature of
humanitarian work, should command and ensure, and stressing the importance of fully respecting the obligations
relating to the use of vehicles and premises of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel
as defined by relevant international instruments, as well as the obligations relating to distinctive emblems
recognized in the Geneva Conventions,
Commending the courage and commitment of those who take part in humanitarian operations, especially
national and locally recruited personnel, and including those serving with national and international nongovernmental organizations in the field, often at great personal risk,
Commending also the courage and commitment of those who take part in peace operations, including
peacekeeping operations,143 often at great personal risk, especially national and locally recruited personnel,
Noting with concern the evolving threats that United Nations personnel face when deployed and that, in 2014,
1,734 persons, representing 0.96 per cent of the United Nations system personnel, were affected by safety and
security incidents, with 30 fatalities, of which 15 resulted from acts of violence, namely, crime, acts of terrorism and
civil unrest, 166 injuries, of which 65 resulted from acts of violence, and 6 abductions,144 and noting that these
figures do not include United Nations personnel who are not part of the United Nations security management
system, such as locally recruited area staff of UNRWA, of whom 18 were killed, 52 injured and 5 abducted
in 2014,145
Strongly condemning all attacks against humanitarian personnel, expressing profound regret at the deaths,
injuries and abductions resulting from these attacks, and noting with concern that there were 329 recorded attacks
against humanitarian personnel in 2014, resulting in at least 121 personnel killed, 88 injured and 120 abducted,
Strongly condemning also all attacks and threats against medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities, and deploring the long-term consequences of such attacks for the population and health-care
systems of the countries concerned, and in this regard welcoming efforts by States, international and nongovernmental organizations and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law by raising awareness and promoting preparedness to address the grave and serious humanitarian
consequences arising from such violence,
Expressing profound regret at the deaths, illnesses and other adverse consequences affecting humanitarian
personnel and health-care personnel as a result of public health hazards such as the outbreak of the Ebola virus
disease in West Africa, and stressing the need for a conducive environment, appropriate equipment and resilient
public health systems, and the urgency of preparedness,
Expressing deep concern at the deep and long-lasting impacts of attacks and threats against humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
Strongly condemning acts of murder and other forms of violence, rape and sexual assault and all forms of
violence committed in particular against women and children, and intimidation, armed robbery, abduction,
hostage-taking, kidnapping, harassment and illegal arrest and detention, to which those participating in
humanitarian operations are exposed, as well as attacks on humanitarian convoys and acts of destruction and
looting of property,

_______________
143

The safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers is specifically addressed in the annual report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/69/19)). Except where
otherwise specified, the present resolution focuses only on the safety and security of civilian United Nations and associated personnel
falling under the United Nations security management system under the responsibility of the Department of Safety and Security of the
Secretariat.
144
See A/70/383, annex I.
145
Ibid., annex V.

109

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Affirming the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of attacks committed on their territory against
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and against their premises or assets do not
operate with impunity, that such attacks are investigated promptly and effectively and that the perpetrators of such acts
are brought to justice, as provided for by national laws and in accordance with obligations under international law,
Recalling the inclusion of attacks intentionally directed against personnel involved in a humanitarian
assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter, as long as they are entitled to the protection
given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict, as a war crime in the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court,146 and noting the role that the Court can play in appropriate cases in
bringing to justice those responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law,
Reaffirming the need to ensure adequate levels of safety and security for United Nations and associated
personnel, including locally recruited staff, which constitutes an underlying duty of the Organization, and mindful of
the need to promote and enhance security consciousness within the organizational culture of the United Nations and
a culture of accountability at all levels, as well as to continue to promote awareness of and sensitivity to national and
local cultures and laws,
Gravely concerned at the large number of accidents and resulting casualties among United Nations and
associated personnel, and conscious of the importance of road and aviation safety in ensuring the continuity of
United Nations operations and preventing casualties among civilians and United Nations and associated personnel,
and in this regard regretting the loss of civilian life as a result of such incidents,
Stressing that acceptance of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel by the host
Governments, local authorities, local communities, populations and other parties as appropriate crucially contributes
to their safety and security,
Noting the importance of reinforcing close collaboration between the United Nations and the host country on
contingency planning, information exchange and risk assessment in the context of good mutual cooperation on
issues relating to the security of United Nations and associated personnel, as well as the importance of coordinating
prevention and mitigation measures and managing security in crisis situations,
Noting also that, in order to remain fit for purpose and to support the effective and principled delivery of
humanitarian assistance, the United Nations security management system needs to evolve in response to the
challenging global security environment, requiring, inter alia, an effective management structure, adequate and
predictable resources and the timely deployment of security personnel with appropriate skills and field experience
and of the equipment necessary for the performance of their duties, including vehicles and telecommunications
equipment, which have an essential role in facilitating the safety of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;147

2. Urges all States to make every effort to ensure the full and effective implementation of the relevant
principles and rules of international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights law, and refugee
law as applicable, related to the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel;
3. Condemns in the strongest possible terms the alarming increase in threats to and deliberate targeting of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and the unprecedented increase in the scale
and the increasingly complex nature of threats faced by such personnel, such as the disturbing trend of politically
and criminally motivated attacks, including extremist attacks, against them;
4. Strongly urges all States to take the necessary measures to ensure the safety and security of national and
international humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and to respect and ensure respect
for the inviolability of United Nations premises, which are essential to the continuation and successful
implementation of United Nations operations;
_______________
146
147

110

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
A/70/383.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Calls upon all Governments and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed
conflicts and in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel and the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow those personnel to perform efficiently their
task of assisting the affected civilian population, including refugees and internally displaced persons;
6. Calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to and to respect fully their obligations under the
relevant international instruments;
7.
Court;146

Also calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal

8. Further calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,142 and urges States parties to put in place appropriate
national legislation, as necessary, to enable its effective implementation;
9. Calls upon all States, all parties involved in armed conflict and all humanitarian actors to respect the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of humanitarian assistance;
10. Welcomes the contribution of female humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel in humanitarian and United Nations operations, expresses concern that these personnel may be more
exposed to certain forms of crime and acts of intimidation and harassment, strongly urges the United Nations system
and Member States to analyse the different forms of violence, crime, acts of intimidation and harassment to which
women and men are differently exposed, and also strongly urges the United Nations system and Member States to
choose appropriate and gender-sensitive approaches for their safety and security and to ensure that female
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel are meaningfully included in decisions related
to their safety and security;
11. Strongly condemns all threats and acts of violence against humanitarian personnel and United Nations
and associated personnel, also condemns attacks intentionally directed against personnel involved in a peacekeeping
mission143 in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations as long as they are entitled to protection from attack
under international humanitarian law, reaffirms the need to prosecute, penalize and punish those responsible for such
acts, strongly urges all States to take stronger action to ensure that crimes against such personnel do not remain
unpunished and are investigated fully, and affirms the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of any such acts
committed on their territory do not operate with impunity, as provided by national laws and obligations under
international law;
12. Stresses the importance of continued close coordination and consultation with host Governments on the
functioning of the security level system and related tools, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to
continue to consult with the host Governments;
13. Calls upon all States to comply fully with their obligations under international humanitarian law,
including as provided for under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War
of 12 August 1949,148 in order to respect and protect civilians, including humanitarian personnel;
14. Stresses the obligation, in accordance with international humanitarian law and national laws and
regulations, as applicable, to respect and protect medical personnel, as well as humanitarian personnel exclusively
engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities,
in all circumstances, in this regard notes the role of domestic legal frameworks and other appropriate measures in
promoting the safety and protection of such personnel, and urges States [and all parties to armed conflict] to develop
effective measures to prevent and address violence against such personnel, their means of transport and equipment,
as well as hospitals and other medical facilities;

_______________
148

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

111

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

15. Notes the importance of giving due consideration to the question of the safety and security of United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel at the World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in Istanbul, Turkey,
on 23 and 24 May 2016 ;
16. Calls upon all States to provide adequate and prompt information in the event of the arrest or detention
of humanitarian personnel or United Nations and associated personnel, so as to afford them the necessary medical
assistance and to allow independent medical teams to visit and examine the health of those detained, and to ensure
their right to legal counsel, and urges States to take the necessary measures to ensure the speedy release of those
who have been arrested or detained in violation of the relevant conventions referred to in the present resolution and
applicable international humanitarian law;
17. Calls upon all parties involved in armed conflict not to abduct, take hostage or kidnap humanitarian
personnel or United Nations and associated personnel or to detain them in violation of the relevant conventions
referred to in the present resolution and applicable international humanitarian law, and speedily to release, without
harm or requirement of concession, any abductee or detainee;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to promote full respect for the human
rights, privileges and immunities of United Nations and associated personnel, and also requests the SecretaryGeneral to seek the inclusion, in negotiations of headquarters and other mission agreements concerning United
Nations and associated personnel, of the applicable conditions contained in the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations,149 the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized
Agencies150 and the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel;141
19. Recommends that the Secretary-General continue to seek the inclusion of, and that host countries
include, key provisions of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel, among others,
those regarding the prevention of attacks against members of the operation, the establishment of such attacks as
crimes punishable by law and the prosecution or extradition of offenders, in future as well as, if necessary, in
existing status-of-forces, status-of-mission, host country and other related agreements negotiated between the United
Nations and those countries, mindful of the importance of the timely conclusion of such agreements, and
encourages further efforts in this regard;
20. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue the ongoing efforts of the United Nations to develop a
more systematic follow-up process with relevant host Governments on cases of serious crimes and acts of violence
resulting in the death or serious injury of United Nations system personnel, in order to bring perpetrators to justice;
21. Calls attention to and reaffirms the obligation of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel to respect and, where required, observe the national laws of the country in which they are
operating, in accordance with international law and the Charter;
22. Stresses the importance of ensuring that humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel are aware and respectful of national and local customs and traditions in their countries of assignment and
communicate clearly their purpose and objectives to local populations in order to enhance their acceptance, thereby
contributing to their safety and security, and in this regard ensure that humanitarian action is guided by humanitarian
principles;
23. Urges the United Nations and other relevant humanitarian actors to include as part of their riskmanagement strategy the building of good relations and trust with national and local governments and the
promotion of acceptance by local communities and all relevant actors with a view to enhancing safety and
security;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the necessary measures to ensure that United Nations
and other personnel carrying out activities in fulfilment of the mandate of a United Nations operation are properly
informed about and operate in conformity with the minimum operating security standards and relevant codes of
conduct and are properly informed about the conditions under which they are called upon to operate and the
standards that they are required to meet, including those contained in relevant national laws and international law,
_______________
149
150

112

Resolution 22 A (I).
Resolution 179 (II).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and that adequate training in security, human rights law and international humanitarian law is provided so as to
enhance their security and effectiveness in accomplishing their functions, and reaffirms the necessity for all other
humanitarian organizations to provide their personnel with similar support;
25. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in coordination with Member States, to take the
necessary measures to ensure that all United Nations premises and assets, including staff residences, are compliant
with the United Nations minimum operating security standards and other relevant United Nations security
standards, and to continue the ongoing assessment of United Nations premises and physical security worldwide;
26. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure that all United Nations personnel
receive adequate safety and security training, stresses the need to continue to improve training so as to enhance
cultural awareness and knowledge of relevant law, including international humanitarian law, prior to their
deployment to the field, and reaffirms the necessity for all other humanitarian organizations to provide their
personnel with similar support;
27. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to provide counselling and support services to United
Nations personnel affected by safety and security incidents, and emphasizes the importance of making available
stress management, mental health and related services for United Nations personnel throughout the system, and
encourages all humanitarian organizations to provide their personnel with similar support;
28. Notes with appreciation the ongoing measures taken by the Secretary-General and the United Nations
system to enhance road safety, including through improved training and initiatives to promote road safety so as to
reduce incidents caused by road hazards and, in particular, to reduce casualties or injuries resulting from these
incidents among United Nations and associated personnel and among the civilian population in the host country, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue the collection and analysis of data and to report on road incidents,
including civilian casualties resulting from road accidents;
29. Welcomes the progress made towards further enhancing the security management system of the United
Nations, including through the integration of all security personnel of the Secretariat under the leadership of the
Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security, and supports the continued implementation of the stay-and-deliver
strategy while focusing on effectively managing the risks to which personnel are exposed in order to enable the
United Nations system to deliver the most critical programmes, even in high-risk environments;
30. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue consistent implementation of the programme criticality
framework as an operational tool allowing informed decisions on acceptable risk to United Nations personnel;
31. Also encourages the Secretary-General to continue to develop enabling procedures that facilitate the
deployment of suitably qualified United Nations security personnel, with the aim of improving the safety and
security measures of the United Nations, in order to strengthen the ability of the United Nations to deliver on its
programmes, mandates and activities, including humanitarian programmes;
32. Requests the Secretary-General, inter alia through the Inter-Agency Security Management Network, to
continue the increased cooperation and collaboration among United Nations departments, organizations, funds and
programmes and affiliated international organizations, including between their headquarters and field offices, in the
planning and implementation of measures aimed at improving staff security, training and awareness, including field
crisis management and gender inclusion in security management, and calls upon all relevant United Nations
departments, organizations, funds and programmes and affiliated international organizations to support those efforts;
33. Calls upon all relevant actors to make every effort to support in their public statements a favourable
environment for the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel;
34. Emphasizes the need to pay particular attention to the safety and security of locally recruited
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, who account for the large majority of
casualties and who are particularly vulnerable to attacks, including in cases of kidnapping, harassment, banditry and
intimidation, requests the Secretary-General to keep under review the relevant United Nations safety and security
policy and to enhance the safety and security of locally recruited personnel, while maintaining operational
effectiveness, and calls upon the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to ensure that their personnel are
adequately consulted on, informed about and trained in the relevant security measures, plans and initiatives of their
respective organizations, which should be in line with applicable national laws and international law;
113

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

35. Notes with appreciation the progress reported in implementing the recommendations of the Independent
Panel on Safety and Security of United Nations Personnel and Premises Worldwide;
36. Requests the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat to further strengthen the security
management of the United Nations, focusing on strengthening security risk management policy and tools and their
application, increasing situational awareness and analysis capacity, strengthening policy development and
promoting best practices, increasing compliance with minimum operating security standards and improving
monitoring and evaluation, enhancing surge capacity for emergency response, devising effective physical security
measures, developing the expertise of security professionals and strengthening support to the designated officials
and the security management teams in the field, and promoting an effective and preventive security management
approach that is multidimensional;
37. Welcomes the work of the Secretary-General in enhancing security collaboration with host
Governments, including efforts to support United Nations designated officials with regard to collaboration with host
Government authorities on staff safety and security;
38. Stresses that the effective functioning at the country level of security operations requires a unified and
robust capacity for policy, standards, coordination, communication, compliance and threat and risk assessment and
operational and deployment flexibility to ensure that the security workforce reflects the changing dynamics of the
security environment, and notes the benefits thereof to United Nations and associated personnel, including those
achieved by the Department of Safety and Security since its establishment;
39. Welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-General thus far, and encourages further efforts to enhance
coordination and cooperation, at both the headquarters and the field levels, between the United Nations and other
humanitarian and non-governmental organizations on matters relating to the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, with a view to addressing mutual security concerns in the
field, based on the “Saving Lives Together” framework as well as other relevant national and local initiatives in this
regard, and requests the Secretary-General in this respect to enhance further collaborative initiatives to address the
security needs of implementing partners, including through enhanced information-sharing and, where appropriate,
training, invites Member States to consider increasing support to those initiatives, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on steps taken in this regard;
40. Underlines the urgent need to allocate adequate and predictable resources to the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel, through regular and extrabudgetary resources, including through the
consolidated appeals process, and encourages all States to contribute to the Trust Fund for Security of Staff
Members of the United Nations System, inter alia, with a view to reinforcing the efforts of the Department of Safety
and Security to meet its mandate and responsibilities to enable the safe delivery of programmes;
41. Also underlines the need for better coordination between the United Nations and host Governments, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, on the use and deployment of
essential equipment required to provide for the safety and security of United Nations personnel and associated
personnel working in the delivery of humanitarian assistance by United Nations organizations;
42. Calls upon States to consider acceding to or ratifying the Tampere Convention on the Provision of
Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations of 18 June 1998,151 which entered into
force on 8 January 2005, and urges them to facilitate and expedite, consistent with their national laws and
international obligations applicable to them, the use of communications equipment in those and other relief
operations, inter alia, by limiting and, whenever possible, expeditiously lifting the restrictions placed on the use of
communications equipment by United Nations and associated personnel;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a
comprehensive and updated report on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel and on the implementation of the present resolution, including an assessment of the impact of
safety and security risks on such personnel, and the development, implementation and outcomes of policies,
strategies and initiatives of the United Nations system in the field of safety and security.
_______________
151

114

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2296, No. 40906.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/105
A/RES/70/105

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 10 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.27 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Canada, Chile, China,
Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Georgia, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Netherlands, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay

70/105. Participation of volunteers, “White Helmets”, in the activities of the United Nations in the field of
humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and technical cooperation for development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 50/19 of 28 November 1995, 52/171 of 16 December 1997, 54/98 of 8 December
1999, 56/102 of 14 December 2001, 58/118 of 17 December 2003, 61/220 of 20 December 2006, 64/75 of
7 December 2009, 67/84 of 13 December 2012 and 69/134 of 12 December 2014,
Reaffirming also its resolutions 46/182 of 19 December 1991, 47/168 of 22 December 1992, 48/57 of
14 December 1993, 49/139 B of 20 December 1994, 50/57 of 12 December 1995 and 51/194 of 17 December 1996
and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1995/56 of 28 July 1995 and 1996/33 of 25 July 1996,
Emphasizing the need for coordination between relief and development activities in the context of
humanitarian emergencies, taking into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,152
Recognizing the importance of mobilizing the scientific and technical know-how of the international
community to assist local communities within a framework of comprehensive disaster risk reduction, and in this
regard expressing appreciation for the international cooperation contributions made by the White Helmets initiative,
through its South-South mechanism, to those in need,
Recognizing also the responsibility of the United Nations system in promoting international cooperation for
developing countries to prevent and mitigate disasters, and to provide and coordinate assistance and rehabilitation
measures aimed at building resilient communities, and highlighting the leading role of the Secretary-General in
this regard,
Recognizing further that the international community, in addressing the growing magnitude and complexity of
disasters and chronic challenges, such as hunger, malnutrition and poverty, must rely on the formulation of a wellcoordinated global response within the framework of the United Nations and on the promotion of a smooth
transition from relief to rehabilitation, reconstruction and development,
Recognizing that the White Helmets initiative has demonstrated the potential of regional partnerships and has
encouraged the participation of affected or vulnerable populations in the tasks of planning, training, mobilizing and
providing an immediate response in disaster situations and complex emergencies, and recognizing also the work of
the White Helmets initiative in disseminating information regarding the importance of a trained and organized
volunteer corps,
Emphasizing the need to integrate a gender perspective, as well as a perspective on the needs of children,
young people, older persons and people with disabilities, in the design and implementation of all phases of disaster
risk reduction,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, submitted in compliance with resolutions 46/182 and 69/135,153 in
particular paragraph 85 of the report, in which it is noted that in 20 years of experience, the White Helmets have
participated in over 260 international humanitarian assistance missions;
2. Recognizes the work done by the White Helmets in coordination with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat to promote the interchange of humanitarian experiences and best practices
among the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and foster a number of regional mechanisms for
international humanitarian assistance;
_______________
152
153

Resolution 70/1.
A/70/77-E/2015/64.

115

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Takes note of the activities of the White Helmets involving the exchange of experiences with
several countries with a view to mutually strengthening international humanitarian assistance and promoting
volunteer work;
4. Recognizes the work undertaken with the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction to strengthen the
disaster risk reduction agenda and generate practical tools for the campaign entitled “Making Cities Resilient: My
city is getting ready”, as well as the active participation in the consultations leading to the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030;154
5. Commends national and international volunteers for their contributions and their fundamental role in
disaster risk reduction, response and recovery;
6. Recognizes the agreement signed between the United Nations Volunteers and the White Helmets
Commission, which extends until 2017 and will allow for continuation of the joint work launched in 1995, and
invites Member States to consider means of supporting collaboration of the White Helmets with their programme
activities and to consider making financial resources available to the Special Voluntary Fund of the United Nations
Volunteers;
7. Takes note of the renewal, signed in 2014, of the memorandum of understanding between the White
Helmets and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which established the framework
for the deployment of White Helmets volunteers in support of the emergency responses of the Office of the High
Commissioner, and recognizes the efforts made by the World Food Programme and the White Helmets to
coordinate integration mechanisms that allow for joint action within the framework of food security, including the
exchange of information among stakeholders in the field, and the international humanitarian assistance activities that
the White Helmets developed with the International Organization for Migration and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan;
8. Recognizes the international humanitarian activities that the White Helmets developed in the period from
2012 to 2015 in coordination with the national authorities of disaster-affected countries and the agencies of the
United Nations system and its partners;
9. Notes the work of the White Helmets initiative in assisting the International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies to promote greater legal preparedness for international disaster assistance in the Americas;
10. Recognizes the participation of the White Helmets in the Latin American and Caribbean regional
consultation held in preparation for the World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and
24 May 2016;
11. Encourages the White Helmets to continue to enhance coordination with the international humanitarian
system and to explore mechanisms for sharing best practices on disaster response and preparedness with other
regional organizations in disaster-prone areas, in order to improve the coordination of humanitarian assistance
provided by the United Nations in emergency situations;
12. Invites the Secretary-General, on the basis of the experience acquired, to continue to consider the use of
the White Helmets initiative as a resource suitable for preventing and mitigating the effects of humanitarian disaster
situations;
13. Also invites the Secretary-General, on the basis of the work experience acquired by the White Helmets in
the international field, as recognized in various resolutions of the General Assembly, and in view of the success of
coordinated actions carried out with, inter alia, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, the World
Health Organization, the Pan American Health Organization, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations
Volunteers, to suggest measures to enhance the collaboration of the White Helmets initiative with the United
Nations system and to report thereon to the Assembly at its seventy-third session in a separate section of the annual
report on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations.
_______________
154

116

Resolution 69/283, annex II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/106
A/RES/70/106

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 10 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.29 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

70/106. Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 and the guiding principles contained in the annex
thereto, other relevant General Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions and agreed conclusions of
the Council,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations155 and on the Central Emergency Response Fund,156
Reaffirming the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming also the need for all actors engaged in the provision of humanitarian
assistance in situations of complex emergencies and natural disasters to promote and fully respect these principles,
Expressing grave concern at the increasing challenges caused by the unprecedented number of people affected
by humanitarian emergencies, including protracted displacement, which are increasing in number, scale and severity
and are stretching humanitarian response capacities, and expressing deep concern about the impact of climate
change, the ongoing consequences of the financial and economic crisis, regional food crises, continuing food and
energy insecurity, water scarcity, unplanned and rapid urbanization of populations, epidemics, natural hazards and
environmental degradation, which are adding to underdevelopment, poverty and inequality and are increasing the
vulnerability of people while reducing their ability to cope with humanitarian crises,
Underscoring the need, in order to ensure a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, to
better align, wherever appropriate, humanitarian and development assistance with national development priorities
and strategies, and encouraging Member States, as well as the United Nations system and regional organizations in
supporting the efforts of Member States, to tackle the root causes of humanitarian crises, including poverty and
underdevelopment, and reduce humanitarian needs,
Recognizing that a cooperative framework between humanitarian and development approaches is imperative
to build resilience,
Concerned about the growing gap between the increasing numbers of people in need of assistance and
sufficient resources to provide relief, noting the appointment by the Secretary-General, in May 2015, of a High-level
Panel on Humanitarian Financing to examine ways to raise more humanitarian funding, to make the funding more
predictable and to use available funding more effectively, and noting that the report of the Panel is forthcoming,
Noting the substantial increase over the past decade in global humanitarian funding requirements, welcoming
non-traditional donors, and emphasizing the need to mobilize adequate, predictable, timely and flexible resources
for humanitarian assistance, based on and in proportion to assessed risks and needs, with a view to planning for,
mitigating, preparing for, responding to and recovering from humanitarian emergencies and to ensuring fuller
coverage of the needs in all sectors and across humanitarian emergencies,
Recognizing, in this regard, the significant achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in
facilitating life-saving assistance to crisis-affected people by providing timely funding, enabling humanitarian
_______________
155
156

A/70/77-E/2015/64.
A/70/96.

117

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

organizations and their implementing partners to act quickly when tragedy strikes and steer resources to crises that
do not receive the attention that they need and deserve, emphasizing the need to broaden and diversify the income
base of the Fund, and welcoming in this context its tenth anniversary,
Emphasizing that strengthened needs analysis, risk management and strategic planning, in coordination with
affected States, including through the use of open and disaggregated data, are crucial elements to ensure a better
informed, more effective, transparent and collective response to the needs of people affected by crises,
Reiterating the need for Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to
mainstream a gender perspective into humanitarian assistance, including by addressing the specific needs of
women, girls, boys and men in a comprehensive and consistent manner, and to improve accountability at all levels
to the needs of affected populations, including persons with disabilities, and recognizing the importance of inclusive
participation in decision-making,
Expressing its deep concern about the increasing challenges faced by Member States and the United Nations
humanitarian response system and their capacities as a result of the consequences of natural disasters, including
those related to the continuing impact of climate change, and reaffirming the need for the implementation of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,157 inter alia, by providing adequate resources for
disaster risk reduction, including investment at all levels in disaster preparedness and capacity-building, and by
working towards building back better in all phases from relief to development,
Expressing grave concern about the unprecedented outbreak of the Ebola virus disease and its adverse impact
on the affected countries, underscoring that the control of outbreaks of major infectious diseases requires proper
early warning, preparedness, resilience-building, cross-sectoral action and greater national, regional and
international collaboration, and in this regard stressing the continued need for a coordinated response to such
outbreaks of major infectious diseases,
Recognizing the primary role of Member States in preparing for and responding to outbreaks of infectious
disease, including those that become humanitarian crises, highlighting the critical role played by Member States, the
World Health Organization as the directing and coordinating authority of international health work, the United
Nations humanitarian system, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and other
humanitarian actors in providing financial, technical and in-kind support in order to bring epidemics under control,
and recognizing also the need to strengthen national health systems, including capacity-building for developing
countries,
Recognizing also that developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, remain acutely vulnerable to human and economic loss resulting from natural hazards, and
recognizing the need for strengthening international cooperation, as appropriate, to strengthen their resilience in
this regard,
Recognizing further that inclusive economic growth and sustainable development are essential for the
prevention of and preparedness for natural disasters and other emergencies,
Recognizing, in this respect, that building national and local preparedness and response capacity through, inter
alia, appropriate and conducive public policies and international assistance, is critical to a more predictable and
effective response and contributes to the achievement of humanitarian and development objectives, including
enhanced resilience and a reduced need for humanitarian response,
Emphasizing that enhancing international cooperation on emergency humanitarian assistance is essential, and
reaffirming its resolution 69/243 of 23 December 2014 on international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in
the field of natural disasters, from relief to development,
Emphasizing also the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming, in
situations in which military capacity and assets are used as a last resort to support the implementation of
humanitarian assistance, the need for their use to be undertaken with the consent of the affected State and in
conformity with international law, including international humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian principles,
_______________
157

118

Resolution 69/283, annex II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Condemning all acts of violence, including direct attacks, against humanitarian personnel and facilities,
including medical personnel, their facilities and other humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties, in a majority of cases affecting locally recruited personnel, noting with concern the negative implications for
the provision of humanitarian assistance to populations in need, and in this regard welcoming the efforts such as the
Health Care in Danger project of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, together with States,
international and non-governmental organizations and other relevant stakeholders, to strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law by raising awareness and promoting preparedness to address the grave and serious
humanitarian consequences arising from such violence,
Recognizing the high number of people affected by humanitarian emergencies, including the unprecedented
number of people who are forcibly displaced, of whom a majority are women and children, owing to conflict,
persecution, violence and other reasons, including terrorism, and who are often displaced for protracted periods,
wherein the national authorities have the primary duty and responsibility to provide protection and humanitarian
assistance and promote durable solutions for internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction, bearing in mind
their particular needs,
Expressing concern about the particular difficulties faced by the millions of refugees in protracted situations,
recognizing that the average length of stay has continued to grow, and emphasizing the need to redouble
international efforts and cooperation to find practical and comprehensive approaches to resolving their plight and to
realize durable solutions for them, consistent with international law and relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Recognizing the importance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949,158 which include a vital legal framework for
the protection of civilian persons in time of war, including the provision of humanitarian assistance,
Noting with grave concern that violence, including gender-based violence, particularly sexual violence, and
violence against children, continues to be deliberately directed against civilian populations during and after
humanitarian situations,
Noting with appreciation the efforts that the United Nations continues to make to improve humanitarian
response, including by strengthening humanitarian response capacities, improving humanitarian coordination,
identifying and integrating appropriate innovation into humanitarian preparedness, response and recovery,
enhancing predictable and adequate funding and strengthening the accountability of all stakeholders, and
recognizing the importance of strengthening emergency administrative procedures and funding to allow for an
effective and needs-based response to emergencies,
Recognizing that, in strengthening the coordination of humanitarian assistance in the field, the organizations of
the United Nations system should continue to consult and work in close coordination with national Governments,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it and helps to contextualize its means of implementation
targets with concrete policies and actions,
1. Welcomes the outcome of the eighteenth humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and Social
Council at its substantive session of 2015;159
_______________
158
159

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/70/3), chap. IX.

119

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue his efforts to strengthen the coordination and
accountability of humanitarian assistance and leadership within the United Nations humanitarian response system,
including through the transformative agenda of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, and calls upon relevant
United Nations organizations and other relevant intergovernmental organizations, as well as other humanitarian and
development actors, to continue to work with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat to enhance the coordination, effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian assistance;
3. Also requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue to improve dialogue with all Member
States on the relevant processes, activities and deliberations of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee;
4. Encourages Member States and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to
improve dialogue and collaboration on humanitarian issues, at the global and field levels, including on policy, in
order to foster a more consultative and inclusive approach to humanitarian assistance;
5. Welcomes the continued efforts by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to build
partnerships with regional organizations and non-traditional donors and the private sector, and encourages Member
States and the United Nations system to continue to strengthen partnerships at the global, regional, national and
local levels in support of national efforts in order to effectively cooperate to provide humanitarian assistance to those
in need and ensure that their collaborative efforts adhere to the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and
independence;
6. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and humanitarian and development
organizations to continue to assess and improve, together with other relevant stakeholders, including the private
sector, how innovation can be more systematically identified and integrated into humanitarian action in a sustainable
manner and to promote the sharing of best practices and lessons learned on innovative tools, processes and
approaches, including those from large-scale natural disasters and humanitarian crises of a protracted nature, that
could improve the effectiveness and quality of humanitarian response, and in this regard encourages all relevant
stakeholders to continue to support the efforts of Member States, in particular developing countries, to strengthen
their capacities, including through facilitating access to information and communication technologies;
7. Welcomes innovative practices that draw on the knowledge of people affected by humanitarian
emergencies to develop locally sustainable solutions and to produce life-saving items locally, with minimal
logistical and infrastructure implications;
8. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and, as appropriate, other relevant
humanitarian actors to continue efforts to improve the humanitarian response to natural and man-made disasters and
complex emergencies by further strengthening humanitarian response capacities at all levels, by continuing to
strengthen the provision and coordination of humanitarian assistance at the global, regional and field levels,
including through existing cluster coordination mechanisms and in support of national authorities of the affected
State, as appropriate, and by further enhancing efficiency, transparency, performance and accountability;
9. Recognizes the benefits of engagement and coordination with relevant humanitarian actors to the
effectiveness of humanitarian response, and encourages the United Nations to continue to pursue efforts to
strengthen partnerships at the global level with the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, relevant
humanitarian non-governmental organizations, other participants in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and other
relevant stakeholders;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen the support provided to United Nations
resident/humanitarian coordinators and to United Nations country teams, including by providing necessary training,
identifying resources and improving the identification of and the selection process for United Nations
resident/humanitarian coordinators, and enhancing their performance accountability;
11. Calls upon the Chair of the United Nations Development Group and the Emergency Relief Coordinator
to continue to enhance their consultations before presenting final recommendations on the selection process for
resident coordinators in countries likely to require significant humanitarian response operations;
12. Requests the United Nations to continue to strengthen its ability to recruit and deploy appropriately
senior, skilled and experienced humanitarian staff quickly and flexibly, giving paramount consideration to the
highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, while paying due regard to gender equality and to
recruiting on as wide a geographical basis as possible, and in this regard encourages the United Nations Development
120

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Group to strengthen the resident coordinator system, on which the humanitarian coordinator system is based, in
order to ensure the full implementation of the management and accountability system of the Group and the resident
coordinator system;
13. Recognizes that diversity of humanitarian staff brings value to humanitarian work and understanding of
developing countries’ contexts, and requests the Secretary-General to address further the insufficient diversity in
geographical representation and gender balance in the composition of the humanitarian staff of the Secretariat and
other United Nations humanitarian agencies, in particular regarding professional and high-level staff, and to report
on measures taken in this regard in his annual report;
14. Also recognizes that accountability is an integral part of effective humanitarian assistance, and
emphasizes the need for enhancing the accountability of humanitarian actors at all stages of humanitarian assistance;
15. Urges Member States to continue to seek to prevent, respond to, investigate and prosecute acts of sexual
and gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies in a strengthened manner, calls upon Member States and
relevant organizations to improve coordination, strengthen capacity, seek to ensure that humanitarian relief is
provided in a way that mitigates the risk of gender-based violence, and strengthen support services for victims and
survivors of such violence beginning in the earliest stages of emergency response, taking into account their unique
and specific needs resulting from the impact of such violence, and calls for a more effective response in that regard;
16. Also urges Member States to continue to seek to prevent, respond to, investigate and prosecute violations
and abuses against children in humanitarian emergencies, calls upon Member States and relevant organizations to
strengthen support services for children affected by humanitarian emergencies, and calls for a more effective
response in that regard;
17. Reaffirms the importance of implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030157 to ensure the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the
economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities and countries,
and underlines the importance of tackling the underlying disaster risk drivers and of integrating a disaster risk
reduction perspective into humanitarian assistance to prevent new and reduce existing disaster risk;
18. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to
continue to build the capacity at all levels of government and within local organizations and communities to better
prepare for hazards, reduce disaster risk, build resilience, and better respond to and recover from and build back
better after disasters, and to complement, rather than substitute for or displace, national capacities to respond to
crises, especially where those crises are prolonged or recurrent;
19. Urges Member States, the United Nations humanitarian system, regional organizations, nongovernmental organizations, the private sector and other humanitarian actors to reinforce preparedness and response
capabilities in relation to those outbreaks of infectious disease that trigger a humanitarian crisis, and calls upon the
United Nations humanitarian system and humanitarian organizations to respond rapidly, in coordination with
affected States, to humanitarian crises triggered by outbreaks of infectious disease, including outbreaks occurring in
humanitarian settings;
20. Calls upon Member States and the international community to provide adequate, sustainable and timely
resources for disaster risk reduction in order to build resilience, including through complementary humanitarian and
development programming and by further strengthening national and local capacities to prevent, prepare for and
respond to humanitarian emergencies, and furthermore encourages closer cooperation between national
stakeholders and humanitarian and development actors in this regard;
21. Encourages closer cooperation between development and humanitarian actors, in coordination with
Member States, to ensure that all relevant actors work together through a longer-term approach, and in this regard
emphasizes that transitions from humanitarian response to longer-term development need to be planned over a
multi-year framework, as appropriate, and linked with development planning processes, while integrating key
stakeholders, such as Governments, regional organizations and international financial institutions, as appropriate;
22. Encourages the United Nations system, humanitarian organizations and development organizations to
continue their efforts to mainstream preparedness, early action and early recovery into their programming,
acknowledges that preparedness, early action and early recovery should receive further funding, and in this regard
encourages the provision of timely, flexible, predictable and adequate resources, including from both humanitarian
and development budgets, as appropriate;
121

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

23. Urges Member States, the United Nations and other relevant organizations to take further steps to
provide a coordinated emergency response to the food and nutrition needs of affected populations, while aiming to
ensure that such steps are supportive of national strategies and programmes aimed at improving food security;
24. Expresses concern about the challenges related to, inter alia, safe access to and use of fuel, firewood,
alternative energy, water and sanitation, shelter and food and health-care services in humanitarian emergencies, and
notes with appreciation initiatives at the national and international levels, including those that more systematically
identify and integrate innovative approaches and share best practices, that promote effective cooperation in
this regard;
25. Encourages the international community, including relevant United Nations organizations and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, to support efforts of Member States aimed at
strengthening their capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters and to support efforts, as appropriate, to
strengthen systems, especially early warning systems, for identifying and monitoring disaster risk, including
vulnerability and natural hazards;
26. Welcomes the growing number of initiatives undertaken at the regional and national levels to promote
the implementation of the Guidelines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster Relief
and Initial Recovery Assistance, encourages Member States and, where applicable, regional organizations to take
further steps to review and strengthen operational and legal frameworks for international disaster relief, taking into
account the Guidelines, as appropriate, and welcomes the valuable support that national Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies are providing to their Governments in this area, in collaboration with the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
partners;
27. Encourages States to create an enabling environment for the capacity-building of local authorities and of
national and local non-governmental and community-based organizations in order to ensure better preparedness in
providing timely, effective and predictable humanitarian assistance, and encourages the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations to provide support to such efforts, including, as appropriate, under the Common
Framework for Preparedness of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, the United Nations Development Group and
the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, through the transfer of technology and expertise to developing
countries and through support to programmes aimed at enhancing the coordination capacities of affected States;
28. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to provide emergency
assistance in ways that are supportive of recovery and long-term development, where appropriate, including through
prioritizing humanitarian tools that strengthen resilience, such as, but not limited to, cash transfers, local
procurement of food and services and social safety nets;
29. Encourages Member States and the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies
to scale up both social protection policies and cash transfer mechanisms in humanitarian response and in building
resilience for populations in situations of vulnerability, including in humanitarian emergencies of a protracted nature,
protracted displacement and natural disasters, to more effectively respond to needs, support the development of
local markets and strengthen national capacities;
30. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations organizations to examine their own financing
mechanisms in order to improve, where possible, fast and flexible financing for preparedness, response and early
recovery;
31. Takes note of the efforts of Member States, the United Nations system and the international community
to strengthen preparedness and local, national and regional humanitarian response capacity, and calls upon the
United Nations and relevant partners to continue support in this regard;
32. Encourages Member States, and calls upon relevant humanitarian organizations, to work closely with
national institutions, including local governments and the private sector, as appropriate, to examine effective,
context-specific ways to be better prepared for, respond to and recover from increasing emergencies in urban areas,
welcomes the initiative to hold the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development
(Habitat III), in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016, and notes the importance of addressing, as appropriate, within
the new urban agenda, policies to ensure a more effective emergency response in urban areas;
122

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

33. Reiterates the need to protect and respect educational facilities, consistent with international
humanitarian law, and encourages efforts to provide safe and enabling learning environments and quality education
for all, including through the use of new technologies and innovations, especially for girls and boys, in humanitarian
emergencies, including in order to contribute to a smooth transition from relief to development;
34. Encourages the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to work with Member
States and relevant United Nations entities to facilitate the exchange of updated, accurate and reliable information,
including through mutually comprehensible harmonized data, in order to ensure better assessment of needs in order
to improve preparedness and humanitarian response;
35. Calls upon relevant United Nations organizations to support the improvement of the humanitarian
programme cycle, in particular the development of strategic response plans and humanitarian needs overviews,
including consolidated appeals processes, in consultation with the affected States in order to strengthen the
coordination of humanitarian action, to meet the needs of people affected by humanitarian emergencies;
36. Encourages Member States to commit and to disburse in a timely fashion humanitarian funding based
on, and in accordance with, the humanitarian appeals brought forward by the United Nations;
37. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations organizations to explore innovative risksharing mechanisms and to base risk management funding on objective data;
38. Requests Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations of the United Nations system and other
relevant humanitarian actors to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women in all stages of
humanitarian response, including disaster preparedness and needs assessments, and to take into account the specific
humanitarian needs and vulnerabilities of all components of the affected population, in particular girls, boys,
women, older persons and persons with disabilities, including in the design and implementation of disaster risk
reduction, humanitarian and recovery programming and post-humanitarian emergency reconstruction, and in this
regard encourages efforts to ensure gender mainstreaming, including in the analysis of allocations and programme
implementation, and through greater use of the gender marker;
39. Calls upon Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations of the United Nations system and other
relevant humanitarian actors to take measures to ensure the full participation of women and men, including persons
with disabilities and older persons, in all stages of decision-making and to engage adolescents and young people on
their specific needs, to ensure that humanitarian assistance is informed, appropriate and effective;
40. Calls upon the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations, in coordination with
Member States, to engage all people affected by crises, in particular those most at risk, including through
communication, enabling their participation in relevant processes and supporting their efforts and capacities to meet
their different needs, while taking into account, as appropriate, their culture, traditions and local customs;
41. Calls upon United Nations humanitarian organizations, in consultation with Member States, as
appropriate, to strengthen the evidence base for humanitarian assistance by further developing common
mechanisms to improve the quality, transparency and reliability of, and make further progress towards, common
humanitarian needs assessments, including through improved collection, analysis and reporting of sex-, age- and
disability-disaggregated data and taking into account environmental impact, to assess their performance in
assistance and to ensure the most effective use of humanitarian resources by those organizations;
42. Calls upon the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to enhance accountability to Member
States, including affected States, and all other stakeholders, including local governments, relevant local
organizations and other actors, as well as affected populations, and to further strengthen humanitarian response
efforts, including by monitoring and evaluating the provision of their humanitarian assistance, incorporating lessons
learned into programming and consulting with the affected populations so that their needs are appropriately assessed
and effectively addressed;
43. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to identify better ways of
working to address the increasing capacity and resource gap, in order to effectively meet the needs of affected
populations;
44. Calls upon donors to provide adequate, timely, predictable and flexible resources based on and in
proportion to assessed needs, including for underfunded and forgotten emergencies, to consider providing early and
123

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

multi-year commitments to pooled humanitarian funds, including the Central Emergency Response Fund and
country-based pooled funds, and to continue to support diverse humanitarian funding channels, encourages efforts
to adhere to the Principles and Good Practice of Humanitarian Donorship160 and to improve burden-sharing among
donors, and in this respect encourages the private sector, civil society and other relevant entities to make relevant
contributions, complementary to those of other sources;
45. Welcomes the important achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in ensuring a more
timely and predictable response to humanitarian emergencies, stresses the importance of continuing to improve the
functioning of the Fund, and in this regard encourages the United Nations funds and programmes and the
specialized agencies to review and evaluate, where necessary, their partnership policies and practices in order to
ensure the timely disbursement of funds from the Fund to implementing partners in order to ensure that resources
are used in the most efficient, effective, accountable and transparent manner possible;
46. Calls upon all Member States, and invites the private sector and all concerned individuals and
institutions, to consider increasing their voluntary contributions to the Central Emergency Response Fund and to
continue to reinforce and strengthen the Fund as the global emergency response fund, and emphasizes that
contributions should be additional to current commitments to humanitarian programming and should not be to the
detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for development;
47. Calls upon Member States that are in a position to do so and development and humanitarian partners, in
their efforts to provide flexible resources, to consider ways of better mainstreaming the need for preparedness and
building resilience in the provision of humanitarian and development assistance, including reconstruction and
rehabilitation, inter alia, with a view to ensuring smooth transition from relief to development;
48. Encourages humanitarian and development actors to pursue, where appropriate, common riskmanagement and resilience objectives, achievable through joint analysis, planning, programming and funding;
49. Calls upon all Member States that are in a position to do so to increase their voluntary contributions to
humanitarian emergencies, including through flexible funding for multi-year purposes, and in this context reiterates
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should benefit from adequate and more predictable
funding;
50. Encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations humanitarian organizations, to
ensure that the basic humanitarian needs of affected populations, including clean water, food, shelter, health,
including sexual and reproductive health, education and protection, are addressed as components of humanitarian
response, including through providing timely and adequate resources, while ensuring that their collaborative efforts
fully adhere to humanitarian principles;
51. Also encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations humanitarian
organizations, to ensure reliable and safe access to sexual and reproductive health-care services in order to protect
women, adolescent girls and infants from preventable mortality and morbidity;
52. Encourages Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to continue to work
together to understand and address the different protection needs of affected populations, particularly the most
vulnerable, in humanitarian crises and ensure that these needs are adequately integrated into preparedness, response
and recovery efforts;
53. Reaffirms the obligation of all States and parties to an armed conflict to protect civilians in armed
conflicts in accordance with international humanitarian law, and invites States to promote a culture of protection,
taking into account the particular needs of women, children, older persons and persons with disabilities;
54. Also reaffirms the obligations of all States and parties to an armed conflict, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, to respect and protect humanitarian personnel, including medical personnel and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, and
hospitals and other medical facilities, which must not be attacked, and to ensure that the wounded and sick receive,
to the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the medical care and attention required;
_______________
160

124

A/58/99-E/2003/94, annex II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

55. Calls upon States to adopt preventive measures and effective responses to acts of violence committed
against civilian populations in armed conflicts and to ensure that those responsible are promptly brought to justice,
in accordance with national law and their obligations under international law;
56. Recognizes the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement161 as an important international framework
for the protection of internally displaced persons, and that forced displacement is not only a humanitarian but also a
development challenge, encourages Member States and humanitarian agencies to continue to work together, in
collaboration with host communities, in endeavours to provide a more predictable response to the needs of
internally displaced persons and in particular to address the long-term nature of displacement by adopting and
implementing long-term strategies and coherent multi-year planning, including in relation to issues such as
livelihoods, and in this regard calls for continued and enhanced international support, upon request, for the capacitybuilding efforts of States and encourages humanitarian organizations to improve coordination, including with
development organizations, to better address the needs of internally displaced persons in support of Member States
to promote durable solutions;
57. Calls upon all States and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed conflict
and in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel, as
well as the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow such personnel to efficiently perform their task of
assisting affected civilian populations, including refugees and internally displaced persons;
58. Welcomes the progress made towards further enhancing the security management system of the United
Nations, and supports the approach taken by the Secretary-General to focus the efforts of the security management
system on enabling the United Nations system to “stay and deliver” its most critical programmes even in high-risk
environments by effectively managing the risks to which personnel are exposed, including in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, and to adapt quickly to changes in local security conditions;
59. Encourages the United Nations and other relevant humanitarian actors to include, as part of their risk
management strategy, the building of good relations and trust with national and local governments and to promote
acceptance by local communities and all relevant actors in order to enable humanitarian assistance to be provided in
accordance with humanitarian principles;
60. Requests the Secretary-General to report on actions taken to enable the United Nations to continue to
strengthen its ability to recruit and deploy staff quickly, effectively and flexibly, to procure emergency relief
materials and services rapidly, cost-effectively and locally, where applicable, and to quickly disburse funds in order
to support Governments and United Nations country teams in the coordination of international humanitarian
assistance;
61. Welcomes the initiative by the Secretary-General to hold the first World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May 2016, takes note of the ongoing preparatory process and consultations,
including the regional and global consultations, and requests the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to ensure an inclusive, consultative and transparent preparatory process that includes the participation and
contributions of Member States and stakeholders to the process and the outcome of the Summit, requests the
Secretary-General to further engage Member States, as well as other stakeholders, and to present a road map on the
preparations for the Summit that includes the expected role of Member States and stakeholders and the expected
outcome, scope and follow-up process, and to report on the outcome of the Summit as soon as possible, within
existing resources;
62. Urges all countries to integrate into their respective national policies and development frameworks the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,162 which includes a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set
of universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, and, inter alia, seeks to address the
needs of the most vulnerable and to leave no one behind;
_______________
161
162

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
Resolution 70/1.

125

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

63. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its 2016 session, on progress made in strengthening the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, including on the process and update on the World Humanitarian
Summit, and to submit a report to the Assembly on the detailed use of the Central Emergency Response Fund.
RESOLUTION 70/107
A/RES/70/107

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 10 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.30 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the
Group of 77 and China), Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

70/107. International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991, the annex to which contains the guiding principles for
the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations system, as well as
all its resolutions on international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development, and recalling the resolutions of the humanitarian segments of the substantive sessions of the
Economic and Social Council,
Reaffirming also the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of
humanitarian assistance,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration163 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,164
adopted by the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Sendai, Japan, from
14 to 18 March 2015,
Recognizing that the Sendai Framework applies to the risk of small-scale and large-scale, frequent and
infrequent, sudden and slow-onset disasters caused by natural or man-made hazards, as well as related environmental,
technological and biological hazards and risks,
Noting with concern that slow-onset disasters such as droughts are on the rise in many places and can have
significant impacts on affected populations and lead to increased vulnerability to other hazards,
Recognizing the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction as the main forum at the global level for
strategic advice coordination and partnership development for disaster risk reduction,
Noting the determination of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, as expressed in its decision 2/CP.18,165 to adopt a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed
outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all parties at its twenty-first session, held in Paris from
30 November to 11 December 2015, and for it to come into effect and be implemented from 2020,
Emphasizing the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, reaffirming, in situations in
which military capacity and assets are used as a last resort to support the implementation of humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters, the need for their use to be undertaken with the consent of the affected State and in
conformity with international law, including international humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian principles, and
emphasizing also in this regard the need for Member States to coordinate with all relevant actors early on in a
disaster response so as to ensure the predictable, coherent and needs-based deployment of military assets and
personnel supporting humanitarian assistance,
_______________
163

Resolution 69/283, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.
165
See FCCC/CP/2012/8/Add.1.
164

126

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Emphasizing also that the affected State has the primary responsibility in the initiation, organization,
coordination and implementation of humanitarian assistance within its territory and in the facilitation of the work of
humanitarian organizations in mitigating the consequences of natural disasters,
Emphasizing further the primary responsibility of each State to undertake disaster risk reduction and
management, including through the implementation of and follow-up to the Sendai Framework, as well as response
and early recovery efforts, in order to minimize the impact of disasters, while recognizing the importance of
international cooperation in support of the efforts of affected countries which may have limited capacities in
this regard,
Expressing its deep concern at the increasing challenges to Member States and to the United Nations
humanitarian response capacity to deal with the consequences of natural disasters, given the effects of global
challenges, including the impact of climate change, the adverse impacts of the global financial and economic crisis
and volatile food prices on food security and nutrition, and other key factors that exacerbate the vulnerability of
populations and exposure to natural hazards and the impact of natural disasters,
Expressing its deep concern also that rural and urban poor communities in the developing world are the
hardest hit by the effects of increased disaster risk,
Noting with concern that persons with disabilities, older persons, women and children are disproportionately
affected in natural disasters,
Acknowledging the impacts of rapid urbanization in the context of natural disasters and that urban disaster
preparedness and responses require appropriate disaster risk reduction strategies, including in urban planning, and
early recovery strategies implemented from the initial stage of relief operations, as well as mitigation, rehabilitation
and sustainable development strategies, and that action by humanitarian and development actors in urban areas
needs to recognize the complexity of cities and build urban resilience, with improved urban expertise and capacities
within organizations, while building on the capabilities, opportunities and potential new partnerships present in
urban settings,
Welcoming the initiative to hold the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development (Habitat III), in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016, and noting the importance of addressing, as
appropriate, within the new urban agenda, policies to ensure a more effective response to natural disasters in
urban areas,
Noting that local communities are the first responders in most disasters, underlining the critical role played by
in-country capacities in disaster risk reduction, including preparedness, as well as response and recovery, and
acknowledging the need to support efforts of Member States to develop and enhance national and local capacities
which are fundamental to improving the overall delivery of humanitarian assistance,
Recognizing the adverse effects of climate change as contributors to environmental degradation and extreme
weather events, which may, in certain instances, among other factors, contribute to disaster-induced human mobility,
Recognizing also the high numbers of persons affected by natural disasters, including in this respect internally
displaced persons,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in support of the efforts of the affected States in
dealing with natural disasters in all their phases, in particular in preparedness, response and the early recovery phase,
and of strengthening the response capacity of countries affected by disaster,
Recognizing the progress made by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER) in its mission,
Noting the progress of the Global Framework for Climate Services in developing and providing science-based
climate information and prediction for climate risk management and for adaptation to climate variability and
change, and looking forward to continued implementation,
Welcoming the important role played by Member States, including developing countries, that have granted
necessary and continued generous assistance to countries and peoples stricken by natural disasters,
Recognizing the significant role played by national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, as part of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, in disaster preparedness and risk reduction, disaster response,
rehabilitation and development,
127

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing also the significant achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in facilitating lifesaving assistance to crisis-affected people by providing timely funding, enabling humanitarian organizations and
their implementing partners to act quickly when tragedy strikes and steer resources to crises that do not receive the
attention that they need and deserve, emphasizing the need to broaden and diversify the income base of the Fund,
and welcoming in this context its tenth anniversary,
Emphasizing the need to address vulnerability and to integrate disaster risk reduction, including preparedness,
into all phases of natural disaster management, post-natural disaster recovery and development planning through
close collaboration of all relevant actors and sectors,
Reaffirming that strengthening resilience contributes to withstanding, adapting to and quickly recovering from
disasters,
Recognizing the changing scope, scale and complexity of humanitarian crises, including natural disasters, and
their adverse impact on efforts to achieve economic growth, sustainable development and internationally agreed
development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,166 and noting the positive contribution that these
efforts can make in strengthening the resilience of populations to such disasters,
Recognizing also the clear relationship between emergency response, rehabilitation and development, and
reaffirming that, in order to ensure a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, emergency
assistance must be provided in ways that will be supportive of short-term and medium-term recovery, leading to
long-term development, and that certain emergency measures should be seen as a step towards sustainable
development,
Emphasizing, in this context, the important role of development organizations and other relevant stakeholders
in supporting national efforts to mitigate the consequences of natural disasters,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;167

2. Expresses its deep concern at the increasing impact of natural disasters, resulting in massive losses of life
and property worldwide, in particular in vulnerable societies lacking adequate capacity to mitigate effectively the
long-term negative social, economic and environmental consequences of natural disasters;
3. Reaffirms the importance of implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030,164 to ensure the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the
economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities and countries,
and underlines the importance of tackling the underlying disaster risk drivers and of integrating a disaster risk
reduction perspective into humanitarian assistance to prevent new and reduce existing disaster risk;
4. Emphasizes the need to promote and strengthen disaster preparedness activities at all levels, in particular
in hazard-prone areas, and encourages Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian
and development actors to increase funding and cooperation for disaster risk reduction activities, including disaster
preparedness;
5. Encourages Member States to provide dedicated financial contributions to preparedness, response and
recovery efforts in a harmonized, flexible and complementary approach that fully utilizes and helps to coordinate
humanitarian and development funding options and potential;
6. Calls upon all States to adopt, where required, and to continue to implement effectively, necessary
legislative and other appropriate measures to mitigate the effects of natural disasters and integrate disaster risk
reduction strategies into development planning, as well as to incorporate a gender perspective into policies, planning
and funding, and in this regard requests the international community to continue to assist developing countries as
well as countries with economies in transition, as appropriate;
7. Acknowledges that climate change, among other factors, contributes to environmental degradation and to
the increase in the intensity and frequency of climate and extreme weather events, both of which amplify disaster
_______________
166
167

128

See resolution 70/1.
A/70/324.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

risk, and in this regard encourages Member States, as well as relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with their specific mandates, to support adaptation to the adverse effects of climate
change and to strengthen disaster risk reduction and early warning systems in order to minimize the humanitarian
consequences of natural disasters, including through the provision of technology and support for capacity-building
in developing countries;
8. Encourages Member States to address the humanitarian and development needs arising from natural
disaster-induced displacement, including through national policies and resilience-building, and in this regard
encourages Member States, supported by the United Nations, to develop national laws and policies on internal
displacement, as appropriate, which address such displacement, detail responsibilities and measures to minimize the
impact of disasters, protect and assist internally displaced persons following disasters, and identify and promote
durable solutions, and in this respect encourages Member States to adopt standards, as appropriate, in line with the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement,168 the Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced
Persons of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee169 and the basic principles and guidelines on development-based
evictions and displacement;170
9. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to
integrate the building of resilience and human mobility into relevant strategies, plans and legal frameworks, in
particular regarding disaster risk management and climate change adaptation, as integral elements of sustainable
development at the national and regional levels so as to help to prevent and mitigate displacement in the context of
disasters and the effects of climate change, including in urban settings where displaced persons have particular
needs, requirements and vulnerabilities;
10. Encourages Member States to strengthen operational and legal frameworks for international disaster
relief and to adopt and implement national laws and regulations, as appropriate, to reduce the impact of the
underlying drivers of disaster risk and vulnerability, and to adopt comprehensive rules and procedures for the
facilitation and regulation of international disaster assistance, drawing, as appropriate, on the Guidelines for the
Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster Relief and Initial Recovery Assistance, and calls
upon the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, relevant United Nations organizations and other
partners for technical support in achieving these aims;
11. Welcomes the effective cooperation among the affected States, relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, donor countries, regional and international financial institutions and other relevant stakeholders, such as the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, municipalities, civil society and the private sector, in the
coordination and delivery of emergency relief, and stresses the need to continue such cooperation and delivery
throughout relief operations and medium- and long-term rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, in a manner that
reduces vulnerability to future natural hazards;
12. Reiterates the commitment to support, as a matter of priority, the efforts of countries, in particular
developing countries, to strengthen their capacities at all levels in order to reduce risks, prepare for and respond
rapidly to natural disasters and mitigate their impact;
13. Urges Member States to develop, update and strengthen early warning systems, disaster preparedness
and risk reduction measures at all levels, in accordance with the Sendai Framework, taking into account their own
circumstances and capacities and in coordination with relevant actors, as appropriate, and encourages the
international community and relevant United Nations entities to continue to support national efforts in this regard;
14. Also urges Member States to improve their response to early warning information in order to ensure that
early warning leads to early action, and encourages all stakeholders to support the efforts of Member States in
this regard;
15. Encourages Member States to consider elaborating and presenting to the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction secretariat their national platforms for disaster reduction in accordance with the Sendai
Framework, and also encourages States to cooperate with each other to reach this objective;
_______________
168

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
A/HRC/13/21/Add.4.
170
A/HRC/4/18, annex I.
169

129

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16. Recognizes the importance of applying a multi-hazard approach to preparedness, and encourages
Member States, taking into account their specific circumstances, and the United Nations system to continue to apply
the approach to their preparedness activities, including by giving due regard to, inter alia, secondary environmental
hazards stemming from industrial and technological accidents;
17. Stresses that, to increase further the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, particular international
cooperation efforts should be undertaken to enhance and broaden further the utilization of national and local
capacities and, where appropriate, of regional and subregional capacities for disaster preparedness and response,
which may be made available in closer proximity to the site of a disaster, and more efficiently and at lower cost;
18. Encourages innovative practices that draw on the knowledge of people affected by natural disasters to
develop locally sustainable solutions and to produce lifesaving items locally, with minimal logistical and
infrastructure implications;
19. Stresses, in this context, the importance of strengthening international cooperation, particularly through
the effective use of multilateral mechanisms, in the timely provision of humanitarian assistance through all phases of
a disaster, from relief and recovery to development, including the provision of adequate resources;
20. Encourages all relevant stakeholders, including Member States, to take appropriate measures to reduce
and discourage the sending of unsolicited, unneeded or inappropriate relief goods in response to disasters;
21. Encourages all Member States to facilitate, to the extent possible, the transit of emergency humanitarian
assistance and development assistance and the entry of humanitarian personnel and supplies, provided in the context
of international efforts, including in the phase from relief to development, in full accordance with the provisions of
resolution 46/182 and the annex thereto, and in full respect of the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence, and their obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law;
22. Encourages Member States to put in place, as appropriate, customs measures to improve effectiveness
in responding to natural disasters;
23. Reaffirms the leading role of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat
as the focal point within the overall United Nations system for the advocacy for and coordination of humanitarian
assistance among United Nations humanitarian organizations and other humanitarian partners;
24. Welcomes the important contribution of the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
system to the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance in supporting Member States, upon their request, and the
United Nations system in preparedness and humanitarian response, and encourages the continued incorporation into
this mechanism of experts from developing countries that are prone to natural disasters;
25. Also welcomes the important contribution of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group to the
effectiveness of international urban search and rescue assistance, and encourages Member States to continue to
support the Advisory Group, in line with General Assembly resolution 57/150 of 16 December 2002;
26. Urges Member States, the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to consider the specific
and differentiated consequences of natural disasters in both rural and urban areas when designing and implementing
disaster risk reduction, prevention and mitigation, preparedness, humanitarian assistance and early recovery
strategies, giving special emphasis to addressing the needs of those living in rural and urban poor areas prone to
natural disasters;
27. Welcomes the continued efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to build
partnerships with regional organizations, traditional and non-traditional donors and the private sector, and
encourages Member States and the United Nations system to continue to strengthen partnerships at the global,
regional, national and local levels in support of national efforts in situations of natural disasters, in order to cooperate
effectively in providing humanitarian assistance to those in need and ensure that their collaborative efforts adhere to
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence;
28. Recognizes that information and telecommunications technology can play an important role in disaster
response, encourages Member States to develop emergency response telecommunications capacities, encourages
the international community to assist the efforts of developing countries in this area, where needed, including in the
130

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

recovery phase, and in this regard encourages Member States that have not acceded to or ratified the Tampere
Convention on the Provision of Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations171 to
consider doing so;
29. Encourages the further use of space-based and ground-based remote-sensing technologies, including as
provided by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency
Response (UN-SPIDER), as well as the sharing of geographical data, for the prevention, mitigation and
management of natural disasters, where appropriate, and invites Member States to continue to provide their support
to the consolidation of the United Nations capability in the area of satellite-derived geographical information for
early warning, preparedness, response and early recovery;
30. Encourages Member States to provide all support necessary, on a voluntary basis, to UN-SPIDER,
including financial support, to enable it to carry out its workplan for 2015–2016, and reiterates the importance of
enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster management and emergency
response through greater access to and use of space-based services for all countries and by facilitating capacitybuilding and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in developing countries;
31. Recognizes the opportunities for new technologies, when utilized in a coordinated fashion and based on
humanitarian principles, potentially to improve the effectiveness and accountability of humanitarian response, and
encourages Member States, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to consider engaging, inter alia, with
the volunteer and technical communities in order to make use of the variety of data and information available during
emergencies and disaster risk efforts;
32. Encourages Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and international financial
institutions to enhance the global capacity for sustainable post-disaster recovery in areas such as coordination with
traditional and non-traditional partners, identification and dissemination of lessons learned, development of
common tools and mechanisms for recovery needs assessment, strategy development and programming, and
incorporation of risk reduction into all recovery processes, and welcomes the ongoing efforts to this end;
33. Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to support national initiatives that address
the differentiated impacts of natural disasters on the affected population, including through the collection and
analysis of data disaggregated, inter alia, by sex, age and disability, using, inter alia, the existing information
provided by States, and through the development of tools, methods and procedures that will result in more timely
and useful initial needs assessments that lead to targeted and more effective assistance, and taking into account the
environmental impact;
34. Calls upon United Nations humanitarian organizations, in consultation with Member States, as
appropriate, to strengthen the evidence base for effective humanitarian assistance by further developing common
mechanisms to improve the quality, transparency and reliability of, and make further progress towards, common
humanitarian needs assessments, to assess their performance in assistance and to ensure the most effective use of
humanitarian resources by these organizations;
35. Encourages Member States to take steps to develop or to improve data collection and analysis and to
facilitate the exchange of relevant information with humanitarian and development organizations of the United
Nations, including through shared platforms and a common approach, in order to inform policy and measures
designed to address disaster risks and their consequences, to support preparedness efforts and to improve the
effectiveness of a needs-based humanitarian response, and encourages the United Nations system, as appropriate,
and other relevant actors to continue to assist developing countries in their efforts to build local and national
capacities for data collection and analysis;
36. Encourages Member States, regional organizations, the United Nations and humanitarian and
development organizations to continue to improve the identification, mapping and analysis of risks and
vulnerabilities, including the local impact of future disaster risk drivers, and the development and implementation of
appropriate strategies and programmes to address them, and in this regard encourages all the relevant stakeholders
to support Governments in capacity development, including at the regional and local levels, through the sharing of
_______________
171

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2296, No. 40906.

131

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

expertise and tools and the provision of necessary resources, as appropriate, to ensure that effective disaster
management plans and capacities are in place in accordance with national priorities for disaster risk management;
37. Stresses the importance of the full and equal participation of women in decision-making and of gender
mainstreaming in developing and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness, response and recovery
strategies, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that gender mainstreaming is better
taken into account in all aspects of humanitarian responses and activities, including the analysis of allocations and
programme implementation, and through greater use of the gender marker;
38. Encourages Governments, local authorities, the United Nations system and regional organizations, and
invites donors and other assisting countries, to address the vulnerabilities and capacities of women and girls through
gender-responsive programming, including with regard to sexual and reproductive health needs and means to
address sexual and gender-based violence and various forms of exploitation during emergencies and in post-disaster
environments, and the allocation of resources in their disaster risk reduction, response and recovery efforts in
coordination with the Governments of affected countries;
39. Emphasizes the importance of mainstreaming the perspective of persons with disabilities in disaster risk
reduction, and recognizes the need for their inclusive participation in and contribution to disaster preparedness,
emergency response, recovery and transition from relief to development, as well as the implementation of policies
and programmes that are inclusive of and accessible to persons with disabilities;
40. Encourages efforts to provide safe and enabling learning environments and quality education for all,
especially for girls and boys, in humanitarian emergencies caused by natural disasters, including in order to
contribute to a smooth transition from relief to development;
41. Encourages Member States and relevant regional and international organizations to identify and
improve the dissemination of best practices for improving disaster preparedness, response and early recovery and to
scale up successful local initiatives, as appropriate;
42. Requests the United Nations humanitarian and development organizations to improve their coordination
of disaster recovery efforts, from relief to development, inter alia, by strengthening institutional, coordination and
strategic planning efforts in disaster preparedness, resilience-building and recovery, in support of national
authorities, and by ensuring that development actors participate in strategic planning at an early stage;
43. Encourages the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to support national,
subnational and local governments and communities in their responsibility to develop long-term strategies and
multi-year operational plans for preparedness that are embedded within disaster risk reduction and resilience
strategies in line with the Sendai Framework;
44. Calls upon the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to improve the dissemination of
tools and services to support enhanced disaster risk reduction, in particular preparedness, and early recovery;
45. Calls upon relevant United Nations humanitarian and development organizations, in consultation with
Member States, to strengthen tools and mechanisms to ensure that early recovery needs and support are integrated
into the planning and implementation of disaster preparedness, humanitarian response and development cooperation
activities, as appropriate;
46. Encourages the United Nations system and humanitarian organizations to continue their efforts to
mainstream early recovery into humanitarian programming, acknowledges that early recovery is an important step
towards resilience-building and should receive further funding, and encourages the provision of timely, flexible and
predictable funding for early recovery, including through established and complementary humanitarian and
development instruments;
47. Urges Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to prioritize
risk management and shift towards an anticipatory approach to humanitarian crises in order to prevent and reduce
human suffering and economic losses;
48. Encourages Member States and the United Nations to enhance the use of common risk analysis,
including the use of the Index for Risk Management, to establish the evidence base for short-, medium- and longterm planning and joint strategies for disaster and climate risk management, capacity development and resiliencebuilding, allowing for greater prioritization of resources where the risk is greatest;
132

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

49. Encourages the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to work towards a
common understanding of underlying risks, clarify roles and responsibilities according to their respective mandates
and establish joint objectives and programmes to strengthen coordination and coherence among short-, mediumand long-term activities to progressively reduce vulnerability and manage the risk of disasters and development
setbacks over multi-year planning cycles, including through integrating risk management into national sustainable
development plans and ensuring the connectivity of humanitarian plans with longer-term sustainable development
priorities;
50. Stresses the need to strengthen resilience at all levels, and in this regard encourages Member States, the
United Nations system and other relevant actors to support efforts, as appropriate, to integrate resilience into
humanitarian and development programming, and encourages humanitarian and development actors to pursue,
where appropriate, common resilience and risk management objectives, achievable through joint analysis, planning,
programming and funding;
51. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to provide emergency
assistance in ways that are supportive of recovery and long-term development, as appropriate, including by
prioritizing humanitarian tools that strengthen resilience and support livelihoods, such as, but not limited to, cash
transfers, vouchers, local procurement of food and services and social safety nets;
52. Encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and development actors to
support humanitarian coordinators and resident coordinators in order to strengthen their capacity, inter alia, to
support the host Government in implementing preparedness measures and to coordinate preparedness activities of
country teams in support of national efforts, and encourages the United Nations system and other relevant
humanitarian actors to further strengthen the ability to quickly and flexibly deploy humanitarian professionals to
support Governments and country teams in the immediate aftermath of a disaster;
53. Encourages Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to
identify ways to improve the current financing architecture in order to better provide coherent, predictable and
flexible longer-term funding for risk management in multi-year strategies, in particular preparedness, on the basis of
a global assessment of risk, allowing for better prioritization of resources where the risk is greatest;
54. Emphasizes the need to mobilize adequate, flexible and sustainable resources for recovery, preparedness
and disaster risk reduction activities in order to ensure predictable and timely access to resources for humanitarian
assistance in emergencies resulting from disasters associated with natural hazards;
55. Welcomes the important achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in ensuring a more
timely and predictable response to humanitarian emergencies, stresses the importance of continuing to improve the
functioning of the Fund, and in this regard encourages the United Nations funds and programmes and the
specialized agencies to review and evaluate, where necessary, their partnership policies and practices in order to
ensure the timely disbursement of funds from the Fund to implementing partners in order to ensure that resources
are used in the most efficient, effective, accountable and transparent manner possible;
56. Calls upon all Member States, and invites the private sector and all concerned individuals and
institutions, to consider increasing their voluntary contributions to the Central Emergency Response Fund, and to
continue to reinforce and strengthen the Fund as the global emergency response fund, and emphasizes that
contributions should be additional to current commitments to humanitarian programming and should not be to the
detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for development;
57. Invites Member States, the private sector and all other relevant stakeholders to harness their differentiated
skills, capacities and resources, and also to consider voluntary contributions to humanitarian funding mechanisms;
58. Strongly encourages giving appropriate consideration to disaster risk reduction and the building of
resilience to disasters as integral elements of sustainable development and in the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development166 and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development172 and promoting a complementary and coherent approach between these agendas
and the Sendai Framework;
_______________
172

Resolution 69/313, annex.

133

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

59. Strongly encourages all relevant actors to work to ensure a comprehensive, coherent, systematic and
people-centred approach to managing risks, including through the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Sendai Framework and the outcomes of the twenty-first session of the Conference of Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development (Habitat III) and the World Humanitarian Summit;
60. Welcomes the initiative by the Secretary-General to hold the first World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May 2016, takes note of the ongoing preparatory process and consultations,
including the regional and global consultations, and requests the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to ensure an inclusive, consultative and transparent preparatory process that includes the participation and
contributions of Member States and stakeholders to the process and the outcome of the Summit, and requests the
Secretary-General to further engage Member States, as well as other stakeholders, and to present a road map on the
preparations for the Summit that includes the expected role of Member States and stakeholders, and the expected
outcome, scope and follow-up process;
61. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the international response to natural disasters and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session and to include in his report recommendations
on how to ensure that humanitarian assistance is provided in ways supportive of the transition from relief to
development.
RESOLUTION 70/108
A/RES/70/108

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 10 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.18 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe

70/108. Assistance to the Palestinian people
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/242 of 19 December 2014, as well as its previous resolutions on the question,
Recalling also the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements in
Washington, D.C., on 13 September 1993, by the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people,173 and the subsequent implementation agreements
concluded by the two sides,
Recalling further all relevant international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, and, in
particular, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,174 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,174 the Convention on the Rights of the Child175 and the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,176
Gravely concerned at the difficult living conditions and humanitarian situation affecting the Palestinian
people, in particular women and children, throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza
Strip where economic recovery and vast infrastructure repair, rehabilitation and development are urgently needed,
especially in the aftermath of the conflict of July and August 2014,
Conscious of the urgent need for improvement in the economic and social infrastructure of the occupied
territory,
_______________
173

A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
175
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
176
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
174

134

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming, in this context, the development of projects, notably on infrastructure, to revive the Palestinian
economy and improve the living conditions of the Palestinian people, stressing the need to create the appropriate
conditions to facilitate the implementation of these projects, and noting the contribution of partners in the region and
of the international community,
Aware that development is difficult under occupation and is best promoted in circumstances of peace and
stability,
Noting the great economic and social challenges facing the Palestinian people and their leadership,
Emphasizing the importance of the safety and well-being of all people, in particular women and children, in
the whole Middle East region, the promotion of which is facilitated, inter alia, in a stable and secure environment,
Deeply concerned about the negative impact, including the health and psychological consequences, of
violence on the present and future well-being of children in the region,
Conscious of the urgent necessity for international assistance to the Palestinian people, taking into account the
Palestinian priorities, and recalling in this regard the National Early Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza,
Expressing grave concern about the grave humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, and underlining the
importance of emergency and humanitarian assistance and the need for the advancement of reconstruction in the
Gaza Strip,
Welcoming the results of the Conference to Support Middle East Peace, convened in Washington, D.C., on
1 October 1993, the establishment of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians and the work being done by the World Bank as its secretariat and the establishment of the
Consultative Group, as well as all follow-up meetings and international mechanisms established to provide
assistance to the Palestinian people,
Underlining the importance of the Cairo International Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, held on
12 October 2014, and urging the timely and full disbursement of pledges for expediting the provision of
humanitarian assistance and the reconstruction process,
Recalling the International Donors’ Conference for the Palestinian State, held in Paris on 17 December 2007,
the Berlin Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil Security and the Rule of Law, held on 24 June 2008, the
Palestine Investment Conferences, held in Bethlehem from 21 to 23 May 2008 and on 2 and 3 June 2010, and the
International Conference in Support of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009,
Welcoming the ministerial meetings of the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development, convened in Tokyo in February 2013 and in Jakarta in March 2014, as a forum for the
mobilization of political and economic assistance, including through exchanges of expertise and lessons learned, in
support of Palestinian development,
Welcoming also the latest meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, held in Brussels on 27 May 2015 and in New York on 25 September 2013, 22 September
2014 and 30 September 2015,
Welcoming further the activities of the Joint Liaison Committee, which provides a forum in which economic
policy and practical matters related to donor assistance are discussed with the Palestinian Authority,
Welcoming the implementation of the Palestinian National Development Plan 2011–2013 on governance,
economy, social development and infrastructure and the adoption of the Palestinian National Development
Plan 2014–2016: State-building to Sovereignty, and stressing the need for continued international support for the
Palestinian State-building process, as outlined in the summary by the Chair of the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee held on 22 September 2014,
Stressing the need for the full engagement of the United Nations in the process of building Palestinian
institutions and in providing broad assistance to the Palestinian people,
135

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing, in this regard, the positive contribution of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework, which is aimed, inter alia, at enhancing developmental support and assistance to the Palestinian people
and strengthening institutional capacity in line with Palestinian national priorities,
Welcoming steps to ease the restrictions on movement and access in the West Bank, while stressing the need
for further steps to be taken in this regard, and recognizing that such steps would improve living conditions and the
situation on the ground and could promote further Palestinian economic development,
Welcoming also the tripartite agreement facilitated by the United Nations regarding access to the Gaza Strip,
and calling for its full implementation and for complementary measures that address the need for a fundamental
change in policy that allows for the sustained and regular opening of the border crossings for the movement of
persons and goods, including for humanitarian and commercial flows and for the reconstruction and economic
recovery of Gaza,
Stressing that the situation in the Gaza Strip is unsustainable and that a durable ceasefire agreement must lead
to a fundamental improvement in the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and ensure the
safety and well-being of civilians on both sides,
Stressing also the urgency of reaching a durable solution to the crisis in Gaza through the full implementation
of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009, including by preventing the illicit trafficking in arms
and ammunition and by ensuring the sustained reopening of the crossing points on the basis of existing agreements,
including the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access between the Palestinian Authority and Israel,
Stressing, in this regard, the importance of the effective exercise by the Palestinian Authority of its full
government responsibilities in the Gaza Strip in all fields, including through its presence at the Gaza crossing points,
Noting the active participation of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority in the activities of the Special Envoys of the Quartet,
Reaffirming the necessity of achieving a comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict in all its aspects,
on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967,
338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002, 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003, 1850 (2008)
of 16 December 2008 and 1860 (2009), as well as the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference and the
principle of land for peace, in order to ensure a political solution, with two States – Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable Palestinian State – living side by side in peace and security and mutual
recognition,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,177
Expressing grave concern about continuing violence against civilians,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;177

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his rapid response and ongoing efforts regarding
assistance to the Palestinian people, including with regard to the emergency humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Member States, United Nations bodies and intergovernmental,
regional and non-governmental organizations that have provided and continue to provide assistance to the
Palestinian people;
4. Stresses the importance of the work of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Palestinian Authority and of the steps taken under the auspices of the Secretary-General to ensure the
achievement of a coordinated mechanism for United Nations activities throughout the occupied territories;

_______________
177

136

A/70/76-E/2015/57.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Urges Member States, international financial institutions of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and regional and interregional organizations to extend, as rapidly and as
generously as possible, economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people, in close cooperation with the
Palestine Liberation Organization and through official Palestinian institutions;
6. Welcomes the meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians of 25 September 2013, 22 September 2014 and 27 May and 30 September 2015, the
outcome of the Cairo International Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, held on 12 October 2014, and the
generous donor response to support the needs of the Palestinian people, and urges the rapid disbursement of donor
pledges;
7. Stresses the importance of following up on the results of the Cairo International Conference on Palestine:
Reconstructing Gaza, to effectively promote economic recovery and reconstruction in a timely and sustainable
manner;
8. Calls upon donors that have not yet converted their budget support pledges into disbursements to
transfer funds as soon as possible, encourages all donors to increase their direct assistance to the Palestinian
Authority in accordance with its government programme in order to enable it to build a viable and prosperous
Palestinian State, underlines the need for equitable burden sharing by donors in this effort, and encourages donors to
consider aligning funding cycles with the Palestinian Authority’s national budget cycle;
9. Calls upon relevant organizations and agencies of the United Nations system to intensify their assistance
in response to the urgent needs of the Palestinian people in accordance with priorities set forth by the
Palestinian side;
10. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, and recognizes the vital role of the Agency in providing humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip;
11. Calls upon the international community to provide urgently needed assistance and services in an effort
to alleviate the difficult humanitarian situation being faced by Palestinian women, children and their families and to
help in the reconstruction and development of relevant Palestinian institutions;
12. Stresses the role that all funding instruments, including the European Commission’s PalestinianEuropean Mechanism for the Management of Socioeconomic Aid and the World Bank trust fund, have been
playing in directly assisting the Palestinian people;
13. Urges Member States to open their markets to exports of Palestinian products on the most favourable
terms, consistent with appropriate trading rules, and to implement fully existing trade and cooperation agreements;
14. Calls upon the international donor community to expedite the delivery of pledged assistance to the
Palestinian people to meet their urgent needs;
15. Stresses, in this context, the importance of ensuring free humanitarian access to the Palestinian people
and the free movement of persons and goods;
16. Also stresses the need for the full implementation by both parties of existing agreements, including the
Agreement on Movement and Access and the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, of 15 November 2005, to
allow for the freedom of movement of the Palestinian civilian population, as well as for imports and exports, within
and into and out of the Gaza Strip;
17. Further stresses the need to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel, premises,
facilities, equipment, vehicles and supplies, as well as the need to ensure safe and unhindered access by
humanitarian personnel and delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow such personnel to efficiently
perform their task of assisting affected civilian populations;
18. Urges the international donor community, United Nations agencies and organizations and nongovernmental organizations to extend to the Palestinian people, as rapidly as possible, emergency economic
assistance and humanitarian assistance, particularly in the Gaza Strip, to counter the impact of the current crisis;
137

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

19. Stresses the need for the continued implementation of the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations of
29 April 1994, fifth annex to the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, signed
in Washington, D.C., on 28 September 1995,178 including with regard to the full, prompt and regular transfer of
Palestinian indirect tax revenues;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session,
through the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the present resolution, containing:
(a)

An assessment of the assistance actually received by the Palestinian people;

(b)

An assessment of the needs still unmet and specific proposals for responding effectively to them;

21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including
special economic assistance”, the sub-item entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
RESOLUTION 70/109
A/RES/70/109

Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 10 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.21 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Chile, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Greece, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Mali, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Portugal, Russian
Federation, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

70/109. A world against violence and violent extremism
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,179
Reaffirming its resolutions 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, 36/103 of 9 December 1981, 39/11 of
12 November 1984, 49/60 of 9 December 1994, 53/243 of 13 September 1999, 55/282 of 7 September 2001, 56/6
of 9 November 2001, 60/288 of 8 September 2006, 64/14 of 10 November 2009, 66/171 of 19 December 2011,
67/99 of 14 December 2012 and 67/173, 67/178 and 67/179 of 20 December 2012 and the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action,180 and reaffirming also its resolution on the most recent review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy,181 in which it urged Member States to unite against violent extremism in all its forms
and manifestations, and its resolutions 69/174 and 69/175 of 18 December 2014,
Recalling with appreciation the high-level thematic debate of the General Assembly on the topic “Promoting
tolerance and reconciliation: fostering peaceful, inclusive societies and countering violent extremism”, held on
21 and 22 April 2015,
Reaffirming that the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter include, inter alia, to develop friendly
relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, to take
other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace, and to achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind such as to race, colour,
sex, language, religion, political or other opinions, national or social origin, property, birth or other status,

_______________
178

A/51/889-S/1997/357, annex.
Resolution 217 A (III).
180
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
181
Resolution 68/276.
179

138

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Underlining that all Member States have undertaken to refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations,
Alarmed by the acts of intolerance, violent extremism, violence, including sectarian violence, and terrorism in
various parts of the world, which claim innocent lives, cause destruction and displace people, and rejecting the use
of violence, regardless of any motivation,
Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter to promote and encourage universal respect
for and observance of all human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction, and reaffirming also that
States are under the obligation to protect and respect all human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons,
Convinced that wars and armed conflicts can lead to radicalization and the spread of violent extremism and
disrupt development of human societies and thwart the well-being of humankind,
Recognizing that a primary responsibility of each State is to ensure a peaceful and violence-free life for its
people, while fully respecting their human rights without distinction of any kind, to live together in peace with its
neighbours, in full respect for political independence and the principle of sovereign equality of others, and to help to
maintain international peace and security,
Recalling that, as affirmed in the Preamble to the Charter, the practice of tolerance is one of the principles to
be applied to attain the ends pursued by the United Nations of preventing war and maintaining peace, and convinced
that the respect for and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons, as well as tolerance,
the recognition and appreciation of others and the ability to live together with and to listen to others, form a sound
foundation of any society and of peace,
Welcoming the efforts made by the Secretary-General and his High Representative for the Alliance of
Civilizations to promote greater understanding and respect among civilizations, cultures and religions,
Reaffirming that violent extremism constitutes a serious common concern for all Member States, threatening
the security and well-being of human societies, and convinced that there is no justification for violent extremism,
whatever the motivation,
Recognizing the need for a comprehensive approach to preventing and countering violent extremism and to
addressing the conditions conducive to its spread, and encouraged by increasing awareness in this regard,
Stressing that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat violent extremism complies with their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, and
underscoring that counter-terrorism measures and the protection of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the
rule of law are not conflicting goals, but complementary and mutually reinforcing, and are an essential part of a
successful effort to counter violent extremism,
Recognizing the commitment of all religions to peace, determined to condemn violent extremism, which
spreads hate and threatens lives, and reaffirming that violent extremism, in all its forms and manifestations, cannot
and should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Recognizing also local, national, regional and multilateral initiatives aimed at addressing both directly and
indirectly the grievances that drive violent extremism,
1. Stresses the international obligations of all States under the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, in particular refraining in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the United Nations and settling their international disputes by peaceful means on the basis of the Charter;
2. Condemns the targeting of civilian populations, including women and children, in violation of
international law, in particular human rights and humanitarian law, including by violent extremists, as well as the
attempts to disrupt and divert the popular quest for political reform, moderation and inclusive development in
different societies and drive it away from the hard work of development towards violence;
3. Deplores attacks on religious places and shrines and cultural sites in violation of international law, in
particular human rights and humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of relics and monuments;
139

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Urges all Member States to unite against violent extremism in all its forms and manifestations as well as
sectarian violence, encourages the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities the causes of violent
extremism and discrimination and to evolve strategies to address these causes, and underlines that States, regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in
promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity;
5. Stresses that it is important that States strongly condemn all forms of violence against women and refrain
from invoking any custom, tradition or religious consideration to avoid their obligations with respect to its
elimination, as set out in the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women;182
6. Encourages all States and international organizations to generate public awareness, to enlighten the
public about the dangers of intolerance and sectarian violence and to react with renewed commitment and action in
support of the promotion of tolerance and human rights, and invites them to continue to pay attention to the
importance of mutual cooperation, understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion of moderation and
tolerance and respect for human rights;
7. Calls upon all States to respect and protect, in their fight against violent extremism, all human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law and to support all actions at the local, national, regional and international
levels, in cooperation with civil society, to foster understanding, tolerance and non-violence, inter alia, through
programmes and institutions in the fields of education, science, culture, communication and information, strengthen
democratic institutions, ensure the all-inclusiveness of the development process, eliminate all forms of intolerance
and violence, eradicate poverty and illiteracy and reduce inequalities within and among nations in order to leave no
one behind;
8. Underlines the vital importance of education, including human rights education, as the most effective
means of promoting tolerance, in preventing the spread of extremism by instilling respect for life and promoting the
practice of non-violence, moderation, dialogue and cooperation, and encourages all States, the specialized agencies
of the United Nations and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to contribute actively to this
endeavour by, inter alia, placing emphasis on civic education and life skills as well as democratic principles and
practices at all levels of formal, informal and non-formal education, and in this regard recognizes the effort made by
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, including through its organization of the
conference, held on 16 and 17 June 2015, on “Youth and the Internet: fighting radicalization and extremism”;
9. Recommends promoting community engagement in countering violent extremism, including by
strengthening ties between communities and emphasizing their common bonds and interests;
10. Calls upon Member States to advocate for and disseminate information on tolerance and mutual respect,
and underlines the potential contribution of the media and new communications technologies, including the Internet,
to promoting respect for all human rights, to developing a better understanding among all religions, beliefs, cultures
and peoples, to enhancing tolerance and mutual respect and thus to strengthening the rejection of violent extremism;
11. Recognizes the positive contribution that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression, particularly
by the media and new technologies, including the Internet, and full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information can make to the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
and reiterates the need to respect the editorial independence and autonomy of the media in this regard;
12. Strongly condemns any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence;
13. Encourages Member States to increase their understanding of the drivers of violent extremism,
particularly for women and youth, so as to develop targeted and comprehensive solutions to this threat;
14. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, regional and non-governmental
organizations and other relevant stakeholders to endeavour to fulfil, in an appropriate manner, the objectives set out
in the present resolution;
_______________
182

140

Resolution 48/104.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

15. Takes note of the intention of the Secretary-General to propose a plan of action to prevent violent
extremism to be presented to and considered by the General Assembly;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution and to recommend ways and means by which the United Nations system
and the Secretariat could assist Member States, upon their request and within existing resources, in generating
public awareness about the dangers of intolerance, as well as in fostering understanding and non-violence.
RESOLUTION 70/110
A/RES/70/110

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.37,
sponsored by South Africa (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and
China)

70/110. The impacts of the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon
The General Assembly,
Noting that the El Niño phenomenon has a recurring character and can lead to extensive natural hazards with
the potential to seriously affect humankind,
Reaffirming the importance of developing strategies at the national, subregional, regional and international
levels that aim to prevent, mitigate and repair the adverse socioeconomic and environmental impacts of the El Niño
phenomenon, the effects of which are already affecting some regions,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration183 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,184
adopted at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction,
Noting with concern that, according to the El Niño/La Niña update of 16 November 2015 of the World
Meteorological Organization, as of October 2015 both the ocean and the atmosphere over the tropical areas of the
Pacific Ocean indicated the presence of a strong El Niño phenomenon,
Recognizing that the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon is already occurring and that it is likely to have a global
impact, in particular on developing countries,
Stressing that the majority of international seasonal climate outlook models indicate that the 2015/16 El Niño
phenomenon will strengthen slightly before the end of 2015 and that its peak three-month average strength,
expected to occur from the period between October and December 2015 to the period between December 2015 and
February 2016, would place it among the three strongest previous El Niño events since 1950 and may place it
among the two strongest,
Recognizing that the impacts of the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon are already evident in some regions and are
expected to be felt in other regions in the next two to six months,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
be left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1. Reaffirms the importance of developing strategies at the national, subregional, regional and international
levels that aim to prevent, mitigate and repair the adverse socioeconomic and environmental impacts of the
2015/16 El Niño phenomenon, while recognizing ongoing national initiatives by affected countries to strengthen
their capacities;
2. Recognizes the continued efforts by the Governments of Ecuador and Spain, the World Meteorological
Organization and the inter-agency secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction to support the
International Research Centre on El Niño at Guayaquil, Ecuador, and encourages them and other members of the
international community to continue to make such contributions for the advancement of the Centre;
_______________
183
184

Resolution 69/283, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.

141

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Notes the assistance provided to Governments by the International Research Centre on El Niño and by
other Governments and institutions in the development of early warning systems that allow for the implementation
of anticipatory risk reduction measures that contribute to the reduction of the potential human, economic and
environmental impacts of the phenomenon;
4. Recognizes the technical and scientific support of the World Meteorological Organization in producing
regionally coordinated monthly and seasonal forecasts, in particular its establishment of a consensus mechanism for
the development of updates on El Niño/La Niña conditions, which receives contributions from several climate
centres, and also recognizes various initiatives undertaken by different countries to strengthen national and regional
capacities;
5. Encourages the World Meteorological Organization, in this regard, to continue to strengthen
collaboration and the exchange of data and information with relevant institutions;
6. Calls upon the international community to urgently provide financial, technical and capacity-building
support to countries that are affected by the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon;
7. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session, under a sub-item entitled “Disaster risk reduction” of the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a section
addressing the socioeconomic and environmental impacts of the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon, in addition to the
section requested in its resolution 69/218 of 19 December 2014;
9. Decides to convene, given the global urgency of the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon, a plenary meeting of
the General Assembly in 2016, during its seventy-first session, to discuss action-oriented recommendations to
address the socioeconomic and environmental impacts of the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon;
10. Invites the Economic and Social Council to devote adequate time during its 2016 session to address the
socioeconomic and environmental impacts of the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon as a global emergency issue,
building upon the expertise of the regional commissions and the specialized agencies and relevant bodies of the
United Nations system.
RESOLUTION 70/125
A/RES/70/125

Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.33,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

70/125. Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review of the
implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall
review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at its seventieth
session:
Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review of the
implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society
We, the Ministers and heads of delegations participating in the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on the overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society, held in New York on 15 and 16 December 2015,
Recalling the request in paragraph 111 of the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society185 that the General
Assembly undertake an overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the
_______________
185

142

See A/60/687.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Information Society in 2015, and in this regard reaffirming the role of the Assembly in this process, and reaffirming
also that the Assembly, in its resolution 68/302 of 31 July 2014, decided that the overall review would be concluded
by a two-day high-level meeting of the Assembly, preceded by an intergovernmental preparatory process that also
meaningfully takes into account inputs from all relevant stakeholders,
Welcoming the constructive and diverse inputs from Governments, the private sector, civil society,
international organizations, the technical and academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders in taking
stock of the progress made in the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society
and addressing potential information and communications technology gaps and areas for continued focus, as well as
challenges, including bridging digital divides and harnessing information and communications technology for
development,
Building on, among other relevant inputs, the 10-year review of the World Summit on the Information Society
conducted by the Commission on Science and Technology for Development in May 2015, and its outcome
document, entitled “Implementing World Summit on the Information Society outcomes: a 10-year review”; the
multi-stakeholder 10-year review event hosted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, entitled “Towards knowledge societies for peace and sustainable development”, held in February
2013, and its final statement, entitled “Information and knowledge for all: an expanded vision and a renewed
commitment”; and the multi-stakeholder high-level event for the review of the World Summit, coordinated and
hosted by the International Telecommunication Union and organized by the International Telecommunication
Union, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and the United Nations Development Programme in June 2014, and its outcomes, the
statement of the 10-year review of the World Summit on the implementation of World Summit outcomes, and the
vision of the 10-year review of the World Summit beyond 2015, both adopted by consensus,
Reaffirming General Assembly resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred
set of universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working
tirelessly for the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms
and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also General Assembly resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,186 supports and complements it and helps to contextualize its means of implementation
targets with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
1. We reaffirm our common desire and commitment to the World Summit on the Information Society
vision to build a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented information society, where everyone can
create, access, utilize and share information and knowledge, enabling individuals, communities and peoples to
achieve their full potential in promoting their sustainable development and improving their quality of life, premised
on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and respecting fully and upholding the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.187
2. We further reaffirm our commitment to the Geneva Declaration of Principles,188 the Geneva Plan of
Action and its action lines,188 the Tunis Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society,185 and we
recognize the need for Governments, the private sector, civil society, international organizations, the technical and
academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders to continue to work together to implement the World
Summit on the Information Society vision beyond 2015.
_______________
186

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 217 A (III).
188
See A/C.2/59/3, annex.
187

143

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. We reaffirm, moreover, the value and principles of multi-stakeholder cooperation and engagement that
have characterized the World Summit on the Information Society process since its inception, recognizing that
effective participation, partnership and cooperation of Governments, the private sector, civil society, international
organizations, the technical and academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders, within their respective
roles and responsibilities, especially with balanced representation from developing countries, has been and
continues to be vital in developing the information society.
4. We welcome the remarkable evolution and diffusion of information and communications technologies,
underpinned by the contributions of both public and private sectors, which have seen penetration into almost all
corners of the globe, created new opportunities for social interaction, enabled new business models and contributed
to economic growth and development in all other sectors, while noting the unique and emerging challenges related
to their evolution and diffusion.
5. We recognize that increased connectivity, innovation and access played a critical role in enabling
progress on the Millennium Development Goals, and we call for close alignment between the World Summit on the
Information Society process and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,186 highlighting the cross-cutting
contribution of information and communications technology to the Sustainable Development Goals and poverty
eradication, and noting that access to information and communications technologies has also become a development
indicator and aspiration in and of itself.
6. We express concern, however, that there are still significant digital divides, such as between and within
countries and between women and men, which need to be addressed through, among other actions, strengthened
enabling policy environments and international cooperation to improve affordability, access, education, capacitybuilding, multilingualism, cultural preservation, investment and appropriate financing. Further, we acknowledge that
a gender divide exists as part of the digital divides, and encourage all stakeholders to ensure the full participation of
women in the information society and women’s access to new technologies, especially information and
communications technologies for development.
7. We acknowledge that particular attention should be paid to address the unique and emerging information
and communications technology challenges facing all countries, in particular developing countries, including African
countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States and middleincome countries, as well as countries and territories under foreign occupation, countries in situations of conflict, postconflict countries and countries affected by natural disasters. Particular attention should also be paid to addressing the
specific information and communications technology challenges facing children, youth, persons with disabilities, older
persons, indigenous peoples, refugees and internally displaced persons, migrants and remote and rural communities.
8. We reaffirm that Internet governance should continue to follow the provisions set forth in the outcomes
of the summits held in Geneva and Tunis.
9. We reaffirm, moreover, that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected online. We
emphasize that progress towards the vision of the World Summit on the Information Society should be considered
not only as a function of economic development and the spreading of information and communications technologies
but also as a function of progress with respect to the realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
10. Building confidence and security in the use of information and communications technologies for
sustainable development should also be a priority, especially given growing challenges, including the abuse of such
technologies for harmful activities from harassment to crime to terrorism.
11. We reiterate our commitments to the positive uses of the Internet and other information and
communications technologies and to taking appropriate actions and preventive measures, as determined by law,
against abusive uses of those technologies, as mentioned under the ethical dimensions of the information society in
the Geneva Declaration of Principles and the Geneva Plan of Action. We also recognize the importance of ethics, as
set out in action line C10 of the Plan of Action, in building the information society and strengthening the role of
information and communications technologies as enablers of development.
1.

Information and communications technology for development

12. We commit to harnessing the potential of information and communications technologies to achieve the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and other internationally agreed development goals, noting that they can
accelerate progress across all 17 Sustainable Development Goals. We accordingly call upon all Governments, the
144

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

private sector, civil society, international organizations, the technical and academic communities and all other
relevant stakeholders to integrate information and communications technologies into their approaches to
implementing the Goals, and request United Nations entities facilitating the World Summit on the Information
Society action lines to review their reporting and work plans to support implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
13. We recognize with satisfaction that the previous decade’s considerable increases in connectivity, use,
creation and innovation have created new tools to drive poverty eradication and economic, social and environmental
betterment. For example, fixed and wireless broadband, mobile Internet, smartphones and tablets, cloud computing,
open data, social media and big data were only in their early stages at the time of the adoption of the Tunis Agenda,
and are now understood to be significant enablers of sustainable development.
14. We reaffirm that the expansion and use of information and communications technologies must continue
to be a core focus and outcome of the World Summit on the Information Society process. We are highly encouraged
that the number of mobile phone subscriptions is estimated to have risen from 2.2 billion in 2005 to 7.1 billion in
2015, and that by the end of 2015, 3.2 billion people are expected to be online, over 43 per cent of the total world
population, of which 2 billion are from developing countries. We also note that fixed broadband subscriptions have
reached a penetration rate of almost 10 per cent, as compared with 3.4 per cent in 2005, and that mobile broadband
remains the fastest growing market segment, with continuous double-digit growth rates reaching 47 per cent in
2015, a value that increased 12 times since 2007.
15. We note that the digital economy is an important and growing part of the global economy, and that
connectivity is correlated with increases in gross domestic product. Information and communications technologies
have created a new generation of businesses, innovators and jobs, while altering and making obsolete others, and
have also generally increased the efficiency, market access and ingenuity of all sectors. We recognize the critical
importance of expanding the participation of all countries, particularly developing countries, in the digital
economy.
16. We also recognize that information and communications technologies are contributing to higher levels
of social benefit and inclusion, providing new channels among citizens, businesses and Governments to share and
augment knowledge, as well as participate in decisions that affect their lives and work. As envisioned by the World
Summit on the Information Society action lines, we have seen information and communications technology-enabled
breakthroughs in Government, including in the provision of public services, education, health care and employment,
as well as in business, agriculture and science, with greater numbers of people having access to services and data
that might previously have been out of reach or unaffordable.
17. We simultaneously recognize that information and communications technologies are fundamentally
altering the way individuals and communities interact, consume and spend their time, with new and unforeseen
health and social consequences, many of which are positive and some of which raise concerns.
18. We recognize that information and communications technologies have become important to disaster and
humanitarian response, and further reaffirm their role in enhancing and developing multi-hazard early warning
systems, preparedness, response, recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction. We also encourage greater investments
in innovation and technology development for long-term, multi-hazard and solution-driven research in the field of
disaster risk management.
19. We recognize that information and communications technologies are also increasingly a means to
support the diversity of cultural expression and the fast-growing cultural and creative industries, and we affirm that
comprehensive, practical digital strategies are needed for the preservation of cultural heritage and access to recorded
information in the digital environment in all its forms.
20. We further recognize that increasing use of information and communications technologies both
generates certain environmental benefits and imposes certain environmental costs, which we aim to reduce. We
welcome the opportunity afforded by sustainable energy to potentially decouple the growth of information and
communications technologies from contributions to climate change, and we also note their catalytic value for the
deployment of renewable energy, energy efficiency, smart and resilient city concepts and Internet-enabled delivery
of services, among other abatement options. However, we recognize that we must encourage further action to
improve the resource efficiency of information and communications technologies and to reuse, recycle and safely
dispose of e-waste.
145

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1.1 Bridging digital divides
21. Despite the previous decade’s achievements in information and communications technology
connectivity, we express concern that many forms of digital divides remain, both between and within countries and
between women and men. We note that divides are often closely linked to education levels and existing inequalities,
and we recognize that further divides can emerge in the future, slowing sustainable development. We acknowledge
that, as of 2015, only around 43 per cent of people globally had Internet access, only 41 per cent of women had
Internet access and an estimated 80 per cent of online content was available in only one of 10 languages. The poor
are the most excluded from the benefits of information and communications technology.
22. We further express concern that digital divides remain between developed and developing countries and
that many developing countries lack affordable access to information and communications technologies. As of
2015, only 34 per cent of households in developing countries had Internet access, with significant variations by
country, as compared with more than 80 per cent in developed countries. This means that two thirds of the
households in developing countries do not have Internet access.
23. We affirm our commitment to bridging digital and knowledge divides, and we recognize that our
approach must be multidimensional and include an evolving understanding of what constitutes access, emphasizing
the quality of that access. We acknowledge that speed, stability, affordability, language, local content and
accessibility for persons with disabilities are now core elements of quality, and that high-speed broadband is already
an essential enabler of sustainable development. We acknowledge, moreover, that differences in individuals’
capabilities to both use and create information and communications technologies represent a knowledge divide that
perpetuates inequality. We note, too, the ambition to move beyond “information societies” to “knowledge societies”,
in which information is not only created and disseminated, but put to the benefit of human development. We
recognize that such divides may change with technological and service innovation, and we call upon all
stakeholders, particularly United Nations entities that are facilitating the World Summit on the Information Society
action lines, within their mandate and existing resources, to continue working together to regularly analyse the
nature of digital divides, study strategies to bridge them and make their findings available to the international
community.
24. We underscore the need for further development of local content and services in a variety of languages
and formats that are accessible to all people, who also need the capabilities and capacities, including media,
information and digital literacy skills, to make use of and further develop information and communications
technologies. Accordingly, we recognize the vital importance of the principles of multilingualism in the information
society to ensure the linguistic, cultural and historical diversity of all nations. We further recognize the value of the
variety of interoperable and affordable information and communications technology solutions, including such
models as proprietary, open-source, and free software.
25. We call, moreover, for a significant increase in access to information and communications technologies,
and encourage all stakeholders to strive to provide universal and affordable access to the Internet for all. We
welcome the efforts of all stakeholders in pursuit of these goals, including efforts being undertaken in the Connect
2020 Agenda for Global Telecommunication/ICT Development, adopted by the Plenipotentiary Conference of the
International Telecommunication Union in 2014.
26. We also recognize digital divides in digital uses and literacy and the need to bridge them.
27. We emphasize our concern that only 41 per cent of women have Internet access, and draw attention to
the gender digital divide, which persists in women’s access to and use of information and communications
technologies, including in education, employment and other areas of economic and social development. We
recognize that ending the gender digital divide and the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 5 on gender
are mutually reinforcing efforts, and we commit to mainstreaming gender in the World Summit on the Information
Society process, including through a new emphasis on gender in the implementation and monitoring of the action
lines, with the support of relevant United Nations entities, including the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women). We call for immediate measures to achieve gender equality in
Internet users by 2020, especially by significantly enhancing women’s and girls’ education and participation in
information and communications technologies, as users, content creators, employees, entrepreneurs, innovators and
leaders. We reaffirm our commitment to ensure women’s full participation in decision-making processes related to
information and communications technologies.
146

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1.2 Enabling environment
28. We recognize that certain policies have substantially contributed to bridging digital divides and the value
of information and communications technologies for sustainable development, and we commit to continuing to
identify and implement best and emerging practices for the establishment and functioning of education, innovation
and investment frameworks for information and communications technologies.
29. We recognize the importance of the free flow of information and knowledge, as the amount of
information distributed worldwide grows and the role of communication becomes all the more important. We
acknowledge that the mainstreaming of information and communications technologies in school curricula, open
access to data, the fostering of competition, the creation of transparent, predictable, independent and nondiscriminatory regulatory and legal systems, proportionate taxation and licensing fees, access to finance, facilitation
of public-private partnerships, multi-stakeholder cooperation, national and regional broadband strategies, efficient
allocation of the radio frequency spectrum, infrastructure-sharing models, community-based approaches and public
access facilities have in many countries facilitated significant gains in connectivity and sustainable development.
30. We recognize that a lack of access to affordable and reliable technologies and services remains a critical
challenge in many developing countries, particularly African countries, least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States and middle-income countries, as well as countries in
situations of conflict, post-conflict countries and countries affected by natural disasters. All efforts should be
deployed to reduce the price of information and communications technologies and broadband access, bearing in
mind that deliberate interventions, including through research and development and technology transfer on mutually
agreed terms, may be necessary to spur lower-cost connectivity options.
31. In building the information society, States are strongly urged to take steps with a view to the avoidance
of, and refrain from, any unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations that impedes the full achievement of economic and social development and hinders the well-being of the
people of the affected countries.
32. We recognize that the radio frequency spectrum should be managed in the public interest and in
accordance with legal principles, with full observance of national laws and regulations as well as relevant
international agreements.
33. We call for a special focus on actions that improve the enabling environment for information and
communications technologies and expand related education and capacity-building opportunities. We also request the
Commission on Science and Technology for Development, within its mandate related to the follow-up to the World
Summit on the Information Society, and all action line facilitators, within their respective mandates and existing
resources, to work with all stakeholders to regularly identify and promote specific, detailed actions to support the
enabling environment for information and communications technologies and development and provide the demanddriven policy advice, technical assistance and capacity-building, as appropriate, to realize them.
1.3 Financial mechanisms
34. We welcome the fact that total public and private spending on information and communications
technologies has increased substantially in the last decade, now reaching trillions of dollars annually, and that it has
been complemented by a proliferation of new financing mechanisms, both results marking progress on
paragraphs 23 and 27 of the Tunis Agenda.
35. We recognize, however, that harnessing information and communications technology for development
and bridging digital divides will require greater and sustainable investment in infrastructure and services, capacitybuilding, promotion of joint research and development and transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms. These
mechanisms remain a primary focus for all countries and people, particularly developing countries.
36. We commit to efficient public resource allocation to deployment and development of information and
communications technology, recognizing the need for budgeting for information and communications technology
across all sectors, especially education. We stress that capacity is a major barrier to closing digital divides, and we
recommend that capacity development, including for innovation, be emphasized to empower local experts and local
communities to benefit fully from and contribute to information and communications technology applications for
development. We recognize the potential to improve connectivity, especially in remote and rural areas, through
universal service funds and publicly funded network infrastructure, among other tools, particularly in areas where
market conditions make investment difficult.
147

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

37. We note the commitments made in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development,189 and recognize that official development assistance and other
concessional financial flows for information and communications technology can make significant contributions to
development outcomes, in particular where they can reduce the risk of public and private investment, and increase
the use of information and communications technology to strengthen good governance and tax collection.
38. We recognize the critical importance of private sector investment in information and communications
technology infrastructure, content and services, and we encourage Governments to create legal and regulatory
frameworks conducive to increased investment and innovation. We also recognize the importance of public-private
partnerships, universal access strategies and other approaches to this end.
39. We encourage a prominent profile for information and communications technologies in the new
Technology Facilitation Mechanism established in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and consideration of how it can
contribute to implementation of the World Summit on the Information Society action lines.
40. We note with concern the challenges in implementing the Digital Solidarity Fund, which was welcomed
in the Tunis Agenda as an innovative financial mechanism of a voluntary nature. We call for an ongoing evaluation
of innovative financing options in the annual review of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society.
2.

Human rights in the information society

41. We reaffirm the commitment set out in the Geneva Declaration of Principles and the Tunis Commitment
to the universality, indivisibility, interdependence and interrelation of all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the right to development, as enshrined in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of the World
Conference on Human Rights.190 We also reaffirm that democracy, sustainable development and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as good governance at all levels, are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing. We resolve to strengthen respect for the rule of law in international, as in national, affairs.
42. We recognize that human rights have been central to the vision of the World Summit on the Information
Society and that information and communications technologies have shown their potential to strengthen the exercise
of human rights, enabling access to information, freedom of expression and freedom of assembly and association.
43. We reaffirm, moreover, as an essential foundation of the information society and as recognized in
Human Rights Council resolution 26/13 of 26 June 2014191 and General Assembly resolution 69/166 of
18 December 2014, that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected online.
44. We note with concern, however, that there are serious threats to freedom of expression and plurality of
information, and we call for the protection of journalists, media workers and civil society space. We call upon States
to take all appropriate measures necessary to ensure the right to freedom of opinion and expression, the right to
peaceful assembly and association and the right not to be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with
privacy, in accordance with their human rights obligations.
45. We reaffirm our commitment to article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in which it is
stated that everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and that this right includes freedom to hold
opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers. We also recall the commitments made under article 19 by States that are party to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.192 We underscore the need to respect the independence of
media. We believe that communication is a fundamental social process, a basic human need and the foundation of
all social organization, and is therefore central to the information society. Everyone, everywhere should have the
opportunity to participate, and no one should be excluded from the benefits that the information society offers.
_______________
189

Resolution 69/313, annex.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
191
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. V, sect. A.
192
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
190

148

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

46. We recall General Assembly resolution 69/166 and, in this context, emphasize that no person shall be
subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence, consistent
with countries’ obligations under international human rights law. Accordingly, we call upon all States to review their
procedures, practices and legislation regarding the surveillance of communications, as well as their interception and
collection of personal data, including mass surveillance, with a view to upholding the right to privacy as set out in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights for States
that are party to the Covenant, by ensuring the full and effective implementation of all their obligations under
international human rights law.
47. We reaffirm our commitment to the provisions in article 29 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights that everyone has duties to the community in which alone the free and full development of his or her
personality is possible and that, in the exercise of his or her rights and freedoms, everyone shall be subject only to
such limitations as are determined by law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the
rights and freedoms of others and of meeting the just requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare
in a democratic society. These rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. In this way, we shall promote an information society in which human dignity is
respected.
3.

Building confidence and security in the use of information and communications technologies

48. We affirm that strengthening confidence and security in the use of information and communications
technologies for the development of information societies and the success of such technologies is a driver for
economic and social innovation.
49. We welcome the significant efforts by Governments, the private sector, civil society, the technical
community and academia to build confidence and security in the use of information and communications
technologies, including by the International Telecommunication Union, the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to
conduct a comprehensive study of the problem of cybercrime and the Group of Governmental Experts on
Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security, among
other international, regional and national efforts.
50. We recognize the leading role for Governments in cybersecurity matters relating to national security. We
further recognize the important roles and contributions of all stakeholders, in their respective roles and
responsibilities. We reaffirm that building confidence and security in the use of information and communications
technologies should be consistent with human rights.
51. We recognize the important role of international law, especially the Charter of the United Nations, in
building confidence and security in the use of information and communications technologies by States, and
welcome the 2013 and 2015 reports of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security.193
52. We are concerned, however, about certain growing uses of information and communications
technologies that threaten security and development benefits, including the use of such technologies for terrorist
purposes and cybercrime. We express the need for existing legal and enforcement frameworks to keep up with the
speed of technological change and its application. Furthermore, we note concerns that attacks against States,
institutions, companies, other entities and individuals are now being undertaken through digital means. We reiterate
our belief that a global culture of cybersecurity needs to be promoted and developed and that cybersecurity
measures should be implemented in cooperation with all stakeholders and international expert bodies in order to
foster trust and security in the information society.
53. We call upon Member States to intensify efforts to build robust domestic security in information and
communications technologies and the use thereof, consistent with their international obligations and domestic law. We
further call upon Member States to cooperate on transnational issues of information and communications technologies
and the use thereof, including capacity-building and cooperation in combating the criminal misuse of the technologies
and preventing the use of technology, communications and resources for criminal or terrorist purposes.
_______________
193

A/68/98 and A/70/174.

149

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

54. We recognize the challenges that States, in particular developing countries, face in building confidence
and security in the use of information and communications technologies. We call for renewed focus on capacitybuilding, education, knowledge-sharing and regulatory practice, as well as promoting multi-stakeholder cooperation
at all levels and raising awareness among users of information and communications technologies, particularly
among the poorest and most vulnerable.
4.

Internet governance

55. We reaffirm paragraph 55 of the Tunis Agenda, and in this regard we recognize that the existing
arrangements have worked effectively to make the Internet the highly robust, dynamic and geographically diverse
medium that it is today, with the private sector taking the lead in day-to-day operations and with innovation and
value creation at the edges. However, almost 4 billion people, representing approximately two thirds of the people
residing in developing countries, remain offline.
56. We recognize that there are many cross-cutting international public policy issues that require attention
and have not been adequately addressed.
57. We take note of paragraph 29 of the Tunis Agenda, and recognize that the management of the Internet as
a global facility includes multilateral, transparent, democratic and multi-stakeholder processes, with the full
involvement of Governments, the private sector, civil society, international organizations, technical and academic
communities and all other relevant stakeholders in accordance with their respective roles and responsibilities.
58. We reiterate the working definition of Internet governance, set out in paragraph 34 of the Tunis Agenda,
as the development and application by Governments, the private sector and civil society, in their respective roles, of
shared principles, norms, rules, decision-making procedures and programmes that shape the evolution and use of the
Internet.
59. We reaffirm the principle agreed in the Geneva Declaration of Principles that the management of the
Internet encompasses both technical and public policy issues and should involve all stakeholders and relevant
intergovernmental and international organizations, within their respective roles and responsibilities, as set out in
paragraph 35 of the Tunis Agenda.
60. We take note of the hosting by the Government of Brazil of the NETMundial Global Multi-stakeholder
Meeting on the Future of Internet Governance, in São Paulo, on 23 and 24 April 2014.
61. We recognize that there is a need to promote greater participation and engagement in the Internet
governance discussions of Governments, the private sector, civil society, international organizations, the technical
and academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders from developing countries, particularly African
countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States and
middle-income countries, as well as countries in situations of conflict, post-conflict countries and countries affected
by natural disasters. We call for strengthened, stable, transparent and voluntary funding mechanisms to this end.
62. We note the important regulatory and legislative processes in some Member States on the open Internet
in the context of the information society and the underlying drivers for it, and call for further information-sharing at
the international level on the opportunities and challenges.
63. We acknowledge the role of the Internet Governance Forum as a multi-stakeholder platform for
discussion of Internet governance issues. We support the recommendations in the report of the Working Group on
Improvements to the Internet Governance Forum of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development,194 which the General Assembly took note of in its resolution 68/198 of 20 December 2013, and we
call for their accelerated implementation. We extend for another 10 years the existing mandate of the Internet
Governance Forum as set out in paragraphs 72 to 78 of the Tunis Agenda. We recognize that during that period, the
Forum should continue to show progress on working modalities and the participation of relevant stakeholders from
developing countries. We call upon the Commission, within its regular reporting, to give due consideration to
fulfilment of the recommendations in the report of its Working Group.
_______________
194

150

A/67/65-E/2012/48 and Corr.1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4.1. Enhanced cooperation
64. We acknowledge that various initiatives have been implemented and some progress has been made in
relation to the process towards enhanced cooperation detailed in paragraphs 69 to 71 of the Tunis Agenda.
65. We note, however, the divergent views held by Member States with respect to the process towards
implementation of enhanced cooperation as envisioned in the Tunis Agenda. We call for continued dialogue and
work on the implementation of enhanced cooperation. We accordingly request the Chair of the Commission on
Science and Technology for Development, through the Economic and Social Council, to establish a working group
to develop recommendations on how to further implement enhanced cooperation as envisioned in the Tunis Agenda,
taking into consideration the work that has been done on this matter thus far. The group, which shall be constituted
no later than July 2016, will decide at the outset on its methods of work, including modalities, and will ensure the
full involvement of all relevant stakeholders, taking into account all their diverse views and expertise. The group
will submit a report to the Commission on Science and Technology for Development at its twenty-first session for
inclusion in the annual report of the Commission to the Council. The report will also serve as an input to the regular
reporting of the Secretary-General on implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society.
5.

Follow-up and review

66. We reaffirm that the ongoing implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society will require the continued commitment and action of all stakeholders, including Governments, the private
sector, civil society, international organizations and the technical and academic communities, and that regular review
of progress of the full set of Summit action lines will be essential to achieving the vision of the Summit.
67. We call for the continuation of annual reports on the implementation of outcomes of the World Summit
on the Information Society, through the Commission on Science and Technology for Development, to the Economic
and Social Council, taking into account the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
and in this regard invite the high-level political forum on sustainable development to consider the annual reports of
the Commission on Science and Technology for Development. We encourage the members of the United Nations
Group on the Information Society to contribute to the reports.
68. We also call for the continuation of the work of the United Nations Group on the Information Society in
coordinating the work of United Nations agencies, according to their mandates and competencies, and we invite the
regional commissions to continue their work in implementation of the World Summit on the Information Society
action lines and their contribution to the reviews thereof, including through regional reviews.
69. We recognize that the World Summit on the Information Society Forum has been a platform for
discussion and sharing of best practices in the implementation of the World Summit outcomes by all stakeholders,
and it should continue to be held annually.
70. We acknowledge the importance of data and statistics to support information and communications
technology for development, and call for further quantitative data to support evidence-based decision-making, as
well as for the inclusion of information and communications technology statistics in national strategies for the
development of statistics and in regional statistical work programmes, and for strengthening local statistical capacity
and targeted training by Governments and all other relevant stakeholders. The activities of the Partnership on
Measuring Information and Communications Technology for Development have made a valuable contribution to
data gathering and dissemination and should be continued.
71. We recognize that, in the preparation of this review, a number of challenges and opportunities have been
identified, requiring longer-term consultations to determine appropriate responses, and that the pace of the
development of information and communications technologies necessitates higher-level consideration of progress
achieved and future action. We accordingly request the General Assembly to hold a high-level meeting on the
overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society in 2025,
involving the input and participation of all stakeholders, including in the preparatory process, to take stock of
progress on the outcomes of the World Summit and identify both areas of continued focus and challenges. We
recommend that the outcome of the high-level meeting be an input into the review process for the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
151

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/183
A/RES/70/183

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.32 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Congo,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg, Monaco, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, Niger,
Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam

70/183. Global health and foreign policy: strengthening the management of international health crises
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 63/33 of 26 November 2008, 64/108 of 10 December 2009, 65/95 of 9 December
2010, 66/115 of 12 December 2011, 67/81 of 12 December 2012, 68/98 of 11 December 2013 and 69/132 of
11 December 2014,
Recalling also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,195 international humanitarian law, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights196 and the Constitution of the World Health Organization,197
Taking note of the President’s statement adopted by the Human Rights Council at its thirtieth session on
promoting the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health by
enhancing capacity-building in public health against pandemics,198
Recognizing that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of all three dimensions of
sustainable development and that, despite progress made, challenges in global health, including major inequities
and vulnerabilities within and among countries, regions and populations, still remain and demand persistent
attention,
Reaffirming the right of every human being, without distinction of any kind, to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health and to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being
of oneself and one’s family, including adequate food, clothing and housing, and to the continuous improvement of
living conditions, with particular attention to the alarming situation of millions of people for whom access to
medicines remains a distant goal, in particular vulnerable populations and destitute people,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling Goal 3 of the 2030 Agenda, which aims to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at
all ages,
Emphasizing the importance of building resilient societies in the context of sustainable development, poverty
eradication and catastrophic events and pandemics,

_______________
195

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
197
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 14, No. 221.
198
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), chap. V, PRST/30/2.
196

152

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the role of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative in promoting synergy between foreign
policy and global health, as well as the Oslo Ministerial Declaration of 20 March 2007, entitled “Global health: a
pressing foreign policy issue of our time”,199 which encouraged global engagement for health, rooted in global
solidarity and shared responsibility,
Reaffirming the role of the World Health Organization as the directing and coordinating authority on
international health work in accordance with its Constitution, and acknowledging the key role of the Organization
and the importance of other relevant international and regional organizations in dealing with outbreaks and
emergencies with health consequences, in providing support to Member States, as appropriate and upon request, in
the development and implementation of preventive measures against the spread of infectious diseases and in the
development of resilient health systems,
Recognizing the primary role of Member States in preparing for and responding to outbreaks of infectious
diseases, including those that become humanitarian crises, highlighting the critical role played by Member States,
the World Health Organization as the directing and coordinating authority on international health work, the United
Nations humanitarian system, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and other
humanitarian actors in providing financial, technical and in-kind support in order to bring epidemics under control,
and recognizing also the need to strengthen national health systems, including capacity-building for developing
countries,
Emphasizing the important role of the World Health Organization, as the United Nations specialized agency
for health, as the lead agency to support the implementation of the International Health Regulations (2005)200 and as
the health cluster lead, in the international response to outbreaks and emergencies with health consequences,
encouraging the ongoing work to reform and improve the emergency response capacity of the World Health
Organization, as required, to meet these responsibilities, noting with appreciation in this regard the report of the
Ebola Interim Assessment Panel, and noting the first report of the advisory group on the reform of the
Organization’s work in outbreaks and emergencies,
Expressing deep concern over recent outbreaks of diseases, such as Ebola virus disease and Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus disease, which demonstrate the potential vulnerability of national health systems
to serious outbreaks of infectious diseases and the necessity of adequate global response mechanisms for health
emergencies, and in this regard noting the worsening situations that can emanate from international and regional
health crises and their multidimensional effects on the political, social, economic, humanitarian, logistical and
security spheres, especially for countries undergoing a peacebuilding process,
Noting with particular concern the unprecedented number of humanitarian crises and natural disasters that are
having an impact on global health, which testify to the enormity of the challenges to which the international
community is concurrently responding,
Recognizing the urgent need for an improved, more effective and better coordinated response capacity for the
international community, and especially for the World Health Organization and Member States, in responding to
outbreaks and emergencies with health consequences, guided by an all-hazards approach emphasizing adaptability,
flexibility and accountability, the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence, and
predictability, timeliness and country ownership,
Recognizing also the importance of the strengthening of financial resources and mechanisms, including within
the World Health Organization, to ensure a timely, effective and coordinated response to outbreaks of disease,
Recalling the International Health Regulations (2005), which are contributing to global public health security
by providing a framework for the coordination of the management of events that may constitute a public health
emergency of international concern, stressing the importance of the adequate capacity of all countries to prevent,
detect, assess, notify and respond to public health threats, and underscoring the importance of the States members of
the World Health Organization abiding by these commitments and continuing to make necessary efforts towards the
full implementation of the Regulations,
_______________
199
200

A/63/591, annex.
World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.

153

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Underlining, in this respect, the urgency of having strong and resilient health systems capable of
implementing the International Health Regulations (2005) and ensuring pandemic preparedness and the prevention
and detection of and response to any eventual outbreaks, as well as the availability of motivated, well-trained and
appropriately equipped health professionals and health workers,
Recognizing that investing in new health workforce employment opportunities may also add broader
socioeconomic value to the global economy and national economies and contribute to the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda,
Acknowledging that malnutrition in all its forms affects people’s health by, inter alia, compromising the
immune system and increasing susceptibility to communicable and non-communicable diseases,
Emphasizing the importance of seeking synergies and collaboration with other relevant actors within and
outside the United Nations system, including the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the Gavi
Alliance, the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, the World Bank, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector, and of including other areas, such as agriculture, when developing overall health systems, including disease
surveillance systems, health financing, procurement and the supply chain, as well as health workforces at the
country, regional and global levels,
Welcoming the decision of the Secretary-General to appoint a high-level panel on the global response to health
crises to make recommendations to strengthen national and international systems to prevent and manage future
health crises, taking into account lessons learned from the response to the outbreak of Ebola virus disease in 2014,
and looking forward to the report and recommendations of the high-level panel,
Recognizing the importance of addressing long-term systemic gaps in capacity to prevent, detect, protect
against, control and provide a public health response to the international spread of disease,
Recalling World Health Assembly resolution 64.5 of 24 May 2011, entitled “Pandemic influenza
preparedness: sharing of influenza viruses and access to vaccines and other benefits”,201 and underlining the
importance of cooperation at the global level in fully implementing the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness
Framework,202
Underscoring the pressing need to build resilient national health systems and strengthen national capacities
through attention to, inter alia, quality service delivery, equitable access to health services and products, health
systems financing, including appropriate budgetary allocations, the health workforce, health information systems,
the procurement and distribution of medicines, vaccines and technologies, sexual and reproductive health-care
services and political will and responsibility in leadership and governance, and recognizing the value and
importance of universal health coverage in providing access to quality health services, while ensuring that the use of
these services does not expose the users to financial hardship, with a special emphasis on the members of the poor,
vulnerable and marginalized segments of the population,
Emphasizing that Member States have primary responsibility for strengthening their capacity in public health
to prevent, detect and respond rapidly to outbreaks of major infectious diseases and health crises, through the
establishment and improvement of effective public health systems, including strategies for the training, recruitment
and retention of sufficient numbers of public health personnel, while recognizing that the magnitude of the
necessary response to a specific outbreak may be beyond the capabilities of many countries, in particular developing
countries, as well as countries with economies in transition,
Aware that access to effective antimicrobial agents constitutes a prerequisite for most modern medicine,
that hard-won gains in health and development, in particular those brought about through the health-related
Millennium Development Goals, are put at risk by increasing antimicrobial resistance, and that antimicrobial
resistance threatens the sustainability of the public health response to many communicable diseases, including

_______________
201
202

154

See World Health Organization, document WHA64/2011/REC/1.
Ibid., annex 2.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

tuberculosis, malaria and HIV/AIDS, and welcoming in this regard the global action plan on antimicrobial
resistance adopted by the sixty-eighth World Health Assembly,203
Recognizing that global preparedness for outbreaks of highly infectious pathogens with epidemic potential
requires continuous commitment to the research and development of medicines, vaccines and diagnostics, including
for emerging diseases and neglected tropical diseases, and recognizing also the need for multisectoral approaches,
strengthened health systems, economic growth and sustainable development, in particular in developing countries,
and improved health status and adequate nutrition,
Underlining the primary responsibility of Member States to promote universal health coverage that comprises
universal and equitable access to quality health services and ensures affordable and quality service delivery,
especially through primary health care and social protection mechanisms, with the support of the international
community and with a view to providing access to health services for all, in particular those in vulnerable or
marginalized groups or situations, and underlining also that women and children are particularly affected by
disasters and outbreaks,
Underscoring the importance of enhanced international cooperation to support the efforts of Member States to
achieve health goals, implement universal access to health services and address health challenges while taking into
account different national circumstances and capacities and respecting national policies and priorities,
Recognizing the need to integrate a gender and life-course perspective in the international response to health
crises, and recognizing also the key role of women as primary care providers in the community,
Underscoring the need for far-reaching partnerships for global health to support the promotion of, inter alia,
gender equality and women’s empowerment and ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and
women’s and girls’ full enjoyment of all human rights, so as to contribute to the eradication of poverty and to
economic and social development, including improved health outcomes,
Reaffirming the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), the Doha Declaration on
the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of
30 August 2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health and, when formal acceptance procedures are completed, the amendment to article 31 of the TRIPS
Agreement, as proposed by the General Council of the World Trade Organization in its decision of 6 December
2005, which provide flexibilities for the protection of public health, and in particular to promote access to medicines
for all, and to encourage the provision of assistance to developing countries in this regard, and calling for broad and
timely acceptance of the amendment to article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement,
Recognizing the continued importance of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health,
which recognizes that intellectual property protection is important for the development of new medicines and also
recognizes the concerns about its effects on prices,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Director
General of the World Health Organization on global health and foreign policy;204
2. Urges Member States, in accordance with their obligations under relevant provisions of international
human rights law, including the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health, to promote equal access to health services, and calls for the development and attainment by Member States
of resilient and sustainable health systems capable of responding effectively to outbreaks and emergencies and of
implementing an effective response to the broader dimensions of outbreaks and emergencies that include food
security and access to basic health services;
3. Calls upon partnerships for global health to support Member States in carrying out their primary
responsibilities to accelerate the transition towards universal health coverage, which implies that all people have

_______________
203
204

World Health Organization, document WHA68/2015/REC/1, annex 3.
A/69/405.

155

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

equal access, without discrimination of any kind, to nationally determined sets of quality promotive, preventive,
curative, rehabilitative and palliative basic health services needed and essential, safe, affordable, effective and
quality medicines, especially through the promotion of primary health care, while ensuring that the use of these
services does not expose the users to financial hardship, with a specific emphasis on the poor, vulnerable and
marginalized segments of the population;
4. Urges Member States, in cooperation, as appropriate, with relevant international organizations, the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and other relevant non-State actors, including Médecins sans
frontières, to develop effective preventive measures to enhance and promote the safety and protection of medical
and health personnel, as well as respect for their respective professional codes of ethics and scope of practice;
5. Calls upon Member States to strengthen support for the health workforce to enable local and regional
surge capacity, as the most important basis for emergency and outbreak response, which includes ensuring the
availability of adequate care and treatment facilities, essential supplies and protective equipment and strengthening
national and regional capacities for disease detection and surveillance, including the provision of support for
developing countries to build capacity in line with the principles of the World Health Organization Global Code of
Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel;205
6. Encourages Member States to secure sustainable financing for health research and development on
emerging diseases and neglected tropical diseases, including Ebola virus disease, and to enhance access to health
products and medical devices to address the health needs of developing countries;
7. Reiterates the call upon Member States to continue to collaborate, as appropriate, on models and
approaches that support the delinkage of the cost of new research and development from the prices of medicines,
vaccines and diagnostics for Ebola virus disease and other emerging and neglected tropical diseases, so as to ensure
their sustained accessibility, affordability and availability and to ensure access to treatment for all those in need;206
8. Commends the regional efforts to implement action plans to ensure the containment of diseases, and
welcomes the current process for the establishment of an African centre for disease control and prevention, as well
as the similar initiatives around the world in line with the International Health Regulations (2005);200
9. Invites the World Health Organization to provide technical support to Member States, upon request, in
order to strengthen their capacity to deal with public health emergencies and implement the International Health
Regulations (2005), with a particular focus on developing countries, in order to build resilient health systems and
strengthen surveillance and preparedness measures, particularly with regard to infectious diseases;
10. Encourages the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Organization for Animal Health to further develop their collaborative efforts and work
towards a “One Health” approach at the national, regional and global levels;
11. Calls upon the World Health Organization, the international humanitarian system, global cluster leads
and other relevant United Nations entities and non-governmental organizations to strengthen their cooperation and
coordination so as to assist Member States, upon request, in effectively responding to situations in which an
outbreak escalates into a humanitarian crisis;
12. Calls upon Member States to seek synergies and collaboration with the World Health Organization and
other relevant actors in the field of health when supporting implementation of the International Health Regulations
(2005) and developing overall health systems, including disease surveillance systems, health financing, procurement
and the supply chain, as well as the health workforce at the national, regional and global levels;
13. Urges the international community to take the measures required to act quickly and effectively in global
health crises and in all outbreaks and emergencies with health consequences, through a comprehensive and wellcoordinated all-hazards approach;

_______________
205
206

156

World Health Organization, document WHA63/2010/REC/1, annex 5.
See World Health Organization, document EBSS/3/2015/REC/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14. Urges Member States to strengthen country and regional capacity in disaster risk reduction, where
needed, in accordance with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, adopted by Member
States at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Sendai, Japan, from 14 to
18 March 2015;207
15. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with the International Health Regulations (2005), to
strengthen disease surveillance capacity and data and information flows between the local and national levels and
with the World Health Organization at the country, regional and global levels to ensure early reporting and detection
of outbreaks of disease and disasters, and commends in this regard international efforts to assist countries to
implement the Regulations, and acknowledges the critical role that the Global Outbreak Alert and Response
Network can play for rapid identification and confirmation of and response to outbreaks of international importance,
under the leadership of the World Health Organization;
16. Urges Member States to fulfil their commitment to fully implement the International Health Regulations
(2005), utilizing, in this respect, North-South, South-South, triangular and bilateral cooperation as well as the
exchange of best practices, and to monitor national compliance;
17. Welcomes the decisions made by the Executive Board of the World Health Organization at its special
session on the Ebola emergency206 and by the sixty-eighth World Health Assembly to strengthen the global response
to health emergencies,208 and calls upon all Member States to actively support their implementation;
18. Calls upon Member States, if in a position to do so, to support the initiative of the World Bank to
develop a pandemic emergency financing facility towards ensuring that the world has the financial resources to
quickly deploy trained health workers, equipment, medicines and whatever else is required to respond to health
emergencies, along with the contingency fund of the World Health Organization;
19. Decides to hold a high-level meeting in 2016 on antimicrobial resistance, and requests the SecretaryGeneral, in collaboration with the Director General of the World Health Organization, and in consultation with
Member States, as appropriate, to determine options and modalities for the conduct of such a meeting, including
potential deliverables;
20. Encourages Member States to participate actively in the dissemination, verification and validation of
surveillance data and information concerning public health emergencies and, in close collaboration with the World
Health Organization, to exchange information and experience in a timely and open manner on epidemics and the
prevention and control of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases that pose a risk to global public health;
21. Calls upon the international community and Member States to give due consideration to the importance
of the management of international health crises, bearing in mind the social, economic, security and environmental
implications of the policy choices and actions of Member States at all levels in their implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development,209 building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals
and seeking to address their unfinished business;
22. Requests the Secretary-General, as appropriate, in consultation with Member States, relevant
international organizations and other relevant actors, to explore steps to meet the global shortfall of trained health
workers, including the possibility of establishing a high-level commission on future health employment and
economic growth;
23. Also requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with Member States, the Director General of
the World Health Organization and the United Nations system, to submit a report on the lessons learned in the
public health emergency response to and management of previous international crises with health consequences,
and to transmit in 2016 and 2017 reports provided by the World Health Organization on the state of health security,
taking into account deliberation by the World Health Assembly on the matter, and acknowledging that the ongoing
necessity of such reports beyond 2017 can be re-evaluated.
_______________
207

Resolution 69/283, annex II.
See World Health Organization, document WHA68/2015/REC/1.
209
Resolution 70/1.
208

157

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/227
A/RES/70/227

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.39,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

70/227. International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the letter dated 22 December 2015 from the President of the Security Council to the President
of the General Assembly drawing the attention of the President of the Assembly to the text of Council resolution
2256 (2015) of 22 December 2015,210
1. Welcomes the completion of the judicial work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994, following delivery of its last
judgement, on 14 December 2015, and the impending closure of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda set
for 31 December 2015;
2. Acknowledges the substantial contribution of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to the
process of national reconciliation and the restoration of peace and security, and to the fight against impunity and the
development of international criminal justice, especially in relation to the crime of genocide;
3. Reiterates its request to the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 to
complete its work and facilitate the closure of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as expeditiously
as possible, with the aim of completing the transition to the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and expresses its continued concern over repeated delays in the conclusion of the work of the Tribunal, in
the light of Security Council resolution 1966 (2010) of 22 December 2010, in which the Council requested the
Tribunal to complete its trial and appeals proceedings by 31 December 2014;
4. Underlines that States should cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
as well as with the International Residual Mechanism;
5. Decides to extend the term of office of the following permanent and ad litem judges at the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, who are members of the Trial Chambers and the Appeals Chamber, until
31 March 2016 or until the completion of the cases to which they have been or will be assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Jean-Claude Antonetti (France)
Mr. Melville Baird (Trinidad and Tobago)
Mr. O-gon Kwon (Republic of Korea)
Ms. Flavia Lattanzi (Italy)
Mr. Howard Morrison (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Mr. Mandiaye Niang (Senegal)

_______________
210

158

A/70/661.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6. Also decides to extend the term of office of the following permanent judge at the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, who is a member of the Appeals Chamber, until 30 June 2016 or until the completion of
the cases to which he has been or will be assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Koffi Kumelio A. Afande (Togo)
7. Further decides to extend the term of office of the following permanent and ad litem judges at the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, who are members of the Trial Chambers, until 31 October 2016 or
until the completion of the cases to which they have been or will be assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Guy Delvoie (Belgium)
Mr. Burton Hall (Bahamas)
Mr. Antoine Kesia-Mbe Mindua (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
8. Decides to extend the term of office of the following permanent judges at the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, who are members of the Trial Chambers and the Appeals Chamber, until 31 December 2016
or until the completion of the cases to which they have been or will be assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Carmel A. Agius (Malta)
Mr. Christoph Flügge (Germany)
Mr. Liu Daqun (China)
Mr. Theodor Meron (United States of America)
Mr. Bakone Melema Moloto (South Africa)
Mr. Alphonsus Martinus Maria Orie (Netherlands)
Mr. Fausto Pocar (Italy)
9. Also decides to reappoint Mr. Serge Brammertz as Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, notwithstanding the provisions of article 16, paragraph 4, of the statute of the Tribunal related to
the length of office of the Prosecutor, for a term with effect from 1 January 2016 until 31 December 2016, which is
subject to an earlier termination by the Security Council upon the completion of the work of the Tribunal;
10. Renews its call upon the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, in the light of Security
Council resolution 1966 (2010), to redouble its efforts to review its projected case completion dates with a view to
shortening them as appropriate, and to prevent any additional delays;
11. Requests the Office of Internal Oversight Services to carry out an evaluation of the methods and work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, in the context of the implementation of the completion strategy
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010), and to submit its report by 1 June 2016, and requests the Tribunal to report
thereafter on the implementation of any recommendations of the Office in the next biannual report to the Security
Council of its President and Prosecutor on progress towards implementation of the completion strategy of
the Tribunal;
12. Commends those States that have accepted the relocation to their territories of acquitted or convicted
persons who have completed serving their sentences, and reiterates its call upon all States to cooperate with and
render all necessary assistance to the International Residual Mechanism with respect to increased efforts towards the
relocation of acquitted or convicted persons who have completed serving their sentences;
13. Urges all States, especially States where fugitives are suspected to be at large, to intensify their
cooperation with and render all necessary assistance to the International Residual Mechanism, in particular to
achieve the arrest and surrender as soon as possible of all remaining fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda;
14. Urges the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to transfer Mr. Ladislas Ntaganzwa for
trial without delay or conditions;
15. Urges the International Residual Mechanism to continue to monitor the cases of Mr. Laurent
Bucyibaruta, Mr. Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, Mr. Jean Uwinkindi and Mr. Bernard Munyagishari, which were
referred to national jurisdictions;
159

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16. Emphasizes that, in view of the substantially reduced nature of the residual functions, the International
Residual Mechanism was established to be a small, temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and size
would diminish over time, with a small number of staff commensurate with its reduced functions, and, recognizing
in this regard the full commitment to these elements expressed by the Mechanism, urges the Mechanism to continue
to be guided by them in its activities;
17. Welcomes the report of the International Residual Mechanism211 and the supplementary information
submitted by the Mechanism to the Security Council pursuant to the statement by the President of the Council of
16 November 2015,212 for the purpose of reviewing the progress of the work of the Mechanism, including in
completing its functions, as required in paragraph 17 of resolution 1966 (2010);
18. Takes note of the work of the International Residual Mechanism to date, in particular the development of
a legal and regulatory framework, procedures and working practices consistent with the statute of the Mechanism213
and drawing on lessons learned from and best practices of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and other tribunals, including its implementation of the doublehatting of personnel, use of rosters to ensure that judges and staff are utilized only when required, enabling judges
and staff to work remotely to the maximum extent possible, and minimizing the need for full-bench participation in
pretrial and pre-appeal hearing-related work, in order to produce substantial reductions in the costs of judicial
activities compared with those of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and commends the Mechanism on its efforts to produce such reductions;
19. Also takes note of the views on and the recommendations made with regard to the work of the
International Residual Mechanism by the Security Council Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, as
reflected in the present resolution, and requests the Mechanism to take into account those views and implement
those recommendations, and to continue to take steps, such as those referred to in paragraph 18 above, to further
enhance efficiency and effective and transparent management, in particular full implementation of the outstanding
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services; production of more focused projections of
completion timelines and disciplined adherence thereto, including by making the best use of the diverse
approaches of common law and civil law systems; enhancement of the geographical diversity and gender balance
of staff, while ensuring continued professional expertise; implementation of a human resources policy consistent
with its temporary mandate; and further reduction of costs, including through, but not limited to, flexible staff
engagement;
20. Requests the International Residual Mechanism to include in the biannual reports to the Security Council
information on progress achieved in implementing the present resolution, as well as detailed information on the
staffing of the Mechanism, respective workload and related costs, with breakdown by division, and detailed
projections of the duration of residual functions based on available data;
21. Takes note of the conclusion of the review by the Security Council of the progress of the work of the
International Residual Mechanism, including in completing its functions, during its initial period, pursuant to
resolution 1966 (2010);
22. Recalls, with a view to strengthening independent oversight of the International Residual Mechanism,
that, as set out in the statement by the President of the Security Council of 16 November 2015, future reviews
carried out pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 1966 (2010) shall include evaluation reports sought from the
Office of Internal Oversight Services with respect to the methods and work of the Mechanism;
23. Encourages the International Residual Mechanism and the Government of Rwanda to collaborate on
matters related to the legacy of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda with respect to reconciliation and
justice in Rwanda, including in respect of access to archives.

_______________
211

S/2015/896.
S/PRST/2015/21.
213
Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), annex 1.
212

160

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 70/228
A/RES/70/228

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/70/L.38,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

70/228. Organization of the 2016 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS214 and the Political Declarations
on HIV/AIDS adopted at the high-level meetings of the General Assembly in 2006215 and 2011,216
Recalling the HIV/AIDS-related goals and commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,217 in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,218 and in the outcome document of the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,219
Welcoming the achievement of the HIV/AIDS-related targets of Millennium Development Goal 6,220 as well
as the achievement of some of the time-bound goals set out in the 2011 Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS,216
while noting with concern that progress has been uneven among and within countries, that gains are fragile and
reversible without a sustained commitment and action and that these time-bound goals will expire by the end
of 2015,
Recognizing that AIDS remains an urgent global health and development challenge, and recognizing also the
need to address persistent challenges and gaps in the fight against HIV/AIDS,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development221 and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,222 including the commitment to
ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030, and emphasizing its interlinkages with the other goals and targets of the
2030 Agenda,
Encouraging all relevant United Nations entities to actively contribute to the proceedings of the high-level
meeting on HIV/AIDS, and taking note of Human Rights Council resolution 30/8 of 1 October 2015 on the
contribution of the Council to the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS in 2016,223
Recalling its decision 68/555 of 30 June 2014 to convene a high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS in 2016 and to
determine the modalities and organizational arrangements for such a meeting by December 2015,
1. Decides to convene a high-level meeting from 8 to 10 June 2016, which will undertake a comprehensive
review of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS214 and the Political
Declarations on HIV/AIDS of 2006,215 and 2011,216 including successes, best practices, lessons learned, obstacles
and gaps, challenges and opportunities, including with regard to partnership and cooperation, and recommendations
to guide and monitor the HIV/AIDS response beyond 2015, including concrete strategies for action to end the AIDS
epidemic by 2030 as well as to promote the continued commitment and engagement of leaders to accelerate a
comprehensive universal and integrated response to HIV/AIDS;
2.

Also decides that the organizational arrangements for the high-level meeting should be as follows:

(a)

The high-level meeting will comprise plenary meetings and up to five thematic panel discussions;

_______________
214

Resolution S-26/2, annex.
Resolution 60/262, annex.
216
Resolution 65/277, annex.
217
Resolution 55/2.
218
Resolution 60/1.
219
Resolution 65/1.
220
Target 6.A: Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS.
221
Resolution 70/1.
222
Resolution 69/313, annex.
223
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), sect. II.
215

161

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(b) The opening plenary meeting will feature statements by the President of the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, a person openly
living with HIV and an eminent person actively engaged in the response to HIV/AIDS;
(c) The chairs of the panel discussions will present summaries of the discussions to the General Assembly at
its closing plenary meeting;
3.
meeting;

Invites Member and observer States and observers to be represented at the highest level at the high-level

4. Encourages Member States to include in their national delegations to the high-level meeting
representatives such as parliamentarians, mayors of cities significantly affected by HIV/AIDS, representatives of
civil society, including non-governmental organizations and organizations and networks representing people living
with HIV, women, adolescents and young persons, orphans, migrants, community organizations and faith-based
organizations and the private sector
5. Invites the United Nations system, including programmes, funds, specialized agencies and regional
commissions, the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General on HIV/AIDS and the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral to Stop Tuberculosis, as well as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, to participate in
the high-level meeting, as appropriate, and urges them to consider initiatives in support of the preparatory process
and the meeting;
6. Encourages other stakeholders, including the international innovative health tools and drug purchase
facility, UNITAID, and the Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health, to contribute, as appropriate, to the
high-level meeting;
7.

Invites the Inter-Parliamentary Union to contribute to the high-level meeting;

8. Requests the President of the General Assembly to organize, no later than April 2016, and preside over
an informal interactive civil society hearing, with the active participation of people living with HIV and broader civil
society, attended by representatives of Member and observer States and observers, non-governmental organizations
in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, invited civil society organizations and the private
sector, as part of the preparatory process for the high-level meeting, and further requests the President to prepare a
summary of the hearing, to be issued as a document of the Assembly prior to the high-level meeting;
9. Encourages Member States to actively participate in the informal interactive hearing at the
ambassadorial level in order to facilitate interaction between Member States and representatives of non-governmental
organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector;
10. Invites intergovernmental organizations and entities that have observer status with the General
Assembly, non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council and nongovernmental members of the Programme Coordinating Board of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS to participate in the high-level meeting, as appropriate;
11. Decides that representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council, civil society organizations and the private sector – one from each grouping – to be selected
during the informal interactive hearing, may also be included in the list of speakers for the plenary meetings of the
high-level meeting, in consultation with the President of the General Assembly;
12. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of representatives of other relevant
non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who may
participate in the high-level meeting, including its panel discussions, taking into account the principles of
transparency and of equitable geographic representation, to submit the proposed list to Member States for their
consideration on a non-objection basis and to bring the list to the attention of the Assembly;224
13. Decides that the arrangements outlined in paragraph 12 above shall not be considered a precedent for
other similar events;
14. Requests the President of the General Assembly, with support from the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS and in consultation with Member States, to finalize the organizational arrangements for the high-level
_______________
224

162

The list will include proposed as well as final names.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

meeting no later than 15 April 2016, including the identification of a person openly living with HIV and an eminent
person actively engaged in the response to HIV/AIDS to speak at the opening plenary meeting; the identification of
themes and finalization of the panel discussions; and the arrangements for the informal interactive hearing with civil
society and the private sector;
15. Requests the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS to continue to facilitate, to the extent
possible, inclusive consultations at the country and regional levels, with the participation of relevant stakeholders,
including Governments, non-governmental organizations, civil society and the private sector, to review the progress
made towards the achievement of the time-bound goals set out in the 2011 Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS
to be met by 2015, as well as opportunities to address gaps, obstacles and challenges;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive and analytical report, at least six weeks prior
to its consideration by the General Assembly, on progress achieved and challenges remaining in realizing the
commitments set out in the Declaration of Commitment and the Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS, as well as
recommendations for sustainable ways to overcome these challenges, taking into consideration the outcomes and
findings of the aforementioned progress review consultations, as available;
17. Requests the President of the General Assembly to hold timely, open, transparent and inclusive
consultations with all Member States, giving due consideration to the report of the Secretary-General and other
inputs to the preparatory process for the high-level meeting, with a view to adopting a concise and action-oriented
declaration as an outcome of the high-level meeting, to be agreed upon by Member States, which reaffirms and
builds on the Declaration of Commitment and the Political Declarations to guide and monitor the HIV/AIDS
response beyond 2015, towards achieving the commitment of ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030.
RESOLUTION 70/235
A/RES/70/235

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, by a recorded vote of 143 to 1, with 4 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/70/L.22 and Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Barbados, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Portugal,
Romania, Samoa, Slovakia, South Africa, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, United States of America
* In favour: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Turkey
Abstaining: Central African Republic, El Salvador, Mali, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

70/235.

Oceans and the law of the sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its annual resolutions on the law of the sea and on oceans and the law of the sea, including
resolution 69/245 of 29 December 2014, as well as other relevant resolutions concerning the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (the Convention),225
_______________
225

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.

163

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also, in this regard, resolution 69/292 of 19 June 2015 on the development of an international
legally binding instrument under the Convention on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,226 the summary of the first global integrated marine
assessment,227 transmitted by the letter dated 7 July 2015 from the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole on the Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment,
including Socioeconomic Aspects (the Regular Process), to the President of the General Assembly,228 and the
reports on the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the Regular Process,229 of the United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea (the Informal Consultative Process)
at its sixteenth meeting230 and on the twenty-fifth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention,231
Recognizing the pre-eminent contribution provided by the Convention to the strengthening of peace, security,
cooperation and friendly relations among all nations in conformity with the principles of justice and equal rights and
to the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples of the world, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as to the
sustainable development of the oceans and seas,
Emphasizing the universal and unified character of the Convention, and reaffirming that the Convention sets
out the legal framework within which all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out and is of strategic
importance as the basis for national, regional and global action and cooperation in the marine sector, and that its
integrity needs to be maintained, as recognized also by the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development in chapter 17 of Agenda 21,232
Recognizing the important contribution of sustainable development and management of the resources and uses
of the oceans and seas to the achievement of international development goals, including those contained in the
United Nations Millennium Declaration,233
Noting with satisfaction that, in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,234 as endorsed
by the General Assembly in resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, States recognized that oceans, seas and coastal areas
form an integrated and essential component of the Earth’s ecosystem and are critical to sustaining it, and that
international law, as reflected in the Convention, provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable
use of the oceans and their resources, and stressed the importance of the conservation and sustainable use of the
oceans and seas and of their resources for sustainable development, including through their contributions to poverty
eradication, sustained economic growth, food security and creation of sustainable livelihoods and decent work,
while at the same time protecting biodiversity and the marine environment and addressing the impacts of climate
change,
Welcoming the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, held from 25 to 27 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, and in
this regard reaffirming the commitment to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development, as reflected in Goal 14 of the outcome document,

_______________
226

A/70/74 and Add.1.
World Ocean Assessment I.
228
See A/70/112.
229
A/70/418.
230
A/70/78.
231
SPLOS/287.
232
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
233
Resolution 55/2.
234
Resolution 66/288, annex.
227

164

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing paragraphs 64 and 65 of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development, adopted by the Conference, which was held from 13 to 16 July 2015,235
Recalling that in “The future we want”, States underscored that broad public participation and access to
information and judicial and administrative proceedings were essential to the promotion of sustainable development
and that sustainable development required the meaningful involvement and active participation of regional, national
and subnational legislatures and judiciaries, and all major groups, and, in this regard, that they agreed to work more
closely with major groups and other stakeholders and encouraged their active participation, as appropriate, in
processes that contribute to decision-making, planning and implementation of policies and programmes for
sustainable development at all levels,
Conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole
through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral approach, and reaffirming the need to improve cooperation
and coordination at the national, regional and global levels, in accordance with the Convention, to support and
supplement the efforts of each State in promoting the implementation and observance of the Convention and the
integrated management and sustainable development of the oceans and seas,
Reiterating the essential need for cooperation, including through capacity-building and transfer of marine
technology, to ensure that all States, especially developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and
small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, are able both to implement the Convention and to
benefit from the sustainable development of the oceans and seas, as well as to participate fully in global and regional
forums and processes dealing with oceans and law of the sea issues,
Emphasizing the need to strengthen the ability of competent international organizations to contribute, at the
global, regional, subregional and bilateral levels, through cooperation programmes with Governments, to the
development of national capacity in marine science and the sustainable management of the oceans and their
resources,
Recalling that marine science is important for eradicating poverty, contributing to food security, conserving the
world’s marine environment and resources, helping to understand, predict and respond to natural events and
promoting the sustainable development of the oceans and seas, by improving knowledge, through sustained
research efforts and the evaluation of monitoring results, and applying such knowledge to management and
decision-making,
Reiterating its deep concern at the serious adverse impacts on the marine environment and biodiversity, in
particular on vulnerable marine ecosystems and their physical and biogenic structure, including coral reefs, cold
water habitats, hydrothermal vents and seamounts, of certain human activities,
Emphasizing the need for the safe and environmentally sound recycling of ships,
Expressing deep concern at the adverse economic, social and environmental impacts of the physical alteration
and destruction of marine habitats that may result from land-based and coastal development activities, in particular
those land reclamation activities that are carried out in a manner that has a detrimental impact on the marine
environment,
Reiterating its serious concern at the current and projected adverse effects of climate change and ocean
acidification on the marine environment and marine biodiversity, and emphasizing the urgency of addressing these
issues,
Expressing concern that climate change continues to increase the severity and incidence of coral bleaching
throughout tropical seas and weakens the ability of reefs to withstand ocean acidification, which could have serious
and irreversible negative effects on marine organisms, particularly corals, as well as to withstand other pressures,
including overfishing and pollution,
Reiterating its deep concern at the vulnerability of the environment and the fragile ecosystems of the polar
regions, including the Arctic Ocean and the Arctic ice cap, particularly affected by the projected adverse effects of
climate change and ocean acidification,
_______________
235

Resolution 69/313, annex.

165

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the need for a more integrated and ecosystem-based approach to, further study of and the
promotion of measures for enhanced cooperation, coordination and collaboration relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biodiversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction,
Recognizing also that the realization of the benefits of the Convention could be enhanced by international
cooperation, technical assistance and advanced scientific knowledge, as well as by funding and capacity-building,
Recognizing further that hydrographic surveys and nautical charting are critical to the safety of navigation and
life at sea, environmental protection, including the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems, and the economics
of the global shipping industry, and encouraging further efforts towards electronic charting, which not only provides
significantly increased benefits for safe navigation and management of ship movement, but also provides data and
information that can be used for sustainable fisheries activities and other sectoral uses of the marine environment,
the delimitation of maritime boundaries and environmental protection, and noting that under the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974,236 ships on international voyages are required to carry an electronic
chart display and information system, in accordance with the implementation schedule as set out in that Convention,
Recognizing that ocean data buoys deployed and operated in accordance with international law are critical for
improving understanding of weather, climate and ecosystems, and that certain types of ocean data buoys contribute
to saving lives by detecting tsunamis, and reiterating its serious concern at intentional and unintentional damage to
such buoys,
Emphasizing that underwater archaeological, cultural and historical heritage, including shipwrecks and
watercraft, holds essential information on the history of humankind and that such heritage is a resource that needs to
be protected and preserved,
Noting with concern the continuing problem of transnational organized crime committed at sea, including
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons and
illicit trafficking in firearms, and threats to maritime safety and security, including piracy, armed robbery at sea,
smuggling and terrorist acts against shipping, offshore installations and other maritime interests, and noting the
deplorable loss of life and adverse impact on international trade, energy security and the global economy resulting
from such activities,
Reiterating the importance of the fair treatment of crew members and its influence on maritime safety,
Recognizing that fibre-optic submarine cables transmit most of the world’s data and communications and hence
are vitally important to the global economy and the national security of all States, conscious that these cables are
susceptible to intentional and accidental damage from shipping and other activities and that the maintenance, including
the repair, of these cables is important, noting that these matters have been brought to the attention of States at
various workshops and seminars, and conscious of the need for States to adopt national laws and regulations to
protect submarine cables and render their wilful damage or damage by culpable negligence punishable offences,
Noting the importance of the delineation of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles and
that it is in the broader interest of the international community that coastal States with a continental shelf beyond
200 nautical miles submit information on the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles to the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (the Commission), and welcoming the submissions to the
Commission by a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention on the outer limits of their continental shelf
beyond 200 nautical miles, that the Commission has continued to fulfil its role, including of making recommendations
to coastal States, and that the summaries of recommendations are being made publicly available,237
Noting also that many coastal States Parties have submitted preliminary information indicative of the outer
limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, as provided for in the decision of the eighteenth Meeting of
States Parties to the Convention regarding the workload of the Commission and the ability of States, particularly
developing States, to fulfil the requirements of article 4 of annex II to the Convention, as well as the decision
contained in SPLOS/72, paragraph (a),238
_______________
236

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1184, No. 18961.
Available from the web page of the Commission maintained by the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea.
238
SPLOS/183.
237

166

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting further that some coastal States may continue to face particular challenges in relation to preparing and
presenting submissions to the Commission,
Noting that financial and technical assistance may be sought by developing countries for activities in relation
to preparing and presenting submissions to the Commission, including through the voluntary trust fund established
by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/7 of 30 October 2000 for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of
submissions to the Commission for developing States, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, and compliance with article 76 of the Convention, as well as other accessible international
assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the trust funds established pursuant to resolution 55/7 in facilitating the
participation of members of the Commission from developing States in the meetings of the Commission and in
fulfilling the requirements of article 4 of annex II to the Convention, while noting with appreciation the recent
contributions made to them,
Reaffirming the importance of the work of the Commission for coastal States and for the international
community,
Recognizing that practical difficulties can arise when there is a considerable delay between the preparation of
submissions and their consideration by the Commission, including in retaining expertise up to and during the
consideration of the submissions by the Commission,
Recognizing also the significant workload of the Commission in view of the large number of submissions
already received and a number of submissions yet to be received, which places additional demands and challenges
on its members and the secretariat as provided by the Secretary-General of the United Nations through the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat (the Division), and
welcoming the decision of the twenty-first Meeting of States Parties to the Convention regarding the workload of
the Commission,239
Noting with concern the projected timetable of the work of the Commission on the submissions already
received by it and those yet to be received, and in this regard noting with appreciation the continued implementation
of the decision of the Commission at its thirtieth session concerning the arrangements for its sessions and the
meetings of its subcommissions, taking into account the decision of the twenty-first Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention,240
Recognizing the need to ensure that the Commission can perform its functions under the Convention
expeditiously, efficiently and effectively and maintain its high level of quality and expertise,
Expressing concern about the implications of the workload of the Commission for the conditions of service of
its members,
Noting, in this regard, the decision of the twenty-fifth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention regarding
the conditions of service of the members of the Commission,241
Recalling its decision, in resolutions 57/141 of 12 December 2002 and 58/240 of 23 December 2003, to
establish a regular process under the United Nations for global reporting and assessment of the state of the marine
environment, including socioeconomic aspects, both current and foreseeable, building on existing regional
assessments, as recommended by the World Summit on Sustainable Development,242 and noting the need for
cooperation among all States to this end,
Recalling also its decisions, in paragraphs 202, 203 and 209 of resolution 65/37 A of 7 December 2010 and
paragraphs 200, 205 and 206 of resolution 66/231 of 24 December 2011, regarding the Regular Process, as
established under the United Nations and accountable to the General Assembly,
_______________
239

SPLOS/229.
See CLCS/76, CLCS/80 and Corr.1, CLCS/85 and CLCS/88.
241
SPLOS/286.
242
See Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
240

167

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling further that the Division has been designated to provide secretariat support to the Regular Process,
including its established institutions,
Recognizing the importance and the contribution of the work of the Informal Consultative Process established
by the General Assembly in its resolution 54/33 of 24 November 1999 to facilitate the annual review of
developments in ocean affairs by the Assembly,
Noting the continuously growing responsibilities of the Secretary-General under the Convention and related
resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular resolutions 49/28 of 6 December 1994, 52/26 of 26 November
1997, 54/33, 65/37 A, 65/37 B of 4 April 2011, 66/231, 67/78 of 11 December 2012, 68/70 of 9 December 2013,
69/245 and 69/292, and in this context the unprecedented substantial increase in activities of the Division, in
particular in view of the growing number of requests to the Division for additional outputs and servicing of
meetings, the provision of technical assistance and capacity-building, the need for enhanced support and assistance
to the Commission and the role of the Division in carrying out the functions in resolution 69/292 and as the
secretariat of the Regular Process, and in relation to the functions as focal point for UN-Oceans,
Reaffirming the importance of the work of the International Seabed Authority (the Authority) in accordance
with the Convention and the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (the Part XI Agreement),243
Reaffirming also the importance of the work of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (the Tribunal)
in accordance with the Convention,
I
Implementation of the Convention and
related agreements and instruments
1. Reaffirms its annual resolutions on the law of the sea and on oceans and the law of the sea, including
resolution 69/245, and other relevant resolutions concerning the Convention;225
2. Also reaffirms the unified character of the Convention and the vital importance of preserving its
integrity;
3. Welcomes the recent accession to the Convention, and calls upon all States that have not done so, in
order to fully achieve the goal of universal participation, to become parties to the Convention and the Part XI
Agreement;243
4. Calls upon States that have not done so, in order to achieve the goal of universal participation, to become
parties to the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks (the Fish Stocks Agreement);244
5. Calls upon States to harmonize their national legislation with the provisions of the Convention and,
where applicable, relevant agreements and instruments, to ensure the consistent application of those provisions and
to ensure also that any declarations or statements that they have made or make when signing, ratifying or acceding
to the Convention do not purport to exclude or to modify the legal effect of the provisions of the Convention in their
application to the State concerned and to withdraw any such declarations or statements;
6. Calls upon States Parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to deposit with the SecretaryGeneral charts or lists of geographical coordinates, as provided for in the Convention, preferably using the generally
accepted and most recent geodetic datums;
7. Notes, in this regard, the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to improve the existing geographic
information system for the deposit by States of charts and geographical coordinates concerning maritime zones,
including lines of delimitation, submitted pursuant to the Convention, and to give due publicity thereto, as requested
_______________
243
244

168

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1836, No. 31364.
Ibid., vol. 2167, No. 37924.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

in paragraph 6 of resolution 59/24 of 17 November 2004, as well as the ongoing cooperation with the International
Hydrographic Organization to develop the technical standards for the collection, storage and dissemination of the
information deposited, in order to ensure compatibility among geographic information systems, electronic nautical
charts and other systems, and emphasizes the importance of the prompt completion of these efforts;
8. Urges all States to cooperate, directly or through competent international bodies, in taking measures to
protect and preserve objects of an archaeological and historical nature found at sea, in conformity with the
Convention, and calls upon States to work together on such diverse challenges and opportunities as the appropriate
relationship between salvage law and scientific management and conservation of underwater cultural heritage,
increasing technological abilities to discover and reach underwater sites, looting and growing underwater tourism;
9. Acknowledges the recent deposit of instruments of ratification and acceptance of the 2001 Convention
on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage,245 calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider
becoming parties to that Convention, and notes in particular the rules annexed to that Convention, which address the
relationship between salvage law and scientific principles of management, conservation and protection of
underwater cultural heritage among Parties, their nationals and vessels flying their flag;
II
Capacity-building
10. Emphasizes that capacity-building is essential to ensure that States, especially developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, are able
to fully implement the Convention, benefit from the sustainable development of the oceans and seas and participate
fully in global and regional forums on ocean affairs and the law of the sea;
11. Recalls, in this regard, that in “The future we want”,234 States recognized the importance of building the
capacity of developing countries to be able to benefit from the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and
seas and their resources, and in this regard emphasized the need for cooperation in marine scientific research to
implement the provisions of the Convention and the outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development, as
well as for the transfer of technology, taking into account the Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine
Technology adopted by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its twenty-second session, in 2003;
12. Emphasizes the need for international cooperation for capacity-building, including cross-sectoral
cooperation, at national, regional and global levels, to address, in particular, gaps in capacity-building in ocean
affairs and the law of the sea, including marine science;
13. Calls for capacity-building initiatives to take into account the needs of developing countries, and calls
upon States, international organizations and donor agencies to make efforts to ensure the sustainability of such
initiatives;
14. Calls upon donor agencies and international financial institutions to keep their programmes
systematically under review to ensure the availability in all States, particularly in developing States, of the
economic, legal, navigational, scientific and technical skills necessary for the full implementation of the Convention
and the objectives of the present resolution, as well as the sustainable development of the oceans and seas nationally,
regionally and globally, and in so doing to bear in mind the interests and needs of landlocked developing States;
15. Encourages intensified efforts to build capacity for developing countries, in particular for the least
developed countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, to improve aids to
navigation, hydrographic services and the production of nautical charts, including electronic charts, as well as the
mobilization of resources and building of capacity with support from international financial institutions and the
donor community;
16. Calls upon States and international institutions, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes, technical partnerships and fellowships, to continue to support and strengthen capacity_______________
245

Ibid., vol. 2562, No. 45694.

169

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

building activities, in particular in developing countries, in the field of marine scientific research by, inter alia,
training personnel to develop and enhance relevant expertise, providing the necessary equipment, facilities and
vessels and transferring environmentally sound technologies;
17. Also calls upon States and international institutions, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes, technical partnerships and fellowships, to support and strengthen capacity-building
activities in developing countries, in particular least developed countries and small island developing States, to
develop their maritime administration and appropriate legal frameworks to establish or enhance the necessary
infrastructure, legislative and enforcement capabilities to promote effective compliance with and implementation
and enforcement of their responsibilities under international law;
18. Further calls upon States and international institutions, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes, technical partnerships and fellowships, to develop and strengthen capacity-building
activities in and to transfer to developing countries, in particular least developed countries and small island
developing States, on mutually agreed terms, and taking into account the Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of
Marine Technology, environmentally sound technologies to study and minimize the impacts of ocean acidification;
19. Emphasizes the need to focus on strengthening South-South cooperation as an additional way to build
capacity and as a cooperative mechanism to further enable countries to set their own priorities and needs and to
foster actions to implement such cooperation;
20. Recognizes with appreciation the important contribution to capacity-building in the field of the law of
the sea by the Rhodes Academy of Oceans Law and Policy, a cooperative undertaking by the Center for Oceans
Law and Policy of the University of Virginia School of Law, the Aegean Institute of the Law of the Sea and
Maritime Law, the Law of the Sea Institute of Iceland, the Max Planck Institute for Comparative Public Law and
International Law, the Netherlands Institute for the Law of the Sea of Utrecht University and the Centre for
International Law of the National University of Singapore that offers a prominent three-week summer course
annually in Rhodes, Greece, celebrates its twentieth anniversary in 2015 and has graduated more than 700 students
from more than 120 countries;
21. Recognizes the importance of the work of the International Maritime Law Institute of the International
Maritime Organization, as a centre of education and training of government legal advisers, mainly from developing
States, confirms its effective capacity-building role in the field of international law, and urges States,
intergovernmental organizations and financial institutions to make voluntary financial contributions to the budget of
the Institute;
22. Also recognizes the importance of the World Maritime University of the International Maritime
Organization as a centre of excellence for maritime education and research, confirms its effective capacity-building
role in the field of maritime transportation, policy, administration, management, safety, security and environmental
protection, as well as its role in the international exchange and transfer of knowledge, and urges States,
intergovernmental organizations and other bodies to make voluntary financial contributions to the University;
23. Welcomes ongoing activities for capacity-building so as to address maritime security and safety needs
and the protection of the marine environment of developing States, and encourages States and international financial
institutions to provide additional funding for capacity-building programmes, including for transfer of technology,
including through the International Maritime Organization and other competent international organizations;
24. Recognizes the considerable need to provide sustained capacity-building assistance, including on
financial and technical aspects, by relevant international organizations and donors to developing States, with a view
to further strengthening their capacity to take effective measures against the multiple facets of international criminal
activities at sea, in line with the relevant international instruments, including the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto;246
25. Also recognizes the need to build the capacity of developing States to raise awareness of and support the
implementation of improved waste management practices, noting the particular vulnerability of small island
developing States to the impact of marine pollution from land-based sources and marine debris;
_______________
246

170

Ibid., vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

26. Further recognizes the importance of assisting developing States, in particular the least developed
countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, in implementing the Convention,
urges States, intergovernmental organizations and agencies, national institutions, non-governmental organizations
and international financial institutions, as well as natural and juridical persons, to make voluntary financial or other
contributions to the trust funds, as referred to in resolutions 55/7, 57/141 and 64/71 of 4 December 2009, established
for this purpose, and expresses its appreciation to those that have contributed;247
27. Acknowledges the importance of capacity-building for developing States, in particular the least
developed countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, for the protection of the
marine environment and the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources;
28. Recognizes that promoting the voluntary transfer of technology is an essential aspect of building
capacity in marine science;
29. Encourages States to use the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on
the Transfer of Marine Technology, and recalls the important role of the secretariat of that Commission in the
implementation and promotion of the Criteria and Guidelines;
30. Also encourages States to consider additional opportunities for capacity-building at the regional level;
31. Welcomes the efforts of the Tribunal in holding regional workshops, including the latest workshop for
the Asia-Pacific region, entitled “The Role of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea in the Settlement of
Disputes relating to the Law of the Sea”, held in Bali, Indonesia, on 27 and 28 August 2015, with the assistance of
the Korea Maritime Institute and in cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia;
32. Takes note of the decision by the Executive Council of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission to launch the Global Ocean Science Report;
33. Notes with appreciation the adoption by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission of the new Capacity Development Strategy (2015–2021) which takes into account that capacity
development is a fundamental tenet of the mission of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission;
34. Expresses its appreciation for the contribution of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission to
capacity-building through its Ocean Teacher Academy training system, which has provided training in ocean data
and information management, and notes the setting up of the Ocean Teacher Global Academy, operating through a
network of regional training centres, which builds capacity and promotes expertise available in developing
countries;
35. Notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Division to compile information on capacity-building initiatives,
requests the Secretary-General to continue to regularly update such information provided by States, international
organizations and donor agencies and include it in his annual report to the General Assembly, invites States,
international organizations and donor agencies to submit such information to the Secretary-General for this purpose,
and requests the Division to post the information on capacity-building initiatives from the annual report of the
Secretary-General on the website of the Division in an easily accessible manner so as to facilitate the matching of
capacity-building needs with opportunities;
36. Calls upon States to continue to assist developing States, and especially the least developed countries
and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, at the bilateral and, where appropriate,
multilateral levels, in the preparation of submissions to the Commission regarding the establishment of the outer
limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, including the assessment of the nature and extent of the
continental shelf of a coastal State, and recalls that coastal States can make requests to the Commission for scientific
and technical advice in the preparation of data for their submissions, in accordance with article 3 of annex II to the
Convention;
37. Recognizes the importance of the trust fund established pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose of
facilitating the preparation of submissions to the Commission for developing States, in particular the least developed
_______________
247

See A/70/74/Add.1, para. 137.

171

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

countries and small island developing States, and compliance with article 76 of the Convention, and, in order to
assist developing States to meet the travel and daily subsistence allowance costs associated with meeting with the
Commission when their submissions are being examined and upon the invitation of the Commission, in accordance
with paragraph 31 of the terms of reference, guidelines and rules of the trust fund,248 amends, as set out in the annex
to the present resolution, sections 2, 4 and 5 of the terms of reference, guidelines and rules of the trust fund;
38. Calls upon the Division to continue to disseminate information on relevant procedures related to the
trust fund established for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of submissions to the Commission and to
continue its dialogue with potential beneficiaries with a view to providing financial support to developing countries
for activities to facilitate their submissions in accordance with the requirements of article 76 of the Convention and
with the Rules of Procedure249 and the Scientific and Technical Guidelines of the Commission250 and to defray the
costs of travel and daily subsistence allowance for delegates to participate in meetings with the Commission upon its
invitation;
39. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with States and relevant international organizations and
institutions, to continue to support training and other activities to assist developing States in the preparation and
presentation of their submissions to the Commission;
40. Recognizes with appreciation the contribution of the Division to capacity-building activities at the
national and regional levels, in particular the work of the Division in promoting wider appreciation of the
Convention and in assisting with its implementation, through the provision of information, advice and assistance to
States and intergovernmental organizations, and recognizes in particular the delivery of a programme of assistance
to the Government of Somalia under a project funded by the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia;
41. Invites Member States and others in a position to do so to support the capacity-building activities of the
Division, including by making earmarked voluntary contributions to the trust fund established by the SecretaryGeneral for the Office of Legal Affairs to support the promotion of international law, and expresses its appreciation
to those who have contributed;
42. Recognizes with appreciation the important contribution to the capacity-building of developing countries
and the promotion of the law of the sea made by the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the
Law of the Sea, which was established by the General Assembly in 1981 in honour of the first President of the Third
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea and which, relying on its network of 17 host institutions, has
awarded to date 30 fellowships to individuals from 26 Member States, welcomes the fact that the twenty-seventh
award, in 2015, was made possible thanks to the generous contributions of Member States, expresses its concern
that the twenty-eighth award, in 2016, may not be possible owing to a lack of funding, and recalls in this regard, the
provisions of its resolutions on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination
and Wider Appreciation of International Law;251
43. Also recognizes with appreciation the important contribution of the United Nations-Nippon Foundation
of Japan Fellowship Programme, which has awarded 120 fellowships to individuals from 70 Member States since
2004, to human resources development for developing Member States in the field of ocean affairs and the law of the
sea and related disciplines, as well as the fostering of global interlinkages and continuing capacity development
through the alumni programme, which held a regional meeting on oceans and climate change, in Cancun, Mexico,
from 5 to 9 October 2015, and a meeting on technical aspects of the law of the sea, in Monaco from 20 to
23 October 2015, and further recognizes with appreciation the provision of a fellowship under the Special Strategic
Award of the United Nations-Nippon Foundation of Japan Fellowship Programme in 2015;

_______________
248

Resolution 55/7, annex II.
CLCS/40/Rev.1.
250
CLCS/11 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1.
251
Resolutions 69/117, para. 8, and 70/116, para. 4.
249

172

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

44. Further recognizes with appreciation the important contribution of the Korea Maritime Institute to the
trust fund to support the internship programmes at the Tribunal since 2011 and its continued efforts to provide
education and training for capacity-building of developing countries through the Yeosu Academy of the Law of the
Sea programme, the first and second sessions of which were held in October 2014 and October 2015, respectively;
45. Encourages the competent international organizations, the United Nations Development Programme
and international financial institutions and funds to consider expanding their programmes within their respective
fields of competence for assistance to developing countries and to coordinate their efforts, and recognizes the
funding available from the Global Environment Facility as well as other funds allocated for projects relating to
oceans;
III
Meeting of States Parties
46. Welcomes the report of the twenty-fifth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention,231 also welcomes
the election by the Meeting on 10 June 2015 of one member of the Commission,231 and further welcomes the
decision taken by the Meeting regarding the conditions of service of the members of the Commission;252
47. Notes that the twenty-fifth Meeting of States Parties, convened by the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 69/245, is to be resumed on 15 January 2016, and requests the Secretary-General to provide full
conference services, including documentation, as required;
48. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the twenty-sixth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention
from 20 to 24 June 2016, with full conference services, including documentation, as required;
IV
Peaceful settlement of disputes
49. Notes with satisfaction the continued and significant contribution of the Tribunal to the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means in accordance with Part XV of the Convention, and underlines the important role and
authority of the Tribunal concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention and the Part XI Agreement;
50. Pays tribute to the important and long-standing role of the International Court of Justice with regard to
the peaceful settlement of disputes concerning the law of the sea;
51. Notes that States parties to an international agreement related to the purposes of the Convention may
submit to, inter alia, the Tribunal or the International Court of Justice any dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of that agreement submitted in accordance with that agreement, and also notes the possibility, provided
for in the Statutes of the Tribunal and the Court, to submit disputes to a chamber;
52. Encourages States Parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to consider making a written
declaration, choosing from the means set out in article 287 of the Convention for the settlement of disputes
concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention and the Part XI Agreement, bearing in mind the
comprehensive character of the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in Part XV of the Convention;
V
The Area
53. Reiterates the importance of the ongoing elaboration and standardization by the Authority, pursuant to
article 145 of the Convention, of rules, regulations and procedures to ensure the effective protection of the marine
environment, for, inter alia, the protection and conservation of the natural resources of the Area and for the
prevention of damage to the flora and fauna of the marine environment from harmful effects that may arise from
activities in the Area;
_______________
252

See SPLOS/286 and SPLOS/287.

173

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

54. Notes that, as at 31 July 2015, the Authority had approved 27 plans of work for exploration for marine
mineral resources in the Area and had entered into 15-year contracts for exploration for polymetallic nodules, for
polymetallic sulphides and for cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts;
55. Notes with appreciation the decision taken by the Council of the Authority at its twenty-first session to
adopt the procedures and criteria for extension of an approved plan of work for exploration pursuant to section 1,
paragraph 9, of the annex to the Part XI Agreement;253
56. Encourages the Authority to continue its work on the exploitation regulations as a matter of priority and
in accordance with the list of priority deliverables endorsed by the Council of the Authority;254
57. Recalls the relevance of the advisory opinion on the responsibilities and obligations of States sponsoring
persons and entities with respect to activities in the Area, issued by the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the Tribunal on
1 February 2011;255
58. Recognizes the importance of the responsibilities entrusted to the Authority by articles 143 and 145 of
the Convention, which refer to marine scientific research and protection of the marine environment in the Area,
respectively;
59. Notes the decision of the Assembly of the Authority to undertake, pursuant to article 154 of the
Convention, a general and systematic review of the manner in which the international regime of the Area has
operated in practice, and also notes that an interim report on the progress of the review will be submitted to the
Assembly of the Authority at its twenty-second session, while the final report, together with any recommendations
designed to improve the operation of the regime, is to be submitted to the Assembly at its twenty-third session;256
60. Recalls that the environmental management plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone, including the
designation, on a provisional basis, of a network of areas of particular environmental interest, was approved in 2012,
to be implemented over an initial three-year period so that it may be improved as more scientific, technical and
environmental baseline and resource assessment data become available and that, for that purpose, the conduct of
marine scientific research in those areas and the supply of available results to the Authority was encouraged,257 in
this regard welcomes the request by the Council of the Authority that a workshop be held before the twenty-second
session of the Authority to review the implementation of the plan, and notes with appreciation that the Council
encouraged the Legal and Technical Commission and the secretariat of the Authority to make progress on the
development of environmental management plans in other international seabed area zones, in particular where there
are currently contracts for exploration;254
61. Expresses its appreciation to States that have made contributions to the voluntary trust fund established
pursuant to the decision of the Authority at its eighth session258 for the purpose of defraying the cost of participation
of the members of the Legal and Technical Commission from developing countries and the members of the Finance
Committee from developing countries in the meetings of the Commission and of the Committee,259 and to States
that have made contributions to the endowment fund for marine scientific research in the Area established by the
Authority at its twelfth session,260 for the purpose of promoting and encouraging the conduct of collaborative
marine scientific research in the Area, and encourages States to make additional contributions to these funds;259
62. Recognizes the ongoing efforts of the Authority to promote its work, and notes in this regard the
workshop on mineral exploitation in the Area, held in Singapore, on 16 and 17 June 2015;

_______________
253

ISBA/21/C/19.
See ISBA/21/C/20.
255
See ISBA/17/A/9.
256
ISBA/21/A/9.
257
See ISBA/18/C/22.
258
ISBA/8/A/11.
259
See ISBA/21/A/2.
260
ISBA/12/A/11.
254

174

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

VI
Effective functioning of the Authority and the Tribunal
63. Commends the progress in the work of the Authority;
64. Also commends the work of the Tribunal since its establishment;
65. Appeals to all States Parties to the Convention to pay their assessed contributions to the Authority and to
the Tribunal in full and on time, and also appeals to States Parties in arrears with their contributions to fulfil their
obligations without delay;
66. Encourages the Authority to continue to explore ways to manage the workload resulting from the
increasing number of contracts and applications, and notes the decision of the Council of the Authority at its twentyfirst session, in which it requested the Secretary-General of the Authority to ensure that adequate time and resources
continue to be made available to support the work of the Legal and Technical Commission, especially on priority
issues;254
67. Notes the decision of the Assembly at its twenty-first session, in which it strongly encouraged
contractors that were still considering their position in relation to the annual overhead charge established by the
Assembly at its nineteenth session, related to the administration and supervision of their contracts, to accept the
relevant amendments to the standard terms of their contracts in order to ensure equitable burden-sharing among all
contractors,261 and in this regard recognizes that a number of contractors have already accepted the annual overhead
charge;262
68. Expresses concern about the low attendance at the annual sessions of the Assembly of the Authority,
noting also the concerns expressed with regard to the scheduling of annual sessions of the Authority and taking into
consideration the great strides made by the Authority in adopting regulations for the prospecting and exploration of
minerals in the Area, and invites the Authority to consider measures to improve the attendance at its annual sessions,
including the holding of the sessions at an earlier time;
69. Recognizes the ongoing efforts of the Authority to organize sensitization seminars to promote awareness
of its work and notes, in this regard, the holding of the ninth sensitization seminar on the exploration and
exploitation of deep seabed mineral resources in the Area, in Pretoria from 17 to 19 March 2015, welcomes the call
to include landlocked and other geographically disadvantaged countries in the seminars, and calls upon other States
and regions to consider inviting the Authority to organize such seminars in order to promote wider participation by
the international community in the exploration and exploitation of mineral resources in the Area;
70. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Agreement on the
Privileges and Immunities of the Tribunal263 and to the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the
Authority;264
71. Emphasizes the importance of the rules and staff regulations of the Tribunal in promoting the
recruitment of a geographically representative staff in the Professional and higher categories, and welcomes the
actions taken by the Tribunal in observance of those rules and regulations;
VII
The continental shelf and the work of the Commission
72. Recalls that, in accordance with article 76, paragraph 8, of the Convention, information on the limits of
the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is
measured shall be submitted by the coastal State to the Commission set up under annex II to the Convention on the
basis of equitable geographical representation, that the Commission shall make recommendations to coastal States
_______________
261

See ISBA/21/A/10, para. 5.
See ISBA/21/FC/4/Rev.2.
263
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2167, No. 37925.
264
Ibid., vol. 2214, No. 39357.
262

175

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

on matters related to the establishment of the outer limits of their continental shelf, and that the limits of the shelf
established by a coastal State on the basis of these recommendations shall be final and binding;
73. Also recalls that, in accordance with article 77, paragraph 3, of the Convention, the rights of the coastal
State over the continental shelf do not depend on occupation, effective or notional, or on any express proclamation;
74. Notes with satisfaction that a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention have submitted
information to the Commission regarding the establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond
200 nautical miles, in conformity with article 76 of the Convention and article 4 of annex II to the Convention,
taking into account the decision of the eleventh Meeting of States Parties to the Convention contained in SPLOS/72,
paragraph (a);
75. Also notes with satisfaction that a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention have
submitted to the Secretary-General, pursuant to the decision of the eighteenth Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention,265 preliminary information indicative of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical
miles and a description of the status of preparation and intended date of submission in accordance with the
requirements of article 76 of the Convention and with the Rules of Procedure and the Scientific and Technical
Guidelines of the Commission, and notes with satisfaction that additional submissions referred to in preliminary
information have been filed with the Commission;
76. Further notes with satisfaction the progress in the work of the Commission266 and that it is giving
current consideration to a number of submissions that have been made regarding the establishment of the outer
limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles;
77. Notes with satisfaction that the Commission, taking into account the decision of the eighteenth Meeting
of States Parties to the Convention,265 has compiled lists of websites of organizations, data/information portals and
data holders where general information and publicly available scientific and technical data can be accessed that may
be relevant to the preparation of submissions, and has made this information available on its website;
78. Takes note of the 22 recommendations made by the Commission on the submissions of a number of
coastal States, and welcomes the fact that summaries of recommendations are being made publicly available in
accordance with paragraph 11.3 of annex III to the Rules of Procedure of the Commission;
79. Notes that the consideration by the Commission of submissions by coastal States in accordance with
article 76 of and annex II to the Convention is without prejudice to the application of other parts of the Convention
by States Parties;
80. Also notes the considerable number of submissions yet to be considered by the Commission and the
demands that this places on its members and the secretariat as provided by the Division, and emphasizes the need to
ensure that the Commission can perform its functions expeditiously, efficiently and effectively and maintain its high
level of quality and expertise;
81. Takes note with appreciation of the decision of the Commission at its thirty-fifth and thirty-seventh
sessions regarding the workload of the Commission, including its decision to continue to extend the duration of its
sessions for 2015 and until June 2017 to three sessions of seven weeks each, including plenary meetings,267 and
further notes the decision of the Commission at its thirty-second and thirty-fourth sessions to establish new
subcommissions so that nine subcommissions would actively consider submissions;268
82. Notes that the Meeting of States Parties to the Convention, in its decisions regarding the conditions of
service of the members of the Commission,269 reaffirmed the obligation of States under the Convention whose
experts were serving on the Commission to defray the expenses of the experts they had nominated while the
experts are in performance of Commission duties, including the provision of medical coverage, and urged those
_______________
265

See SPLOS/183.
See CLCS/88, CLCS/90 and CLCS/91.
267
See CLCS/85 and CLCS/88.
268
See CLCS/80 and Corr.1 and CLCS/83 and Corr.1.
269
SPLOS/276 and SPLOS/286.
266

176

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

States to do their utmost to ensure the full participation of those experts in the work of the Commission, including
the meetings of subcommissions, in accordance with the Convention;
83. Also notes the decision of the twenty-fifth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention to continue the
consideration of the conditions of service of the members of the Commission within the open-ended working group
established by the twenty-third Meeting of States Parties to the Convention;241
84. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take appropriate measures, within overall existing
resource levels, to further strengthen the capacity of the Division, serving as the secretariat of the Commission, in
order to ensure enhanced support and assistance to the Commission and its subcommissions in their consideration of
submissions, as required by paragraph 9 of annex III to the Rules of Procedure of the Commission, in particular its
human resources, taking into account the need for simultaneous work on several submissions;
85. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to provide all necessary secretariat services to the Commission
in accordance with article 2, paragraph 5, of annex II to the Convention;
86. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate and timely measures to ensure secretariat services for
the Commission and its subcommissions for the extended duration of time requested in the decision of the twentyfirst Meeting of States Parties to the Convention;239
87. Also requests the Secretary-General, consequently, to continue to allocate appropriate and sufficient
resources to the Division to provide adequate services and assistance to the Commission in view of the increase in
the number of its working weeks;
88. Expresses its appreciation to States that have made contributions to the voluntary trust fund established
pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of submissions to the Commission and to
the voluntary trust fund also established pursuant to that resolution for the purpose of defraying the cost of
participation of the members of the Commission from developing States in the meetings of the Commission,247
encourages States to make additional contributions to these funds, and authorizes the use, as appropriate, of the latter
trust fund, and in accordance with the purpose of its terms of reference, to defray the cost of the participation of the
Chair of the Commission who is a member of the Commission nominated by a developing country in the Meetings
of States Parties to the Convention;
89. Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an interim measure and subject to the availability of funds in the
trust fund established pursuant to resolution 55/7 for facilitating the participation of members of the Commission
from developing States in the meetings of the Commission, following the allocation of the required funds to cover
the costs of travel and daily subsistence allowance of the members of the Commission from developing States for
the sessions of the Commission in 2016, to reimburse those members for the costs of medical travel insurance from
that trust fund on a session-by-session basis and subject to a reasonable limit that the Secretary-General shall
determine, based on the information regarding medical travel insurance available to him;
90. Takes note of the written information, provided by the Secretary-General in response to the request in
paragraph 81 of resolution 69/245, on options for mechanisms to provide medical insurance coverage to members
of the Commission, including costs, and expresses its intention to continue to consider these and other options and,
if necessary, to further review the terms of reference for the trust fund established pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the
purpose of facilitating the participation of members of the Commission from developing States in the meetings of
the Commission;
91. Emphasizes the need for members of the Commission to have more suitable working space for their
work at the sessions of the Commission and its subcommissions and, in this regard, recognizes the written
information, provided by the Secretary-General in response to the request in paragraph 84 of resolution 69/245, on
options to ensure that they have such working space, and notes that consideration of structural changes to the current
working space of the Commission would need to take due account of the upcoming expiry of the lease for the
current premises of the Division and other issues raised in the study on the long-term accommodation needs at
United Nations Headquarters for the period from 2014 to 2034270 and the associated consideration of those issues by
the General Assembly;
_______________
270

A/68/734.

177

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

92. Recognizes, in regard to the long-term accommodation discussions, that, owing to its exceptional
character, the Commission has special requirements for its working space, including the need for additional fit-forpurpose working space, adequate technical equipment and climate control, and needs to remain located within the
same premises as the Division, and emphasizes that, in the context of any relocation of the Division or any change
in its working space, full regard will be paid to these special requirements of the Commission;
93. Notes with concern the urgent challenges that the current working conditions place on the Commission,
and in this regard, while taking due account of the upcoming expiry of the lease of the current premises of the
Division and the long-term accommodation discussions noted in paragraph 92 above, requests that the SecretaryGeneral provide cost-effective, transportable, non-structural improvements to address some of the immediate
working space needs of the Commission;
94. Approves the convening by the Secretary-General of the fortieth, forty-first and forty-second sessions of
the Commission, in New York, from 1 February to 18 March 2016, from 11 July to 26 August 2016 and from
17 October to 2 December 2016, respectively, with full conference services, including documentation, for the
plenary parts of these sessions,271 as well as any resumed sessions as may be required by the Commission, and
requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to meet these requirements within overall existing resources;
95. Expresses its firm conviction about the importance of the work of the Commission, carried out in
accordance with the Convention, including with respect to the participation of coastal States in relevant proceedings
concerning their submissions, and recognizes the continued need for active interaction between coastal States and
the Commission;
96. Expresses its appreciation to States that have exchanged views in order to increase understanding of
issues, including expenditures involved, arising from the application of article 76 of the Convention, thus facilitating
the preparation of submissions by States, in particular developing States, to the Commission, and encourages States
to continue to exchange views;
97. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with Member States, to continue to support workshops
or symposiums on scientific and technical aspects of the establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf
beyond 200 nautical miles, taking into account the need to strengthen capacity-building for developing countries in
preparing their submissions;
VIII
Maritime safety and security and flag State implementation
98. Encourages States to ratify or accede to international agreements addressing the safety and security of
navigation, as well as maritime labour, and to adopt the necessary measures consistent with the Convention and
other relevant international instruments aimed at implementing and enforcing the rules contained in those
agreements, and emphasizes the need for capacity-building for and assistance to developing States;
99. Recognizes that the legal regimes governing maritime safety and maritime security may have common
and mutually reinforcing objectives that may be interrelated and could benefit from synergies, and encourages States
to take this into account in their implementation;
100. Emphasizes the need for further efforts to promote a culture of safety and security in the shipping
industry and to address the shortage of adequately trained personnel, and urges the establishment of more centres to
provide the required education and training;
101. Also emphasizes that safety and security measures should be implemented in support of and with minimal
negative effects on seafarers and fishers, especially in relation to their working conditions, and welcomes the ongoing
cooperation between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Labour
Organization in relation to decent work and employment in fisheries and aquaculture and on child labour in fisheries
and aquaculture, as well as the work that has been conducted by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the International Labour Organization on the issue of trafficking in persons and forced labour on fishing vessels;
_______________
271

From 8 to 12 February and from 7 to 11 March 2016 during the fortieth session, and from 18 to 22 July and from 15 to 19 August 2016
during the forty-first session.

178

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

102. Welcomes the consideration by the International Maritime Organization of the fair treatment of seafarers,
and notes the adoption by the Organization on 4 December 2013 of resolution A.1090(28) on the fair treatment of
crew members in respect of shore leave and access to shore-side facilities;
103. Notes the theme for the 2015 World Maritime Day, “Maritime education and training”;
104. Invites States that have not yet done so to become parties to the International Convention on Standards
of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978,272 as amended, and the International Convention
on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995;
105. Invites States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Maritime Labour Convention, as
amended, and also invites States that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the Work in Fishing Convention,
2007 (No. 188) and the Seafarers’ Identity Documents Convention (Revised), 2003 (No. 185),273 of the International
Labour Organization and to effectively implement all of those Conventions, and emphasizes the need to provide to
States, at their request, technical cooperation and assistance in that regard;
106. Invites States to ratify or accede to the Cape Town Agreement of 2012 on the Implementation of the
Provisions of the Torremolinos Protocol of 1993 relating to the Torremolinos International Convention for the
Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977;
107. Welcomes ongoing cooperation between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the International Maritime Organization and the International Labour Organization relating to the safety of fishers
and fishing vessels, and underlines the urgent need for continued work in that area;
108. Recalls that all actions taken to combat threats to maritime security must be in accordance with
international law, including the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention;
109. Recognizes the crucial role of international cooperation at the global, regional, subregional and bilateral
levels in combating, in accordance with international law, threats to maritime security, including piracy, armed
robbery at sea and terrorist acts against shipping, offshore installations and other maritime interests, through bilateral
and multilateral instruments and mechanisms aimed at monitoring, preventing and responding to such threats, the
enhanced sharing of information among States relevant to the detection, prevention and suppression of such threats,
and the prosecution of offenders with due regard to national legislation, and the need for sustained capacity-building
to support such objectives, and in this regard welcomes the adoption at the Ministerial Meeting of the twenty-second
Regional Forum of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, held in Kuala Lumpur on 6 August 2015, of the
Work Plan for Maritime Security 2015–2017;
110. Acknowledges the work of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in promoting
international cooperation and strengthening capacity to combat the problem of transnational organized crime
committed at sea;
111. Notes that piracy and armed robbery at sea affect a wide range of vessels engaged in maritime activities;
112. Emphasizes the importance of promptly reporting incidents to enable accurate information on the scope
of the problem of piracy and armed robbery against ships and, in the case of armed robbery against ships, by
affected vessels to the coastal State, underlines the importance of effective information-sharing with States
potentially affected by incidents of piracy and armed robbery against ships, and notes with appreciation the
important role of the International Maritime Organization and the important contribution of the Information Sharing
Centre of the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia,
based in Singapore, which will mark its tenth anniversary in 2016;
113. Urges all States, in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization, to actively combat piracy
and armed robbery at sea by adopting measures, including those relating to assistance with capacity-building
through training of seafarers, port staff and enforcement personnel in the prevention, reporting and investigation of
_______________
272
273

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1361, No. 23001.
Ibid., vol. 2304, No. 41069.

179

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

incidents, by bringing the alleged perpetrators to justice, in accordance with international law, and by adopting
national legislation, as well as by providing enforcement vessels and equipment and guarding against fraudulent
ship registration;
114. Encourages States to ensure effective implementation of international law applicable to combating
piracy, as reflected in the Convention, calls upon States to take appropriate steps under their national law to
facilitate, in accordance with international law, the apprehension and prosecution of those who are alleged to have
committed acts of piracy, including the financing or facilitation of such acts, also taking into account other relevant
instruments that are consistent with the Convention, and encourages States to cooperate, as appropriate, with a view
to developing their national legislation in this regard;
115. Expresses grave concern at the threats posed by piracy and armed robbery at sea to the safety and
welfare of seafarers and other persons;
116. Invites all States, the International Maritime Organization, the International Labour Organization and
other relevant international organizations and agencies to adopt or recommend, as appropriate, measures to protect
the interest and welfare of seafarers and fishers who are victims of pirates, after their release from captivity,
including their post-incident care and reintegration into society;
117. Notes the ongoing cooperation between the International Maritime Organization, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Division with respect to the compilation of national legislation on piracy, also
notes that copies of national legislation received by the Secretariat have been placed on the website of the Division,
and encourages the aforementioned bodies to further cooperate with the view to assisting Member States, upon
request, in developing their national laws on piracy;
118. Recognizes continued national, bilateral and trilateral initiatives, as well as regional cooperative
mechanisms, in accordance with international law, to address piracy, including the financing or facilitation of acts of
piracy, and armed robbery at sea in the Asian region, and calls upon other States to give immediate attention to
adopting, concluding and implementing cooperation agreements at the regional level on combating piracy and
armed robbery against ships;
119. Expresses serious concern at the inhuman conditions hostages taken at sea face in captivity and also the
adverse impact on their families, calls for the immediate release of all hostages taken at sea, and stresses the
importance of cooperation among Member States on the issue of hostage-taking at sea;
120. Welcomes, in this regard, the ongoing work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Hostage
Support Programme, funded by the Board of the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia, in securing the release of seafarers held hostage off the coast of Somalia;274
121. Also welcomes the recent achievements against piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia
resulting from efforts at the global and regional levels and the significant decrease in reported incidents of piracy off
the coast of Somalia, which are at the lowest level since 2006, in that regard continues to be gravely concerned by
the ongoing threat that piracy and armed robbery at sea continue to pose in the region off the coast of Somalia, notes
the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2246 (2015) of 10 November 2015, as well as the statements by
the President of the Council of 25 August 2010275 and of 19 November 2012,276 also notes that the authorization in
resolution 2246 (2015) and relevant resolutions277 apply only with respect to the situation in Somalia and shall not
affect the rights, obligations or responsibilities of Member States under international law, including any rights or
obligations under the Convention, with respect to any other situation, and underscores, in particular, that they shall
not be considered as establishing customary international law;
122. Notes the continued efforts within the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, following the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1851 (2008), and commends the contributions of all States in the efforts to
fight piracy off the coast of Somalia;
_______________
274

See S/2013/623, paras. 11–13, and S/2014/740, para. 10.
S/PRST/2010/16; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2010–31 July 2011.
276
S/PRST/2012/24; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2012–31 July 2013.
277
See Security Council resolution 2246 (2015), first preambular paragraph.
275

180

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

123. Recognizes the primary role of the Federal Government of Somalia in combating piracy and armed
robbery against ships off the coast of Somalia, acknowledges the importance of a comprehensive and sustainable
settlement of the situation in Somalia, and emphasizes the need to address the underlying causes of piracy and to
assist Somalia and States in the region in strengthening institutional capacity to fight piracy, including the financing
or facilitation of acts of piracy, and armed robbery against ships off the coast of Somalia and to bring to justice those
involved in such acts;
124. Notes the approval by the International Maritime Organization of the guidelines to assist in the
investigation of the crimes of piracy and armed robbery against ships, revised interim guidance to shipowners, ship
operators and shipmasters on the use of privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships in the high risk
area, revised interim recommendations for flag States regarding the use of privately contracted armed security
personnel on board ships in the high risk area, revised interim recommendations for port and coastal States
regarding the use of privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships in the high risk area, interim
guidance to private maritime security companies providing privately contracted armed security personnel on board
ships in the high risk area, and interim guidance for flag States on measures to prevent and mitigate Somalia-based
piracy;
125. Encourages States to ensure that ships flying their flag apply ship security measures approved in
accordance with national and international law;
126. Notes the efforts made by the shipping industry to cooperate with the efforts by States regarding piracy
off the coast of Somalia, in particular in assisting ships that navigate in that area, and recalls the adoption on
30 November 2011 by the Assembly of the International Maritime Organization of resolution A.1044(27) on piracy
and armed robbery against ships in waters off the coast of Somalia;
127. Also notes the continued implementation of the Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy
and Armed Robbery against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden (Djibouti Code of Conduct),
adopted on 29 January 2009 under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization, in the four thematic
areas of information sharing, training, national legislation and capacity-building;
128. Expresses its deep concern at the continuing incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea, in particular violence against innocent crew members of vessels, notes the adoption by the Security Council
of resolutions 2018 (2011) of 31 October 2011 and 2039 (2012) of 29 February 2012, supports the recent efforts to
address this problem at the global and regional levels, recalls the primary role of States in the region to counter the
threat and address the underlying causes of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, welcomes the
adoption in Yaoundé on 25 June 2013 of the Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships, and Illegal Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa, and calls upon States in the region to
implement the Code of Conduct as soon as possible and consistent with international law, in particular the
Convention;
129. Urges States to ensure the full implementation of resolution A.1069(28) of the Assembly of the
International Maritime Organization on prevention and suppression of piracy, armed robbery against ships and illicit
maritime activity in the Gulf of Guinea;
130. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation278 and the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf,278 notes the entry into force on 28 July 2010
of the 2005 Protocol to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation279 and of the 2005 Protocol to the 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety
of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf,280 invites States that have not yet done so to consider
becoming parties to those Protocols, and urges States parties to take appropriate measures to ensure the effective
implementation of those instruments through the adoption of legislation, where appropriate;
_______________
278

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1678, No. 29004.
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.15/21.
280
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.15/22.
279

181

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

131. Calls upon States to effectively implement the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code and the
amendments to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea,281 and to work with the International
Maritime Organization to promote safe and secure shipping while ensuring freedom of navigation;
132. Urges all States, in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization, to improve the protection
of offshore installations by adopting measures related to the prevention, reporting and investigation of acts of
violence against installations, in accordance with international law, and by implementing such measures through
national legislation to ensure proper and adequate enforcement;
133. Emphasizes the progress in regional cooperation, including the efforts of littoral States, on the
enhancement of safety, security and environmental protection in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, and the
effective functioning of the Cooperative Mechanism on Safety of Navigation and Environmental Protection in the
Straits of Malacca and Singapore (the Cooperative Mechanism) to promote dialogue and facilitate close cooperation
between the littoral States, user States, shipping industries and other stakeholders in line with article 43 of the
Convention, notes with appreciation the convening of the eighth Cooperation Forum, in Singapore, on 5 and
6 October 2015, the eighth Project Coordination Committee Meeting, in Singapore, on 9 October 2015, the fortieth
Tripartite Technical Experts Group Meeting, in Singapore, on 7 and 8 October 2015, and the fourteenth and fifteenth
Aids to Navigation Fund Committee Meetings, in Singapore, on 28 and 29 April 2015 and 1 and 2 October 2015,
respectively, the events being key pillars of the Cooperative Mechanism, also notes with appreciation the important
role of the Information Sharing Centre of the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed
Robbery against Ships in Asia, based in Singapore, and calls upon States to give immediate attention to adopting,
concluding and implementing cooperation agreements at the regional level;
134. Recognizes that some transnational organized criminal activities threaten legitimate uses of the oceans
and endanger the lives of people at sea, as well as the livelihoods and security of coastal communities;
135. Notes that transnational organized criminal activities are diverse and may be interrelated in some cases
and that criminal organizations are adaptive and take advantage of the vulnerabilities of States, in particular coastal
and small island developing States in transit areas, and calls upon States and relevant intergovernmental
organizations to increase cooperation and coordination at all levels to detect and suppress the smuggling of
migrants, trafficking in persons and illicit trafficking in firearms, in accordance with international law;
136. Recognizes the importance of enhancing international cooperation at all levels to fight transnational
organized criminal activities, including illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, within the scope
of the United Nations instruments against illicit drug trafficking, as well as the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in
persons and illicit trafficking in firearms and criminal activities at sea falling within the scope of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;282
137. Notes with grave concern the recent proliferation of, and endangerment of lives through, the smuggling
of migrants by sea, underscores the necessity to address such situations in accordance with applicable international
law, and encourages States, acting nationally or through relevant global or regional organizations, as appropriate, to
provide technical assistance and capacity-building to flag, port, and coastal States, upon request, to enhance their
capabilities to prevent smuggling of migrants and human trafficking by sea;
138. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime,283 the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime,284 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and

_______________
281

International Maritime Organization, documents SOLAS/CONF.5/32 and 34, and document MSC 81/25/Add.1, annex 2, resolution
MSC.202(81), introducing the long-range identification and tracking of ships system.
282
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
283
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
284
Ibid., vol. 2326, No. 39574.

182

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,285 and to take
appropriate measures to ensure their effective implementation;
139. Calls upon States to ensure freedom of navigation, the safety of navigation and the rights of transit
passage, archipelagic sea lanes passage and innocent passage in accordance with international law, in particular the
Convention;
140. Welcomes the work of the International Maritime Organization relating to the protection of shipping
lanes of strategic importance and significance, and in particular in enhancing safety, security and environmental
protection in straits used for international navigation, and calls upon that Organization, States bordering straits and
user States to continue their cooperation to keep such straits safe, secure and environmentally protected and open to
international navigation at all times, consistent with international law, in particular the Convention;
141. Calls upon user States and States bordering straits used for international navigation to continue to
cooperate by agreement on matters relating to navigational safety, including safety aids for navigation, and the
prevention, reduction and control of pollution from ships, and welcomes developments in this regard;
142. Calls upon States that have accepted the amendments to regulation XI-1/6 of the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974,286 to implement the Code of International Standards and
Recommended Practices for a Safety Investigation into a Marine Casualty or Marine Incident,287 which took effect
on 1 January 2010, and, in particular, to comply with the mandatory submission of a marine safety investigation
report to the International Maritime Organization for every marine safety investigation conducted into a very serious
marine casualty to identify trends and develop knowledge and risk-based recommendations;288
143. Notes the adoption by the Assembly of the International Maritime Organization at its twenty-eighth
session of the resolution on guidelines on the preservation and collection of evidence following an allegation of a
serious crime having taken place on board a ship or following a report of a missing person from a ship, and pastoral
and medical care of persons affected;289
144. Recognizes the important work of the International Hydrographic Organization, calls upon States that
have not yet done so to consider becoming members of that Organization, encourages all its members to actively
consider, in accordance with applicable rules and procedures, applications of States that wish to become members of
that Organization, and urges all States to work with that Organization to increase the coverage of hydrographic
information on a global basis to enhance capacity-building and technical assistance and to promote safe navigation,
particularly through the production and use of accurate electronic navigational charts, especially in areas used for
international navigation, in ports and where there are vulnerable or protected marine areas;
145. Also recognizes the importance of navigational warning services based on marine meteorological data
for the safety of ships and lives at sea and the optimization of navigation routes, and notes the collaboration between
the World Meteorological Organization and the International Maritime Organization for the enhancement of these
services and their extension to the Arctic region;
146. Encourages States to continue their efforts in the implementation of all areas of the Action Plan for the
Safety of Transport of Radioactive Material, approved by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in March 2004;
147. Notes that cessation of the transport of radioactive materials through the regions of small island
developing States is an ultimate desired goal of small island developing States and some other countries, and
recognizes the right of freedom of navigation in accordance with international law; that States should maintain
dialogue and consultation, in particular under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
International Maritime Organization, with the aim of improved mutual understanding, confidence-building and
enhanced communication in relation to the safe maritime transport of radioactive materials; that States involved in
_______________
285

Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 84/24/Add.1, annex 3, resolution MSC.257(84).
287
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 84/24/Add.1, annex 1, resolution MSC.255(84).
288
See International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.1061(28).
289
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.1091(28).
286

183

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the transport of such materials are urged to continue to engage in dialogue with small island developing States and
other States to address their concerns; and that these concerns include the further development and strengthening,
within the appropriate forums, of international regulatory regimes to enhance safety, disclosure, liability, security
and compensation in relation to such transport;
148. Acknowledges, in the context of paragraph 147 above, the potential environmental and economic
impacts of maritime incidents and accidents on coastal States, in particular those related to the transport of
radioactive materials, and emphasizes the importance of effective liability regimes in that regard;
149. Encourages States to draw up plans and to establish procedures to implement the Guidelines
on Places of Refuge for Ships in Need of Assistance adopted by the International Maritime Organization on
5 December 2003;290
150. Notes the entry into force of the Nairobi International Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007,291
on 14 April 2015, and invites States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to this Convention;
151. Requests States to take appropriate measures with regard to ships flying their flag or of their registry to
address hazards that may be caused by wrecks and drifting or sunken cargo to navigation or the marine
environment;
152. Calls upon States to ensure that masters on ships flying their flag take the steps required by relevant
instruments292 to provide assistance to persons in distress at sea, and urges States to cooperate and to take all
measures necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the amendments to the International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue293 and to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea294 relating to the
delivery of persons rescued at sea to a place of safety, as well as of the associated Guidelines on the Treatment of
Persons Rescued at Sea;295
153. Recognizes that all States must fulfil their search and rescue responsibilities in accordance with
international law, including the Convention, reaffirms the ongoing need for the International Maritime Organization
and other relevant organizations to assist, in particular, developing States both to increase and improve their search
and rescue capabilities, including as appropriate through the establishment of additional rescue coordination centres
and regional sub-centres, and to take effective action to address, to the extent feasible, the issue of unseaworthy
ships and small craft within their national jurisdiction, and emphasizes in this regard the importance of cooperation
for these purposes, including within the framework of the International Convention on Maritime Search and
Rescue, 1979;296
154. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant actors in relation to disembarkation of persons rescued at sea,
and notes in this regard the need to implement all relevant and applicable international instruments and the
importance of cooperation among States as provided for in those instruments;
155. Also notes that “Protection at sea” was the theme of the seventh Dialogue on Protection Challenges of
the High Commissioner for Refugees, held in Geneva on 10 and 11 December 2014;
156. Invites States to implement the Revised Guidelines on the Prevention of Access by Stowaways and the
Allocation of Responsibilities to Seek the Successful Resolution of Stowaway Cases adopted by the International
Maritime Organization on 2 December 2010;297
_______________
290

International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.949(23).
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.16/19.
292
The International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979,
as amended, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982, and the International Convention on Salvage, 1989.
293
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.1, annex 5, resolution MSC.155(78).
294
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.1, annex 3, resolution MSC.153(78).
295
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.2, annex 34, resolution MSC.167(78).
296
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1405, No. 23489.
297
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 88/26/Add.1, annex 6, resolution MSC.312(88).
291

184

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

157. Calls upon States to continue to cooperate in developing comprehensive approaches to international
migration and development, including through dialogue on all their aspects;
158. Also calls upon States to take measures to protect fibre-optic submarine cables and to fully address
issues relating to these cables, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
159. Encourages greater dialogue and cooperation among States and the relevant regional and global
organizations through workshops and seminars on the protection and maintenance of fibre-optic submarine cables to
promote the security of such critical communications infrastructure;
160. Also encourages the adoption by States of laws and regulations addressing the breaking or injury of
submarine cables or pipelines beneath the high seas done wilfully or through culpable negligence by a ship flying its
flag or by a person subject to its jurisdiction, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
161. Affirms the importance of maintenance, including the repair, of submarine cables, undertaken in
conformity with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
162. Reaffirms that flag, port and coastal States all bear responsibility for ensuring the effective
implementation and enforcement of international instruments relating to maritime security and safety, in accordance
with international law, in particular the Convention, and that flag States have primary responsibility that requires
further strengthening, including through increased transparency of ownership of vessels and the monitoring of
organizations authorized to carry out surveys and issue certificates on their behalf, taking into account the entry into
force of the Code for Recognized Organizations on 1 January 2015;298
163. Urges flag States without an effective maritime administration and appropriate legal frameworks to
establish or enhance the necessary infrastructure, legislative and enforcement capabilities to ensure effective
compliance with and implementation and enforcement of their responsibilities under international law, in particular
the Convention, and, until such action is taken, to consider declining the granting of the right to fly their flag to new
vessels, suspending their registry or not opening a registry, and calls upon flag and port States to take all measures
consistent with international law necessary to prevent the operation of substandard vessels;
164. Recognizes that international shipping rules and standards adopted by the International Maritime
Organization in respect of maritime safety, efficiency of navigation and the prevention and control of marine
pollution, complemented by best practices of the shipping industry, have led to a significant reduction in maritime
accidents and pollution incidents, encourages all States to participate in the Voluntary International Maritime
Organization Member State Audit Scheme,299 and notes the decision of the International Maritime Organization to
institutionalize the Audit Scheme, with the expected mandatory use of the International Maritime Organization
Instruments Implementation Code (III Code) from 1 January 2016;300
165. Welcomes the adoption by the International Maritime Organization of the International Code for Ships
Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code), and encourages States and competent international organizations and
bodies to support the effective implementation of the requirements of the Polar Code which are expected to enter
into force on 1 January 2017;
166. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization on matters related to passenger ship
safety in light of recent accidents, and encourages States and competent international organizations and bodies to
support continued efforts, including technical cooperation activities, to improve passenger ship safety;
167. Recognizes that maritime safety can also be improved through effective port State control, the
strengthening of regional arrangements and increased coordination and cooperation among them and increased
transparency and information-sharing, including among safety and security sectors;
168. Encourages flag States to take appropriate measures sufficient to achieve or maintain recognition by
intergovernmental arrangements that recognize satisfactory flag State performance, including, as appropriate,
_______________
298

International Maritime Organization, document MSC 92/26/Add.1, annex 1.
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.946(23).
300
See International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolutions A.1018(26), A.1067(28), A.1068(28) and A.1070(28).
299

185

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

satisfactory port State control examination results on a sustained basis, with a view to improving quality shipping
and furthering flag State implementation of relevant instruments under the International Maritime Organization as
well as relevant goals and objectives of the present resolution;
IX
Marine environment and marine resources
169. Emphasizes once again the importance of the implementation of Part XII of the Convention in order to
protect and preserve the marine environment and its living marine resources against pollution and physical
degradation, and calls upon all States to cooperate and take measures consistent with the Convention, directly or
through competent international organizations, for the protection and preservation of the marine environment;
170. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States noted with concern that the health of oceans and marine
biodiversity are negatively affected by marine pollution, including marine debris, especially plastic, persistent
organic pollutants, heavy metals and nitrogen-based compounds, from a number of marine and land-based sources,
including shipping and land run-off, and that States committed to take action to reduce the incidence and impacts of
such pollution on marine ecosystems, including through the effective implementation of relevant conventions
adopted in the framework of the International Maritime Organization, and the follow-up of relevant initiatives such
as the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities,301 as
well as the adoption of coordinated strategies to this end, and that they further committed to take action, by 2025,
based on collected scientific data, to achieve significant reductions in marine debris to prevent harm to the coastal
and marine environment;
171. Encourages States, in accordance with the commitment expressed in “The future we want” and based
on collected scientific data, to take action by 2025 to achieve significant reductions in marine debris to prevent harm
to the coastal and marine environment;
172. Notes the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, notes with concern its recent
findings on the acidification of oceans and the impact thereon, as well as the findings of the World Meteorological
Organization contained in its annual Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, and in this regard encourages States and competent
international organizations and other relevant institutions, individually and in cooperation, to urgently pursue further
research on ocean acidification, especially programmes of observation and measurement, noting in particular the
continued work under the Convention on Biological Diversity302 and paragraphs 6 to 10 of decision XII/23 on
marine and coastal biodiversity, adopted at the twelfth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on Biological Diversity, held in Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea, from 6 to 17 October 2014,303 and to increase
national, regional and global efforts to address levels of ocean acidity and the negative impact of such acidity on
vulnerable marine ecosystems, particularly coral reefs;
173. Expresses concern, in this regard, at the recent findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change on the acidification of the oceans and the substantial risks to marine ecosystems, especially polar
ecosystems and coral reefs, and the potentially detrimental consequences for fisheries and livelihoods;
174. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States called for support for initiatives that address ocean
acidification and the impacts of climate change on marine and coastal ecosystems and resources and, in this regard,
reiterated the need to work collectively to prevent further ocean acidification, as well as to enhance the resilience of
marine ecosystems and of the communities whose livelihoods depend on them, and to support marine scientific
research, monitoring and observation of ocean acidification and particularly vulnerable ecosystems, including
through enhanced international cooperation in this regard;
175. Welcomes, in this regard, the holding in Monaco, from 12 to 14 January 2015, of the third International
Workshop on the Socioeconomic Impacts of Ocean Acidification, on the theme “Bridging the gap between ocean

_______________
301

A/51/116, annex II.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
303
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/29, Sect. I.
302

186

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

acidification and economic valuation”, organized by the Scientific Centre of Monaco and the Ocean Acidification
International Coordination Centre of the International Atomic Energy Agency;
176. Notes with concern the approximately 30 per cent increase in the acidity of ocean surface waters since
the beginning of the industrial era304 and the wide range of impacts associated with the continuing and alarming
acidification of the world’s oceans, and urges States to make significant efforts to tackle the causes of ocean
acidification, recognizing countries national circumstances and respective capabilities, and to further study and
minimize its impacts, to enhance local, national, regional and global cooperation in this regard, including the sharing
of relevant information and the development of worldwide capacity, including in developing countries, to measure
ocean acidification, and to take steps to make marine ecosystems healthier and, as a result, more resilient, to the
extent possible, to the impacts of ocean acidification;
177. Recognizes the attention paid to ocean acidification at the fourteenth meeting of the Informal
Consultative Process, and commits itself to continue to pay attention to this important issue, including by taking into
account the first global integrated marine assessment and the ongoing work of the Ocean Acidification International
Coordination Centre;
178. Encourages States, individually or in collaboration with relevant international organizations and bodies,
to enhance their scientific activity to better understand the effects of climate change on the marine environment and
marine biodiversity and develop ways and means of adaptation, taking into account, as appropriate, the
precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches;
179. Notes the convening of the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, in Paris, from 30 November to 11 December 2015, recognizes the
importance of raising awareness of the adverse impact of climate change on the marine environment, marine
biodiversity and sea level, and notes that Oceans Day at the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties was
held on 4 December 2015;
180. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to international agreements addressing
the protection and preservation of the marine environment and its living marine resources against the introduction of
harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens and marine pollution from all sources, including the dumping of wastes
and other matter, and other forms of physical degradation, as well as agreements that provide for preparedness for,
response to and cooperation on pollution incidents and that include provisions on liability and compensation for
damage resulting from marine pollution, and to adopt the necessary measures consistent with international law,
including the Convention, aimed at implementing and enforcing the rules contained in those agreements;
181. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States noted the significant threat that alien invasive species pose
to marine ecosystems and resources and committed to implement measures to prevent the introduction and manage
the adverse environmental impacts of alien invasive species, including, as appropriate, those adopted in the
framework of the International Maritime Organization;
182. Encourages States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004,305 thereby facilitating its
early entry into force;
183. Encourages States, directly or through competent international organizations, to consider the further
development and application, as appropriate and consistent with international law, including the Convention, of
environmental impact assessment processes covering planned activities under their jurisdiction or control that may
cause substantial pollution of or significant and harmful changes to the marine environment, and also encourages
the communication of the reports of the results of such assessments to the competent international organizations in
accordance with the Convention;
184. Encourages States that have not done so to become parties to regional seas conventions addressing the
protection and preservation of the marine environment;
_______________
304

As stated in the 2013 report of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on the physical science basis of
climate change.
305
International Maritime Organization, document BWM/CONF/36, annex.

187

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

185. Encourages States, in accordance with international law, including the Convention and other relevant
instruments, either bilaterally or regionally, to jointly develop and promote contingency plans for responding to
pollution incidents, as well as other incidents that are likely to have significant adverse effects on the marine
environment and biodiversity;
186. Recognizes the importance of improving understanding of the impact of climate change on oceans and
seas, and recalls that in “The future we want”, States noted that sea-level rise and coastal erosion are serious threats
for many coastal regions and islands, particularly in developing countries and, in this regard, called upon the
international community to enhance its efforts to address these challenges;
187. Notes with concern the severe impacts on coastal communities of extreme weather events such as
tropical cyclones and associated storm surges, and encourages cooperative actions by relevant United Nations
bodies and organizations, including the World Meteorological Organization, to assist States in improving forecasting
of such events and its application in multi-hazard early warning systems and risk management;
188. Also notes with concern that the health of the oceans and marine biodiversity are negatively affected by
marine debris, especially plastic, from land-based and marine sources, and invites States to implement resolution 1/6
on marine plastic debris and microplastics, adopted by the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United
Nations Environment Programme at its first session, held in Nairobi from 23 to 27 June 2014;306
189. Recognizes the need for better understanding of the sources, amounts, pathways, distribution, trends,
nature and impacts of marine debris, especially plastic, and to examine possible measures and best available
techniques and environmental practices to prevent its accumulation and minimize its levels in the marine
environment, and welcomes in this regard the work conducted under the Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific
Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection, led by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, and its
report entitled “Sources, fate and effects of microplastics in the marine environment – a global assessment”;
190. Acknowledges the request by the United Nations Environment Assembly in its resolution 1/6 to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to undertake a study on marine plastic debris
and marine microplastics, and to present the study for the consideration of that Assembly at its second session, in
May 2016, recalls the invitation to Statesto share relevant information with the Executive Director pertinent to this
study, and notes that the Informal Consultative Process will focus its discussions at its seventeenth meeting on the
theme “Marine debris, plastics and microplastics”;
191. Welcomes the activities of relevant United Nations bodies and organizations, in particular the United
Nations Environment Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
International Maritime Organization and other intergovernmental organizations, to address the sources and impacts
of marine debris, including through the Global Partnership on Marine Litter, as well as actions relating to marine
debris taken under the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals,307 in particular the
adoption by the Conference of the Parties to that Convention at its eleventh meeting of resolution 11.30 on
management of marine debris, and notes the recent work of the International Whaling Commission on assessing the
impacts of marine debris on cetaceans;
192. Encourages States to further develop partnerships with industry and civil society to raise awareness of
the extent of the impact of marine debris on the biological diversity, health and productivity of the marine
environment and consequent economic loss, and encourages States to cooperate, as appropriate, to address marine
debris and microplastics in the marine environment;
193. Urges States to integrate the issue of marine debris into national and, as appropriate, regional strategies
dealing with waste management, especially in the coastal zone, ports and maritime industries, including recycling,
reuse, reduction and disposal, to consider developing an integrated waste management infrastructure and to
encourage the development of appropriate economic incentives with the aim of reducing marine debris to address
this issue, including the development of cost-recovery systems that provide an incentive to use port reception
facilities and discourage ships from discharging marine debris at sea, and support for measures to prevent, reduce
_______________
306
307

188

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/69/25), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1651, No. 28395.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and control pollution from any source, including land-based sources, such as community-based coastal and
waterway clean-up and monitoring activities, and encourages States to cooperate regionally and subregionally to
identify potential sources and coastal and oceanic locations where marine debris aggregates and to develop and
implement joint prevention and recovery programmes for marine debris as well as to raise awareness of the issue of
marine debris and the need to consider environmentally sound options for its removal;
194. Notes the work of the International Maritime Organization to prevent pollution from ships;
195. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Protocol of 1997
(annex VI - Regulations for the Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships) to the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, as amended;308
196. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to the 1996 Protocol to the Convention
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (the London Protocol);
197. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization and the resolution on International
Maritime Organization policies and practices related to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from ships;309
198. Urges States to cooperate in correcting the shortfall in port waste reception facilities in accordance with
the action plan to address the inadequacy of port waste reception facilities developed by the International Maritime
Organization;
199. Recognizes that most of the pollution load of the oceans emanates from land-based activities and affects
the most productive areas of the marine environment, and calls upon States, as a matter of priority, to implement the
Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities and to take
all appropriate measures to fulfil the commitments of the international community embodied in the Manila
Declaration on Furthering the Implementation of the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine
Environment from Land-based Activities;310
200. Expresses its concern regarding the spreading of hypoxic dead zones and harmful algal blooms in
oceans as a result of eutrophication fuelled by riverine run-off of fertilizers, sewage outfall and reactive nitrogen
resulting from the burning of fossil fuels and resulting in serious consequences for ecosystem functioning, and calls
upon States to enhance their efforts to reduce eutrophication, particularly by reducing total nutrient pollution from
land-based sources and, to this effect, to continue to cooperate within the framework of relevant international
organizations, in particular the Global Programme of Action;
201. Calls upon all States to ensure that urban and coastal development projects and related land-reclamation
activities are carried out in a responsible manner that protects the marine habitat and environment and mitigates the
negative consequences of such activities;
202. Encourages States that have not yet done so to take, as soon as possible, the domestic measures
necessary to enable them to meet their obligations upon ratification and thereafter to ratify, accept, approve or
accede to the Minamata Convention on Mercury,311 with a view to its entry into force as soon as possible;
203. Welcomes the continued work of States, the United Nations Environment Programme and regional
organizations in the implementation of the Global Programme of Action, and encourages increased emphasis on the
link between fresh water, the coastal zone and marine resources in the implementation of international development
goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,233 and of the time-bound targets in
the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),242 in particular the target on sanitation, and the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development;312

_______________
308

International Maritime Organization, document MEPC 62/24/Add.1, annex 19, resolution MEPC.203(62).
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.963(23).
310
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP(DEPI)/GPA/IGR.3/6, annex.
311
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP(DTIE)/Hg/CONF/4, annex II.
312
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
309

189

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

204. Recalls the resolution of the thirtieth Consultative Meeting of Contracting Parties to the Convention on
the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (the London Convention) and
the third Meeting of Contracting Parties to the London Protocol, held from 27 to 31 October 2008, on the regulation
of ocean fertilization,313 in which the Contracting Parties agreed, inter alia, that the scope of the London Convention
and Protocol includes ocean fertilization activities and that, given the present state of knowledge, ocean fertilization
activities other than for legitimate scientific research should not be allowed, and that scientific research proposals
should be assessed on a case-by-case basis using an assessment framework to be developed by the scientific groups
under the London Convention and Protocol, and also agreed that, to this end, such other activities should be
considered as contrary to the aims of the London Convention and Protocol and should not currently qualify for any
exemption from the definition of dumping in article III, paragraph 1 (b), of the London Convention and article 1,
paragraph 4.2, of the London Protocol;
205. Also recalls the resolution of the thirty-second Consultative Meeting of Contracting Parties to the
London Convention and the fifth Meeting of Contracting Parties to the London Protocol, held from 11 to
15 October 2010, on the Assessment Framework for Scientific Research Involving Ocean Fertilization;314
206. Notes the continued work of the Contracting Parties to the London Convention and Protocol towards a
global, transparent and effective control and regulatory mechanism for ocean fertilization activities and other
activities that fall within the scope of the London Convention and Protocol and have the potential to cause harm to
the marine environment, and notes the recent amendments to the Protocol on this matter;315
207. Recalls decision IX/16 C, adopted at the ninth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, held in Bonn, Germany, from 19 to 30 May 2008,316 in which the Conference
of the Parties, inter alia, bearing in mind the ongoing scientific and legal analysis occurring under the auspices of the
London Convention and Protocol, requested parties and urged other Governments, in accordance with the
precautionary approach, to ensure that ocean fertilization activities were not carried out until there was an adequate
scientific basis on which to justify such activities, including an assessment of associated risks, and that a global,
transparent and effective control and regulatory mechanism was in place for those activities, with the exception of
small-scale scientific research studies within coastal waters, and stated that such studies should be authorized only if
justified by the need to gather specific scientific data, should be subject to a thorough prior assessment of the
potential impacts of the research studies on the marine environment, should be strictly controlled and should not be
used for generating and selling carbon offsets or for any other commercial purposes, and takes note of decision
X/29, adopted at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, held
in Nagoya, Japan, from 18 to 29 October 2010,317 in which the Conference of the Parties requested parties to
implement decision IX/16 C;
208. Also recalls that in “The future we want”, States stressed their concern about the potential environmental
impacts of ocean fertilization, recalled in this regard the decisions related to ocean fertilization adopted by the
relevant intergovernmental bodies, and resolved to continue addressing ocean fertilization with utmost caution,
consistent with the precautionary approach;
209. Reaffirms paragraph 119 of resolution 61/222 of 20 December 2006 regarding ecosystem approaches
and oceans, including the proposed elements of an ecosystem approach, means to achieve implementation of an
ecosystem approach and requirements for improved application of an ecosystem approach, and in this regard:
(a) Notes that continued environmental degradation in many parts of the world and increasing competing
demands require an urgent response and the setting of priorities for management actions aimed at conserving
ecosystem integrity;
(b) Also notes that ecosystem approaches to ocean management should be focused on managing human
activities in order to maintain and, where needed, restore ecosystem health to sustain goods and environmental
_______________
313

International Maritime Organization, document LC 30/16, annex 6, resolution LC-LP.1 (2008).
International Maritime Organization, document LC 32/15 and Corr.1, annex 5, resolution LC-LP.2 (2010).
315
International Maritime Organization, document LC 35/15, annex 4, resolution LP.4(8).
316
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I.
317
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
314

190

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

services, provide social and economic benefits for food security, sustain livelihoods in support of international
development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and conserve marine biodiversity;
(c) Recalls that States should be guided in the application of ecosystem approaches by a number of existing
instruments, in particular the Convention, which sets out the legal framework for all activities in the oceans and seas,
and its implementing Agreements, as well as other commitments, such as those contained in the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the World Summit on Sustainable Development call for the application of an ecosystem
approach by 2010, and in this context encourages States to enhance their efforts towards applying such an approach;
(d) Encourages States to cooperate and coordinate their efforts and take, individually or jointly, as
appropriate, all measures, in conformity with international law, including the Convention and other applicable
instruments, to address impacts on marine ecosystems within and beyond areas of national jurisdiction, taking into
account the integrity of the ecosystems concerned;
210. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States committed themselves to protect and restore the health,
productivity and resilience of oceans and marine ecosystems, to maintain their biodiversity, enabling their
conservation and sustainable use for present and future generations, and to effectively apply an ecosystem approach
and the precautionary approach in the management, in accordance with international law, of activities having an
impact on the marine environment, to deliver on all three dimensions of sustainable development;
211. Encourages competent organizations and bodies that have not yet done so to incorporate an ecosystem
approach into their mandates, as appropriate, in order to address impacts on marine ecosystems;
212. Invites States, in particular those States with advanced technology and marine capabilities, to explore
prospects for improving cooperation with and assistance to developing States, in particular least developed countries
and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, with a view to better integrating into national
policies and programmes sustainable and effective development in the marine sector;
213. Notes the information compiled by the Secretariat318 in relation to the assistance available to and
measures that may be taken by developing States, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, as well as coastal African States, to realize the benefits of sustainable and effective development
of marine resources and uses of the oceans, as provided by States and competent international organizations and
global and regional funding agencies, and urges them to provide information for the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral and for incorporation on the website of the Division;
214. Encourages States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Hong Kong
International Convention for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships, 2009,319 to facilitate its early
entry into force;
215. Encourages continued cooperation between the parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal320 and the International Maritime
Organization on regulations on the prevention of pollution from ships;
216. Notes the role of the Basel Convention in protecting the marine environment against the adverse effects
which may result from such wastes;
217. Notes with concern the potential for serious environmental consequences resulting from oil spill
incidents or pollution incidents involving hazardous or noxious substances, urges States, consistent with
international law, to cooperate, directly or through competent international organizations, and share best practices, in
the fields of protection of the marine environment, human health and safety, prevention, emergency response and
mitigation, and in this regard encourages the undertaking of and collaboration on scientific research, including
marine scientific research, to better understand the consequences of marine oil spills or marine spills involving
hazardous or noxious substances;
_______________
318

A/63/342.
International Maritime Organization, document SR/CONF/45.
320
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1673, No. 28911.
319

191

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

218. Encourages States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Cooperation, 1990,321 and the Protocol on Preparedness,
Response and Cooperation to Pollution Incidents by Hazardous and Noxious Substances, 2000, of the International
Maritime Organization, and in this regard to consider developing and joining regional arrangements to enhance
international cooperation for combating major oil and hazardous substances pollution incidents;
219. Encourages States to consider becoming parties to the 2010 Protocol to the 1996 International
Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious
Substances by Sea;322
X
Marine biodiversity
220. Reaffirms its central role relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
beyond areas of national jurisdiction;
221. Notes the work and contributions of States and relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies in
the context of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction;
222. Recalls, in this regard, its resolution 69/292, entitled “Development of an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction”;
223. Recognizes the abundance and diversity of marine genetic resources and their value in terms of the
benefits, goods and services they can provide;
224. Also recognizes the importance of research on marine genetic resources for the purpose of enhancing the
scientific understanding, potential use and application, and enhanced management of marine ecosystems;
225. Encourages States and international organizations, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes and partnerships, to continue in a sustainable and comprehensive way to support, promote
and strengthen capacity-building activities, in particular in developing countries, in the field of marine scientific
research, taking into account, in particular, the need to create greater taxonomic capabilities;
226. Notes the work under the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal Biological Diversity323 and the
Convention on Biological Diversity elaborated programme of work on marine and coastal biological diversity,324
and, while reiterating the central role of the General Assembly relating to the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, notes with appreciation the complementary
technical and scientific work done by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity;
227. Reaffirms the need for States, individually or through competent international organizations, to urgently
consider ways to integrate and improve, based on the best available scientific information and the precautionary
approach and in accordance with the Convention and related agreements and instruments, the management of risks
to the marine biodiversity of seamounts, cold water corals, hydrothermal vents and certain other underwater
features;
228. Calls upon States and international organizations to urgently take further action to address, in accordance
with international law, destructive practices that have adverse impacts on marine biodiversity and ecosystems,
including seamounts, hydrothermal vents and cold water corals;

_______________
321

Ibid., vol. 1891, No. 32194.
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.17/10.
323
See A/51/312, annex II, decision II/10.
324
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex, decision VII/5, annex I.
322

192

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

229. Calls upon States to strengthen, in a manner consistent with international law, in particular the
Convention, the conservation and management of marine biodiversity and ecosystems and national policies in
relation to marine protected areas;
230. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States reaffirmed the importance of area-based conservation
measures, including marine protected areas, consistent with international law and based on best available scientific
information, as a tool for conservation of biological diversity and sustainable use of its components, and noted
decision X/2 of the tenth Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, that by
2020, 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of particular importance for biodiversity and
ecosystem services, are to be conserved through effectively and equitably managed, ecologically representative and
well-connected systems of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures;317
231. Encourages States, in this regard, to further progress towards the establishment of marine protected
areas, including representative networks, and calls upon States to further consider options to identify and protect
ecologically or biologically significant areas, consistent with international law and on the basis of the best available
scientific information;
232. Reaffirms the need for States to continue and intensify their efforts, directly and through competent
international organizations, to develop and facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools for conserving and
managing vulnerable marine ecosystems, including the possible establishment of marine protected areas, consistent
with international law, as reflected in the Convention, and based on the best scientific information available;
233. Notes the work of States, relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies, including the Convention
on Biological Diversity, in the assessment of scientific information on and compilation of ecological criteria for the
identification of marine areas that may require protection, in the light of the objective of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development to develop and facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools, such as ecosystem
approaches and the establishment of marine protected areas consistent with international law, as reflected in the
Convention, and based on scientific information, including representative networks;242
234. Recalls that the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, at its ninth meeting,
adopted scientific criteria for identifying ecologically or biologically significant marine areas in need of protection in
open-ocean waters and deep-sea habitats and scientific guidance for selecting areas to establish a representative
network of marine protected areas, including in open-ocean waters and deep-sea habitats,325 notes the ongoing work
under the Convention on Biological Diversity on the application of the scientific criteria for ecologically or
biologically significant marine areas through the organization of a series of regional workshops, and also recalls that
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has developed guidance for the identification of
vulnerable marine ecosystems through the International Guidelines for the Management of Deep-sea Fisheries in
the High Seas;
235. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization to identify and designate as
Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas marine areas which are recognized for their significance in terms of ecological,
socioeconomic or scientific criteria and are vulnerable to damage by international shipping activities;326
236. Acknowledges the Micronesia Challenge, the Eastern Tropical Pacific Seascape project, the Caribbean
Challenge and the Coral Triangle Initiative, which in particular seek to create and link domestic marine protected
areas to better facilitate ecosystem approaches, and reaffirms the need for further international cooperation,
coordination and collaboration in support of such initiatives;
237. Reiterates its support for the International Coral Reef Initiative, notes the International Coral Reef
Initiative General Meeting held in Okinawa, Japan, from 20 to 23 October 2014, and supports the elaborated
programme of work of the Convention on Biological Diversity on marine and coastal biological diversity related to
coral reefs under the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal Biological Diversity;
238. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States recognized the significant economic, social and
environmental contributions of coral reefs, in particular to islands and other coastal States, as well as the significant
_______________
325
326

United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I, decision IX/20, annexes I and II.
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.982(24).

193

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

vulnerability of coral reefs and mangroves to impacts, including from climate change, ocean acidification,
overfishing, destructive fishing practices and pollution, and supported international cooperation with a view to
conserving coral reef and mangrove ecosystems and realizing their social, economic and environmental benefits, as
well as facilitating technical collaboration and voluntary information-sharing;
239. Encourages States and relevant international institutions to improve efforts to address coral bleaching
by, inter alia, improving monitoring to predict and identify bleaching events, supporting and strengthening action
taken during such events and improving strategies to manage reefs to support their natural resilience and enhance
their ability to withstand other pressures, including ocean acidification, and in this regard also encourages States to
implement the priority actions to achieve Aichi Biodiversity Target 10 for coral reefs and closely associated
ecosystems, adopted by the twelfth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological
Diversity;303
240. Encourages States to cooperate, directly or through competent international bodies, in exchanging
information in the event of accidents involving vessels on coral reefs and in promoting the development of
economic assessment techniques for both restoration and non-use values of coral reef systems;
241. Emphasizes the need to mainstream sustainable coral reef management and integrated watershed
management into national development strategies, as well as into the activities of relevant United Nations agencies
and programmes, international financial institutions and the donor community;
242. Notes that ocean noise has potential significant adverse impacts on living marine resources, affirms the
importance of sound scientific studies in addressing this matter, encourages further research, studies and
consideration of the impacts of ocean noise on living marine resources, notes the work of States and competent
international organizations in that regard, and requests the Division to continue to compile the peer-reviewed
scientific studies it receives from Member States and intergovernmental organizations pursuant to paragraph 107 of
resolution 61/222 and, as appropriate, to make them, or references and links to them, available on its website;
243. Notes the approval of the International Maritime Organization Guidelines for the reduction of
underwater noise from commercial shipping to address adverse impacts on marine life;
XI
Marine science
244. Calls upon States, individually or in collaboration with each other or with competent international
organizations and bodies, to continue to strive to improve understanding and knowledge of the oceans and the deep
sea, including, in particular, the extent and vulnerability of deep sea biodiversity and ecosystems, by increasing their
marine scientific research activities in accordance with the Convention;
245. Encourages, in that regard, relevant international organizations and other donors to consider supporting
the Endowment Fund of the International Seabed Authority in order to promote the conduct of collaborative marine
scientific research in the international seabed area by supporting the participation of qualified scientists and technical
personnel from developing countries in relevant programmes, initiatives and activities;
246. Notes with concern that human-related threats, such as marine debris, ship strikes, underwater noise,
persistent contaminants, coastal development activities, oil spills and discarded fishing gear, together may severely
impact marine life, including its higher trophic levels, and calls upon States and competent international
organizations to cooperate and coordinate their research efforts in this regard so as to reduce these impacts and
preserve the integrity of the whole marine ecosystem while fully respecting the mandates of relevant international
organizations;
247. Notes the partnership between the Division and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission on a
training programme on marine scientific research under the Convention, and encourages States, relevant
international organizations and other donors to consider supporting the initiative;
248. Welcomes, in this regard, the launch by the Division and the Korea Maritime Institute in cooperation
with the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the programme entitled “Promote and facilitate the
conduct of marine scientific research under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea”, with the aim of
assisting developing countries, especially small island developing States, to build their capacities in the field of
marine scientific research;
194

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

249. Invites all relevant organizations, funds, programmes and bodies within the United Nations system, in
consultation with interested States, to coordinate relevant activities with regional and national marine scientific and
technological centres in small island developing States, as appropriate, to ensure the more effective achievement of
their objectives in accordance with relevant United Nations small island developing States development
programmes and strategies;
250. Welcomes the resolution adopted by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission at its twenty-eighth session, held in Paris from 18 to 25 June 2015, regarding adoption of the Second
International Indian Ocean Expedition as an important catalyst project linking Indian Ocean processes to the global
ocean and atmosphere, officially launched in Goa, India, on 4 December 2015 for an initial period of five years, and
invites States to participate in this initiative;
251. Notes with appreciation the work of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, with the advice
of the Advisory Body of Experts on the Law of the Sea, on the development of procedures for the implementation
of Parts XIII and XIV of the Convention;
252. Also notes with appreciation the work of the Advisory Body of Experts, including its work in
cooperation with the Division, on the practice of member States related to marine scientific research and transfer of
marine technology within the framework of the Convention, and welcomes the decision of the Executive Council of
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission at its forty-fifth session, held in Paris from 26 to 28 June 2012,
that the Advisory Body will continue its work focused on priorities as tasked by Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission governing bodies in line with the terms of reference, mobilizing extrabudgetary resources when
necessary;
253. Recalls the issuance of the revised publication entitled Marine Scientific Research: A guide to the
implementation of the relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in December
2010, and requests the Secretariat to continue to make efforts to publish the guide in all official languages of the
United Nations;
254. Notes with appreciation the contribution to marine biodiversity research of the Ocean Biogeographic
Information System, a free and open-access data holding and sharing facility, hosted by the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission;
255. Welcomes the increasing attention being focused on oceans as a potential source of renewable energy,
and notes in this regard the summary of discussions of the Informal Consultative Process at its thirteenth meeting;327
256. Stresses the importance of increasing the scientific understanding of the oceans-atmosphere interface,
including through participation in ocean observing programmes and geographic information systems, such as the
Global Ocean Observing System, sponsored by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the World Meteorological Organization and the International Council for
Science, particularly considering their role in monitoring and forecasting climate change and variability and in the
establishment and operation of tsunami warning systems;
257. Welcomes the progress made by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and Member States
towards the establishment and operation of regional and national tsunami warning and mitigation systems, also
welcomes the continued collaboration of the United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations in this
effort, further welcomes the development and recent dissemination of the new Enhanced Tsunami Products for the
Pacific Tsunami Warning and Mitigation System and the development of Enhanced Tsunami Products for the
Tsunami and Other Coastal Hazards Warning System for the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions, which will assist
countries in the Pacific and the Caribbean to assess tsunami threats and issue warnings, and encourages Member
States to establish and sustain their national warning and mitigation systems, within a global, ocean-related multihazard approach, as necessary, to reduce loss of life and damage to national economies and strengthen the resilience
of coastal communities to natural disasters;
258. Stresses the need for continued efforts in developing mitigation and preparedness measures for natural
disasters, particularly following tsunami events caused by earthquakes, such as the 11 March 2011 event in Japan;
_______________
327

A/67/120.

195

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

259. Urges States to take necessary action and to cooperate in relevant organizations, including the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the World
Meteorological Organization, to address damage to ocean data buoys deployed and operated in accordance with
international law, including through education and outreach about the importance and purpose of these buoys, and
by strengthening these buoys against such damage, and increasing reporting of such damage;
XII
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State
of the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects
260. Reiterates the need to strengthen the regular scientific assessment of the state of the marine environment
in order to enhance the scientific basis for policymaking;
261. Recalls that in “The future we want”, States expressed their support for the Regular Process, looked
forward to the completion of its first global integrated assessment of the state of the marine environment by 2014
and its subsequent consideration by the General Assembly, and encouraged consideration by States of the
assessment findings at appropriate levels;
262. Welcomes the holding of the sixth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the Regular
Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects, convened in New York from 8 to 11 September 2015 in accordance with paragraph 264 of
resolution 69/245;
263. Endorses the recommendations adopted by the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole at its sixth
meeting;229
264. Reaffirms the principles guiding the Regular Process and the objective and scope of its first cycle
(2010–2014) as agreed upon at the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole in 2009;328
265. Recalls that the Regular Process, as established under the United Nations, is accountable to the General
Assembly and is an intergovernmental process guided by international law, including the Convention and other
applicable international instruments, and takes into account relevant Assembly resolutions;
266. Welcomes with appreciation the first global integrated marine assessment (World Ocean Assessment),
and approves its summary;228
267. Recognizes the importance of the assessment, including for the small island developing States;
268. Recognizes with utmost appreciation the work of the members of the Group of Experts of the Regular
Process during the entire first cycle of the Regular Process and, in particular, the work carried out with respect to the
assessment;329
269. Also recognizes with utmost appreciation the work of those members of the pool of experts who
contributed to the preparation of the assessment;
270. Recognizes with appreciation the support provided by the Division, as the secretariat of the Regular
Process, during the first cycle of the Regular Process;
271. Also recognizes with appreciation the important role of the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole, and thanks the members of the Bureau for their guidance during the intersessional periods;
272. Further recognizes with appreciation those organizations that contributed to the first cycle of the
Regular Process, including the United Nations Environment Programme and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission, for their technical and scientific, logistical and financial support during the first cycle of the Regular
Process;

_______________
328
329

196

See A/64/347, annex.
See A/70/418, para. 49 (c).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

273. Emphasizes the importance of making Governments, intergovernmental organizations, the scientific
community and the general public aware of the assessment, and requests the secretariat of the Regular Process to
make the assessment available on its website and on the website of the World Ocean Assessment, and to undertake
other activities with the view to raising awareness of the assessment;
274. Encourages States, and invites relevant intergovernmental organizations to take the assessment fully into
account as part of various processes, such as the Informal Consultative Process, and recognizes the supporting role
of the assessment in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;330
275. Recalls the importance of ensuring that assessments, such as those prepared under the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
and the Regular Process, support one another and avoid unnecessary duplication, and the importance of taking into
account assessments at the regional level;
276. Notes the views expressed by Member States, including members of the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole, observers and other participants in the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole, the Group of
Experts and the secretariat of the Regular Process, on the lessons learned from the first cycle of the Regular Process
and the need to continue the consideration of those issues during the intersessional period;
277. Notes with appreciation the contributions, including in-kind contributions, for workshops, the website,
and support to members of the Group of Experts;
278. Also notes with appreciation the contributions to the voluntary trust fund established pursuant to
paragraph 183 of resolution 64/71 for the purpose of supporting the operations of the first five-year cycle and for the
duration of the operations of the Regular Process,331 while expressing its concern about the difficulty in raising
sufficient funds for the Regular Process;
279. Notes the significant human and financial resource constraints under which the first cycle of the Regular
Process was conducted;
280. Recalls the decision of the General Assembly in paragraph 177 of its resolution 64/71 that, in the first
cycle, the scope of the Regular Process would focus on establishing a baseline and, in subsequent cycles, extend to
the evaluation of trends;
281. Decides to launch the second cycle of the Regular Process;
282. Requests the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole to continue the consideration of
lessons learned from the first cycle of the Regular Process with a view to the implementation of the second cycle,
including by inviting Member States, observers and other participants in the Ad Hoc Working Group, through the
Co-Chairs, to contribute by sending their views in writing to the Bureau and convening one or more informal open
meetings with Member States, observers and other participants in the Ad Hoc Working Group, and requests the
Bureau to inform the Ad Hoc Working Group at its seventh meeting of the views received and to circulate that
information in advance of the seventh meeting;
283. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the seventh meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole from 3 to 9 August 2016, with a view to providing recommendations to the General Assembly on the followup to the assessment, the implementation of the second cycle of the Regular Process, including its budget and
duration, and any adjustments that might be necessary in the light of lessons learned from the first cycle, including
with regard to resource requirements, before the end of the seventieth session of the Assembly, and taking into full
consideration the discussions on lessons learned and the way forward;
284. Decides that the meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole shall continue to be coordinated
by two co-chairs, representing developing and developed countries, respectively, to be appointed by the President of
the General Assembly, in consultation with regional groups, for the duration of the second cycle;
_______________
330
331

Resolution 70/1.
See resolution 69/245, para. 278.

197

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

285. Requests the Secretary-General to review the resource requirements for the second cycle of the Regular
Process and to report to Member States in advance of the seventh meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of
the Whole;
286. Requests the secretariat of the Regular Process to compile, subject to budgetary considerations, an
inventory of available information on recent and ongoing assessments and other processes at the regional and global
levels relevant to the Regular Process, and requests the secretariat to submit it to the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole by the end of February 2016;
287. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the Chairs of the regional groups to constitute a group of
experts, ensuring adequate expertise and geographical distribution, comprising a maximum of 25 experts, with no
more than five experts per regional group, for the duration of the second cycle of the Regular Process, taking into
account the desirability of some degree of continuity, and in accordance with the terms of reference of the Group of
Experts of the Regular Process;332
288. Invites individuals who served in the Group of Experts during the first cycle of the Regular Process to
provide advice, as required, to the Bureau and the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole until the Group of Experts
for the second cycle has been appointed;
289. Invites the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the International Maritime Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and other competent United Nations specialized agencies, as appropriate, to continue to provide technical and
scientific support to the Regular Process;
290. Recognizes that United Nations specialized agencies can play an important role in promoting the
Regular Process, and invites those agencies to continue to promote the Regular Process in consultation and
coordination with the secretariat of the Regular Process;
291. Urges Member States, international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make financial contributions to the voluntary
trust fund and to make other contributions to the Regular Process;
XIII
Regional cooperation
292. Notes that there have been a number of initiatives at the regional level, in various regions, to further the
implementation of the Convention, also notes in that context the Caribbean-focused Assistance Fund, which is
intended to facilitate, mainly through technical assistance, the voluntary undertaking of maritime delimitation
negotiations between Caribbean States, notes once again the Fund for Peace: Peaceful Settlement of Territorial
Disputes, established by the General Assembly of the Organization of American States in 2000 as a primary
mechanism, given its broader regional scope, for the prevention and resolution of pending territorial, land border
and maritime boundary disputes, and calls upon States and others in a position to do so to contribute to these funds;
293. Notes with appreciation efforts at the regional level to further the implementation of the Convention and
respond, including through capacity-building, to issues related to maritime safety and security, the conservation and
sustainable use of living marine resources, the protection and preservation of the marine environment and the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity;
294. Welcomes the adoption of the outcome document of the third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, entitled “SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway”333 and the new modalities
set forth for strengthened action on a range of small island developing States challenges and priorities, including
challenges related to the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources, and the preservation of the marine
environment, and reaffirms its commitment to work with small island developing States towards full
implementation of the Samoa Pathway to ensure its success;
_______________
332
333

198

See A/67/87, annex III.
Resolution 69/15, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

295. Invites States and international organizations to enhance their cooperation to better protect the marine
environment, and in this respect welcomes the memorandum of understanding for enhanced cooperation, concluded
between the Commission for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic, the North East
Atlantic Fisheries Commission, the International Seabed Authority and the International Maritime Organization;
296. Recognizes the results of the International Polar Year, 2007–2008, with particular emphasis on new
knowledge about the linkages between environmental change in the polar regions and global climate systems, and
encourages States and scientific communities to strengthen their cooperation in this respect;
297. Welcomes regional cooperation, and in this regard notes the Pacific Oceanscape Framework as an
initiative to enhance cooperation among coastal States in the Pacific island region to foster marine conservation and
sustainable development;
298. Notes with appreciation the various cooperative efforts displayed by States at the regional and
subregional levels, and in this regard welcomes initiatives, such as the Integrated Assessment and Management of
the Gulf of Mexico Large Marine Ecosystem;
299. Acknowledges relevant cooperation among the members of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the
South Atlantic;
300. Notes the decision of the Assembly of the African Union in January 2015 to adopt Agenda 2063, and
notes that, on 25 July 2015, the African Union launched Decade of African Seas and Oceans (2015–2025) and
observed the first annual African Day of the Seas and Oceans;
301. Also notes the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for
the Decade 2014–2024 by the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, held in
Vienna from 3 to 5 November 2014,334 following the comprehensive 10-year review of the implementation of the
Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New
Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries,335 and also
notes the need for cooperation to address the development needs and challenges faced by landlocked developing
countries associated with, inter alia, their lack of direct territorial access to the sea, remoteness and isolation from
world markets, in line with the objectives of the Vienna Programme of Action;
302. Further notes the efforts of the Sargasso Sea Alliance, led by the Government of Bermuda, to raise
awareness of the ecological significance of the Sargasso Sea;
XIV
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process
on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
303. Welcomes the report of the Co-Chairs on the work of the Informal Consultative Process at its sixteenth
meeting, which focused on the theme “Oceans and sustainable development: integration of the three dimensions of
sustainable development, namely, environmental, social and economic”;230
304. Recognizes the role of the Informal Consultative Process as a unique forum for comprehensive
discussions on issues related to oceans and the law of the sea, consistent with the framework provided by the
Convention and chapter 17 of Agenda 21,232 and that the perspective of the three pillars of sustainable development
should be further enhanced in the examination of the selected topics;
305. Welcomes the work of the Informal Consultative Process and its contribution to improving coordination
and cooperation between States and strengthening the annual debate of the General Assembly on oceans and the law
of the sea by effectively drawing attention to key issues and current trends;
_______________
334

Resolution 69/137, annex II.
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003
(A/CONF.202/3), annex I.

335

199

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

306. Also welcomes efforts to improve and focus the work of the Informal Consultative Process, and in that
respect recognizes the primary role of the Informal Consultative Process in integrating knowledge, the exchange of
opinions among multiple stakeholders and coordination among competent agencies, and enhancing awareness of
topics, including emerging issues, while promoting the three pillars of sustainable development, and recommends
that the Informal Consultative Process devise a transparent, objective and inclusive process for the selection of
topics and panellists so as to facilitate the work of the General Assembly during informal consultations concerning
the annual resolution on oceans and the law of the sea;
307. Recalls the need to strengthen and improve the efficiency of the Informal Consultative Process, and
encourages States, intergovernmental organizations and programmes to provide guidance to the Co-Chairs to this
effect, particularly before and during the preparatory meeting for the Informal Consultative Process;
308. Also recalls that a further review of the effectiveness and utility of the Informal Consultative Process
will be undertaken by the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
309. Requests the Secretary-General to convene, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 54/33,
the seventeenth meeting of the Informal Consultative Process, in New York from 13 to 17 June 2016, to provide it
with the facilities necessary for the performance of its work and to arrange for support to be provided by the
Division, in cooperation with other relevant parts of the Secretariat, as appropriate;
310. Expresses its continued serious concern regarding the lack of resources available in the voluntary trust
fund established pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose of assisting developing countries, in particular least
developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked developing States, in attending the meetings of
the Informal Consultative Process, and urges States to make additional contributions to the trust fund;
311. Decides that those representatives from developing countries who are invited by the Co-Chairs, in
consultation with Governments, to make presentations during the meetings of the Informal Consultative Process
shall receive priority consideration in the disbursement of funds from the voluntary trust fund established pursuant
to resolution 55/7 in order to cover the costs of their travel, and shall also be eligible to receive daily subsistence
allowance subject to the availability of funds after the travel costs of all other eligible representatives from those
countries mentioned in paragraph 310 above have been covered;
312. Recalls its decision in resolution 69/245 that, in its deliberations on the report of the Secretary-General
on oceans and the law of the sea, the Informal Consultative Process will focus its discussions at its seventeenth
meeting on the theme “Marine debris, plastics and microplastics”;
XV
Coordination and cooperation
313. Encourages States to work closely with and through international organizations, funds and programmes,
as well as the specialized agencies of the United Nations system and relevant international conventions, to identify
emerging areas of focus for improved coordination and cooperation and how best to address these issues;
314. Expresses its concern at the desecration of graves at sea and the looting of wrecks of ships constituting
such graves, and calls upon States to cooperate, as appropriate, to prevent the looting and desecration of wrecks of
ships constituting graves in order to ensure that proper respect is given to all human remains located in maritime
waters, consistent with international law, including, as appropriate, the 2001 Convention on the Protection of the
Underwater Cultural Heritage, among parties thereto;
315. Encourages bodies established by the Convention to strengthen coordination and cooperation, as
appropriate, in fulfilling their respective mandates;
316. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of heads of
intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations engaged in
activities relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea, as well as funding institutions, and underlines the
importance of their constructive and timely input for the report of the Secretary-General on oceans and the law of
the sea and of their participation in relevant meetings and processes;
317. Welcomes the work done by the secretariats of relevant United Nations specialized agencies,
programmes, funds and bodies and the secretariats of related organizations and conventions to enhance inter-agency
coordination and cooperation on ocean issues, including, where appropriate, through UN-Oceans, the inter-agency
coordination mechanism on ocean and coastal issues within the United Nations system;
200

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

318. Recognizes the work undertaken by UN-Oceans, under the revised terms of reference for the work of UNOceans, and with the United Nations Legal Counsel/Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea as the focal
point of UN-Oceans, and, as an interim measure, in this regard, invites Member States and others in a position to do so
to make financial earmarked contributions to the trust fund established by the Secretary-General for the Office of Legal
Affairs to support the promotion of international law, and authorizes the Secretary-General to disburse funds from such
contributions to that trust fund for the purposes of the development and maintenance of an online searchable database
for an inventory of the mandates of UN-Oceans members and priorities approved by the respective governing
bodies of the participating organizations of UN-Oceans, with a view to identifying possible areas of collaboration
and synergy, as well as for travel associated with the performance of the functions of the focal point;
319. Reaffirms its decision to review the terms of reference for the work of UN-Oceans at its seventy-second
session in the light of the work of UN-Oceans;
XVI
Activities of the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea
320. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the annual report on oceans and the law of the
sea, prepared by the Division, as well as for the other activities of the Division, which reflect the high standard of
assistance provided to Member States by the Division;
321. Notes with satisfaction the seventh observance by the United Nations of World Oceans Day in 2015,336
recognizes with appreciation the efforts deployed by the Division in organizing its celebration, and invites the
Division to continue to promote and facilitate international cooperation on the law of the sea and ocean affairs in the
context of the future observance of World Oceans Day, as well as through its participation in other events;
322. Recalls the responsibilities and functions entrusted to the Secretary-General in the Convention and in the
related resolutions of the General Assembly, including resolutions 49/28 and 52/26, notes the increased number of
requests to the Division for additional outputs and servicing of meetings in resolution 69/292 and in relation to the
support to be provided by the Division as secretariat of the Regular Process during the second cycle of the Regular
Process, and requests the Secretary-General to make proposals in the context of the 2016–2017 budget in order to
strengthen the capacity of the Division, including through the redeployment of existing resources, and to ensure that it
can carry out the functions in resolution 69/292 and as the secretariat of the Regular Process in an efficient manner;
323. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication activities of the Division, in particular
through the publication of The Law of the Sea: A Select Bibliography and the Law of the Sea Bulletin;
XVII
Seventy-first session of the General Assembly
324. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive report for consideration by the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session on developments and issues relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea,
including the implementation of the present resolution, in accordance with resolutions 49/28, 52/26 and 54/33, and
to prepare a separate section of the report on the topic that is the focus of the seventeenth meeting of the Informal
Consultative Process;
325. Emphasizes the critical role of the annual report of the Secretary-General, which integrates information on
developments relating to the implementation of the Convention and the work of the Organization, its specialized
agencies and other institutions in the field of ocean affairs and the law of the sea at the global and regional levels, and as
a result constitutes the basis for the annual consideration and review of developments relating to ocean affairs and the
law of the sea by the General Assembly as the global institution having the competence to undertake such a review;
326. Notes that the report referred to in paragraph 324 above will also be submitted to States Parties pursuant
to article 319 of the Convention regarding issues of a general nature that have arisen with respect to the Convention;
_______________
336

By its resolution 63/111, the General Assembly designated 8 June as World Oceans Day.

201

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

327. Also notes the desire to further improve the efficiency of and effective participation of delegations in the
informal consultations concerning the annual General Assembly resolution on oceans and the law of the sea, decides
that the period of the informal consultations on that resolution should not exceed a maximum of two weeks in total
and that the consultations should be scheduled in such a way that the Division has sufficient time to produce the
report referred to in paragraph 324 above, and invites States to submit text proposals for inclusion in the resolution
to the Coordinator of the informal consultations at the earliest possible date;
328. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Oceans and the
law of the sea”.
Annex
Amendments to annex II to General Assembly resolution 55/7: Trust Fund for the purpose of facilitating the
preparation of submissions to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf for developing States,
in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States, and compliance with article 76
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
Terms of reference, guidelines and rules
2.

Objects and purpose of the Trust Fund
In paragraph 9, amend the last sentence to read:
“The object of the Fund is to enable developing States, in particular, the least developed coastal countries
and small island developing States, to make an initial assessment of their particular case, make appropriate
plans for further investigations and data acquisition, to prepare the final submission documents when the
necessary data have been acquired, and to meet with the Commission when it is considering their submission
upon the Commission’s invitation.”

4.

Application for financial assistance
In paragraph 16, insert the following subparagraph after subparagraph (d):
“(d bis) Air travel and daily subsistence allowance for up to three members of a delegation when the
Commission or relevant subcommission has invited that delegation to attend its meeting or session, except in
cases where a joint submission of three or more States is being considered, for which a maximum of six
members total of such a joint delegation may receive assistance;”
In paragraph 17, insert the following sub-paragraph after subparagraph (d):
“(d bis) Air travel and daily subsistence allowance when the Commission or relevant subcommission
has invited a delegation to attend its meeting or session
The application shall be accompanied by:
(i)

A copy of the communication from the Commission inviting the State to attend its meeting or session;

(ii) A communication from the requesting Government(s) nominating the delegate(s) who will attend a
meeting or session of the Commission or subcommission, and indicating the dates during which each
delegate(s) will be required to attend such meeting or session;
(iii) A copy of the passport information page and information on the telephone number and email address for
each delegate nominated to attend a meeting or session.”
5.

Consideration of applications
Amend paragraph 21 to read:
“21. In considering the application, the Division shall consider applications in the order in which they
are received by the Division and be guided by the financial needs of the requesting developing State and
availability of funds, with priority given to least developed countries and small island developing States.”

202

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/21.

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures ........................................205

70/22.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace................................................................207

70/23.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty ............................................................................................................209

70/24.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East...........................................................210

70/25.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons .........................................................................................................................212

70/26.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space ................................................................................................................214

70/27.

No first placement of weapons in outer space ..........................................................................................................216

70/28.

2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and its Preparatory Committee................................................................................................................................218

70/29.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them.........................219

70/30.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament
and arms control ....................................................................................................................................................221

70/31.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation ..........................................................222

70/32.

Relationship between disarmament and development...............................................................................................225

70/33.

Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations .................................................................................226

70/34.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament .....................................228

70/35.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus ........................................231

70/36.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction ...............................................................233

70/37.

Reducing nuclear danger ........................................................................................................................................235

70/38.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons..................................................................236

70/39.

Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices ....................238

70/40.

United action with renewed determination towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons ......................................240

70/41.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction ......................................................................................................244

70/42.

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context......................................................................247

70/43.

Regional disarmament............................................................................................................................................248

70/44.

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels ..............................................................................249

70/45.

Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas ..................................................................................251

70/46.

Countering the threat posed by improvised explosive devices ...................................................................................253

70/47.

Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons......................................................................................................256

70/48.

Humanitarian pledge for the prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons.............................................................258

70/49.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects ..............................................................................260

203

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/50.

Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world ................................................................................................263

70/51.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments ..........266

70/52.

Nuclear disarmament .............................................................................................................................................270

70/53.

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities ..................................................................276

70/54.

Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions ..........................................................................................278

70/55.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer
of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction ..................................................................................................279

70/56.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use
of nuclear weapons ................................................................................................................................................281

70/57.

Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World ...........................................................284

70/58.

The Arms Trade Treaty ..........................................................................................................................................287

70/59.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes .....................................................................................................289

70/60.

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)...........................................................290

70/61.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament......................................................................................292

70/62.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons .................................................................................293

70/63.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean ........294

70/64.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa...................................................................................................................296

70/65.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific..................................................300

70/66.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa......................................................................302

70/67.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament ..............................................................................................................304

70/68.

Report of the Disarmament Commission .................................................................................................................305

70/69.

Thirty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research ....................................................307

70/70.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East ..................................................................................................309

70/71.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects ................................................................311

70/72.

Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region .....................................................................313

70/73.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty................................................................................................................315

70/74.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction .........................................................................................................317

70/237.

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security ...................319

204

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/21
A/RES/70/21

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/451, para. 8)1

70/21.

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/72 of 4 December 1998, 54/43 of 1 December 1999, 56/14 of 29 November 2001,
58/28 of 8 December 2003, 60/44 of 8 December 2005, 62/13 of 5 December 2007, 64/22 of 2 December 2009,
66/20 of 2 December 2011 and 68/23 of 5 December 2013 on objective information on military matters, including
transparency of military expenditures,
Recalling also its resolution 35/142 B of 12 December 1980, which introduced the United Nations system for
the standardized reporting of military expenditures, its resolutions 48/62 of 16 December 1993, 49/66 of
15 December 1994, 51/38 of 10 December 1996 and 52/32 of 9 December 1997, in which the General Assembly
called upon all Member States to participate in the system, and its resolution 47/54 B of 9 December 1992, in which
the Assembly endorsed the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters and
invited Member States to provide the Secretary-General with relevant information regarding their implementation,
Noting that, since then, national reports on military expenditures and on the guidelines and recommendations
for objective information on military matters have been submitted by a number of Member States belonging to
different geographical regions,
Convinced that the improvement of international relations forms a sound basis for promoting further openness
and transparency in all military matters,
Convinced also that transparency in military matters is an essential element for building a climate of trust and
confidence between States worldwide and that a better flow of objective information on military matters can help to
relieve international tension and is therefore an important contribution to conflict prevention,
Noting the role of the standardized reporting system, as instituted through its resolution 35/142 B, as an
important instrument to enhance transparency in military matters,
Conscious that the value of the standardized reporting system would be enhanced by a broader participation of
Member States,
Noting that a periodic review of the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures could facilitate its further
development and maintain its continued relevance and operation, and recalling that, in its resolution 66/20, the
General Assembly recommended the establishment of a process for periodic reviews and that another review of the
continuing relevance and operation of the Report be conducted in five years,
Welcoming the establishment of a group of governmental experts, on the basis of equitable geographical
representation, to review the operation and further development of the Report on Military Expenditures, including
the establishment of a process for periodic reviews in order to ensure the continued relevance and operation of the
Report, commencing in 2016,
Recalling, in that regard, the report of the Secretary-General on ways and means to implement the guidelines
and recommendations for objective information on military matters, including, in particular, on how to strengthen
and broaden participation in the standardized reporting system,2

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
2
A/54/298.

205

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling also the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the Operation and Further Development of
the United Nations Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military Expenditures on further ways and means to
implement the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters, including, in
particular, on how to strengthen and broaden participation in the standardized reporting system,3
Welcoming the work of the Secretariat on migrating data submitted on military expenditures to its new,
interactive web platform, which includes an online reporting feature, thus increasing user-friendliness and
facilitating the submission of reports, in accordance with resolution 66/20,
Noting the efforts of several regional organizations to promote transparency of military expenditures,
including standardized annual exchanges of relevant information among their member States,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the Report on Military Expenditures under the current political and
economic circumstances,
Recalling that, in its resolution 66/20, the General Assembly recommended that, for the purpose of reporting
by Member States of their national military expenditures in the framework of the Report on Military Expenditures,
“military expenditures” be commonly understood to refer to all financial resources that a State spends on the uses
and functions of its military forces and information on military expenditures represents an actual outlay in current
prices and domestic currency,
Mindful of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including its Article 26,
1. Calls upon Member States, with a view to achieving the broadest possible participation, to provide the
Secretary-General, by 30 April annually, with a report on their military expenditures for the latest fiscal year for
which data are available, using, preferably and to the extent possible, one of the online reporting forms, including a
nil report if appropriate, or, as appropriate, any other format developed in the context of similar reporting on military
expenditures to other international or regional organizations;
2. Recommends the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters to all
Member States for implementation, fully taking into account specific political, military and other conditions
prevailing in a region, on the basis of initiatives and with the agreement of the States of the region concerned;
3. Invites Member States in a position to do so to supplement their reports, on a voluntary basis, with
explanatory remarks regarding submitted data to explain or clarify the figures provided in the reporting forms, such
as the total military expenditures as a share of gross domestic product, major changes from previous reports and any
additional information reflecting their defence policy, military strategies and doctrines;
4.

Invites Member States to provide, preferably with their annual report, their national points of contact;

5. Encourages relevant international bodies and regional organizations to promote transparency of military
expenditures and to enhance complementarities among reporting systems, taking into account the particular
characteristics of each region, and to consider the possibility of an exchange of information with the United Nations;
6.

Takes note of the annual reports of the Secretary-General;4

7.

Requests the Secretary-General, within available resources:

(a) To continue the practice of sending an annual note verbale to Member States requesting the submission
of their report on military expenditures;
(b) To circulate annually a note verbale to Member States detailing which reports on military expenditures
were submitted and are available online;

_______________
3

A/66/89 and Corr.1–3.
A/58/202 and Add.1–3, A/59/192 and Add.1, A/60/159 and Add.1–3, A/61/133 and Add.1–3, A/62/158 and Add.1–3, A/63/97 and Add.1
and 2, A/64/113 and Add.1 and 2, A/65/118 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and 2, A/66/117 and Add.1, A/67/128 and Add.1, A/68/131 and Add.1,
A/69/135 and Add.1 and A/70/139 and Add.1.
4

206

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(c) To continue consultations with relevant international bodies, with a view to ascertaining requirements
for adjusting the present instrument in order to encourage wider participation, and to make recommendations, based
on the outcome of those consultations and taking into account the views of Member States, on necessary changes to
the content and structure of the standardized reporting system;
(d) To encourage relevant international bodies and organizations to promote transparency of military
expenditures and to consult with those bodies and organizations with emphasis on examining possibilities for
enhancing complementarities among international and regional reporting systems and for exchanging related
information between those bodies and the United Nations;
(e) To continue to foster further cooperation with relevant regional organizations, with a view to raising
awareness of the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures and its role as a confidence-building measure;
(f) To encourage the United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament in Africa, in Asia and the
Pacific and in Latin America and the Caribbean to assist Member States in their regions in enhancing their
knowledge of the standardized reporting system;
(g) To promote international and regional or subregional symposiums and training seminars and to support
the development of an online training course by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, with the
financial and technical support of interested States, with a view to explaining the purpose of the standardized
reporting system, facilitating the electronic filing of reports and providing relevant technical instructions;
(h)

To report on experiences gained during such symposiums and training seminars;

(i) To provide, upon request, technical assistance to Member States lacking the capacity to report data and
to encourage Member States to voluntarily provide bilateral assistance to other Member States;
8.

Encourages Member States:

(a) To inform the Secretary-General about possible problems with the standardized reporting system and
their reasons for not submitting the requested data;
(b) To continue to provide the Secretary-General with their views and suggestions on ways and means to
improve the future functioning of and broadened participation in the standardized reporting system, including
necessary changes to its content and structure, as well as recommendations to facilitate its further development;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, under the item entitled
“Reduction of military budgets”, the sub-item entitled “Objective information on military matters, including
transparency of military expenditures”.
RESOLUTION 70/22
A/RES/70/22

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/452, para. 7),5
by a recorded vote of 128 to 3, with 45 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,

_______________
5

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).

207

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine

70/22.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The GeneralAssembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of
16 December 1971, and recalling also its resolutions 54/47 of 1 December 1999, 56/16 of 29 November 2001,
58/29 of 8 December 2003, 60/48 of 8 December 2005, 62/14 of 5 December 2007, 64/23 of 2 December 2009,
66/22 of 2 December 2011 and 68/24 of 5 December 2013 and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, held in
New York from 2 to 13 July 1979,6
Recalling further paragraph 102 of the Final Document of the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Kuala Lumpur on 24 and 25 February 2003,7 in which it was noted,
inter alia, that the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean would continue his informal consultations
on the future work of the Committee,
Emphasizing the need to foster consensual approaches that are conducive to the pursuit of such endeavours,
Noting the initiatives taken by countries of the region to promote cooperation, in particular economic
cooperation, in the Indian Ocean area and the possible contribution of such initiatives to overall objectives of a zone
of peace,
Convinced that the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime
users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would assist the progress of a
mutually beneficial dialogue to develop conditions of peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region,
Considering that greater efforts and more time are required to develop a focused discussion on practical
measures to ensure conditions of peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee,8
1.

Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean;8

2. Reiterates its conviction that the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the
major maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would greatly
facilitate the development of a mutually beneficial dialogue to advance peace, security and stability in the Indian
Ocean region;
3. Requests the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee to continue his informal consultations with the members
of the Committee and to report through the Committee to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render, within existing resources, all necessary assistance
to the Ad Hoc Committee, including the provision of summary records;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session the item entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace”.

_______________
6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 45 and corrigendum (A/34/45 and Corr.1).
A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/70/29).
7

208

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/23
A/RES/70/23

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/453, para. 7)9

70/23.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/53 of 10 December 1996 and 56/17 of 29 November 2001 and all its other
relevant resolutions, as well as those of the Organization of African Unity and of the African Union,
Recalling also the signing of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba) in Cairo on
11 April 1996,10
Recalling further the Cairo Declaration adopted on that occasion,11 in which it was emphasized that nuclearweapon-free zones, especially in regions of tension, such as the Middle East, enhance global and regional peace and
security,
Recalling the statement made by the President of the Security Council on behalf of the members of the
Council on 12 April 1996,12 in which the Council affirmed that the signature of the Treaty constituted an important
contribution by the African countries to the maintenance of international peace and security,
Considering that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, especially in the Middle East, would
enhance the security of Africa and the viability of the African nuclear-weapon-free zone,
1. Recalls with satisfaction the entry into force of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of
Pelindaba)10 on 15 July 2009;
2.

Calls upon African States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Treaty as soon as possible;

3. Welcomes the convening of the first Conference of States Parties to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba), on 4 November 2010, the second Conference of States Parties, on 12 and
13 November 2012, and the third Conference of States Parties, on 29 and 30 May 2014, all held in Addis Ababa;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the nuclear-weapon States that have signed the Protocols to the Treaty10
that concern them, and calls upon those that have not yet ratified the Protocols that concern them to do so as soon as
possible;
5. Calls upon the States contemplated in Protocol III to the Treaty that have not yet done so to take all
measures necessary to ensure the speedy application of the Treaty to territories for which they are, de jure or de
facto, internationally responsible and which lie within the limits of the geographical zone established in the Treaty;
6. Calls upon the African States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons13 that
have not yet done so to conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with the International Atomic Energy
Agency pursuant to the Treaty, thereby satisfying the requirements of article 9 (b) and annex II to the Treaty of
Pelindaba, and encourages them to conclude additional protocols to their safeguards agreements on the basis of the
model protocol approved by the Board of Governors of the Agency on 15 May 1997;
7. Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency for the diligence with
which they have rendered effective assistance to the signatories to the Treaty;
_______________
9

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Belize, Georgia, Jamaica, Kazakhstan,
Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States),
Portugal, Serbia and Trinidad and Tobago.
10
A/50/426, annex.
11
A/51/113-S/1996/276, annex.
12
S/PRST/1996/17; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1996 (S/INF/52).
13
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

209

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty”.
RESOLUTION 70/24
A/RES/70/24

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/456, para. 7)14

70/24.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/71 of
10 December 1976, 32/82 of 12 December 1977, 33/64 of 14 December 1978, 34/77 of 11 December 1979, 35/147
of 12 December 1980, 36/87 A and B of 9 December 1981, 37/75 of 9 December 1982, 38/64 of 15 December
1983, 39/54 of 12 December 1984, 40/82 of 12 December 1985, 41/48 of 3 December 1986, 42/28 of 30 November
1987, 43/65 of 7 December 1988, 44/108 of 15 December 1989, 45/52 of 4 December 1990, 46/30 of 6 December
1991, 47/48 of 9 December 1992, 48/71 of 16 December 1993, 49/71 of 15 December 1994, 50/66 of 12 December
1995, 51/41 of 10 December 1996, 52/34 of 9 December 1997, 53/74 of 4 December 1998, 54/51 of 1 December
1999, 55/30 of 20 November 2000, 56/21 of 29 November 2001, 57/55 of 22 November 2002, 58/34 of
8 December 2003, 59/63 of 3 December 2004, 60/52 of 8 December 2005, 61/56 of 6 December 2006, 62/18 of
5 December 2007, 63/38 of 2 December 2008, 64/26 of 2 December 2009, 65/42 of 8 December 2010, 66/25 of
2 December 2011, 67/28 of 3 December 2012, 68/27 of 5 December 2013 and 69/29 of 2 December 2014 on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also the recommendations for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East consistent with paragraphs 60 to 63, and in particular paragraph 63 (d), of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,15
Emphasizing the basic provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions, in which all parties directly concerned
are called upon to consider taking the practical and urgent steps required for the implementation of the proposal to
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East and, pending and during the establishment of
such a zone, to declare solemnly that they will refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, acquiring or in any
other way possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices and from permitting the stationing of nuclear
weapons on their territory by any third party, to agree to place their nuclear facilities under International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards and to declare their support for the establishment of the zone and to deposit such
declarations with the Security Council for consideration, as appropriate,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all States to acquire and develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
Emphasizing the need for appropriate measures on the question of the prohibition of military attacks on
nuclear facilities,
Bearing in mind the consensus reached by the General Assembly since its thirty-fifth session that the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East would greatly enhance international
peace and security,
Desirous of building on that consensus so that substantial progress can be made towards establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Welcoming all initiatives leading to general and complete disarmament, including in the region of the Middle
East, and in particular on the establishment therein of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons,
_______________
14
15

210

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Egypt.
Resolution S-10/2.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the peace negotiations in the Middle East, which should be of a comprehensive nature and represent an
appropriate framework for the peaceful settlement of contentious issues in the region,
Recognizing the importance of credible regional security, including the establishment of a mutually verifiable
nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Emphasizing the essential role of the United Nations in the establishment of a mutually verifiable nuclearweapon-free zone,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 69/29,16
1. Urges all parties directly concerned seriously to consider taking the practical and urgent steps required
for the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and, as a means of promoting this objective,
invites the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;17
2. Calls upon all countries of the region that have not yet done so, pending the establishment of the zone, to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
3. Takes note of resolution GC(59)/RES/15, adopted on 17 September 2015 by the General Conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency at its fifty-ninth regular session, concerning the application of Agency
safeguards in the Middle East;
4. Notes the importance of the ongoing bilateral Middle East peace negotiations and the activities of the
multilateral Working Group on Arms Control and Regional Security in promoting mutual confidence and security in
the Middle East, including the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
5. Invites all countries of the region, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region
of the Middle East, to declare their support for establishing such a zone, consistent with paragraph 63 (d) of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,15 and to deposit those declarations with the
Security Council;
6. Also invites those countries, pending the establishment of the zone, not to develop, produce, test or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or permit the stationing on their territories, or territories under their control, of
nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices;
7. Invites the nuclear-weapon States and all other States to render their assistance in the establishment of
the zone and at the same time to refrain from any action that runs counter to both the letter and the spirit of the
present resolution;
8.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 69/29;16

9. Invites all parties to consider the appropriate means that may contribute towards the goal of general and
complete disarmament and the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the region of the
Middle East;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to pursue consultations with the States of the region and
other concerned States, in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 46/30 and taking into account the evolving
situation in the region, and to seek from those States their views on the measures outlined in chapters III and IV of
the study annexed to the report of the Secretary-General of 10 October 199018 or other relevant measures, in order to
move towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East”.
_______________
16

A/70/153 (Part I) and Add.1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
18
A/45/435.
17

211

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/25
A/RES/70/25

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/457, para. 7),19
by a recorded vote of 127 to none, with 55 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

70/25.

A/RES/70/25.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,

Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the world with regard to ensuring
lasting security for their peoples,
Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest threat to mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Noting that the renewed interest in nuclear disarmament should be translated into concrete actions for the
achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove
the danger of nuclear war,
Determined to abide strictly by the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations on the non-use of
force or threat of force,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States need to
be safeguarded against the use or threat of use of force, including the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the
international community to develop effective measures and arrangements to ensure the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures and arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons can contribute positively to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,
the first special session devoted to disarmament,20 in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue efforts to
_______________
19

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bangladesh, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
20
Resolution S-10/2.

212

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons, and desirous of promoting the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Final
Document,
Recalling the relevant parts of the special report of the Committee on Disarmament21 submitted to the General
Assembly at its twelfth special session, the second special session devoted to disarmament,22 and of the special
report of the Conference on Disarmament submitted to the Assembly at its fifteenth special session, the third special
session devoted to disarmament,23 as well as the report of the Conference on its 1992 session,24
Recalling also paragraph 12 of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, contained in
the annex to its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980, in which it is stated, inter alia, that all efforts should be
exerted by the Committee on Disarmament urgently to negotiate with a view to reaching agreement on effective
international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting the in-depth negotiations undertaken in the Conference on Disarmament and its Ad Hoc Committee on
Effective International Arrangements to Assure Non-Nuclear-Weapon States against the Use or Threat of Use of
Nuclear Weapons,25 with a view to reaching agreement on this question,
Taking note of the proposals submitted under the item in the Conference on Disarmament, including the drafts
of an international convention,
Taking note also of the relevant decision of the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Kuala Lumpur on 24 and 25 February 2003,26 which was reiterated at the Sixteenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August
2012,27 as well as the relevant recommendations of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
Taking note further of the unilateral declarations made by all the nuclear-weapon States on their policies of
non-use or non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear-weapon States,
Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the
elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, as well as the difficulties pointed out in evolving a common approach acceptable to all,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 984 (1995) of 11 April 1995 and the views expressed on it,
Recalling its relevant resolutions adopted in previous years, in particular resolutions 45/54 of 4 December
1990, 46/32 of 6 December 1991, 47/50 of 9 December 1992, 48/73 of 16 December 1993, 49/73 of 15 December
1994, 50/68 of 12 December 1995, 51/43 of 10 December 1996, 52/36 of 9 December 1997, 53/75 of 4 December
1998, 54/52 of 1 December 1999, 55/3l of 20 November 2000, 56/22 of 29 November 2001, 57/56 of 22 November
2002, 58/35 of 8 December 2003, 59/64 of 3 December 2004, 60/53 of 8 December 2005, 61/57 of 6 December
2006, 62/19 of 5 December 2007, 63/39 of 2 December 2008, 64/27 of 2 December 2009, 65/43 of 8 December
2010, 66/26 of 2 December 2011, 67/29 of 3 December 2012, 68/28 of 5 December 2013 and 69/30 of
2 December 2014,
1. Reaffirms the urgent need to reach an early agreement on effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Conference on Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the
idea of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons, although the difficulties with regard to evolving a common approach acceptable to all have also been
pointed out;
_______________
21

The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February1984.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/S-12/2), sect. III.C.
23
Ibid., Fifteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/S-15/2), sect. III.F.
24
Ibid., Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27), sect. III.F.
25
Ibid., Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/48/27), sect. III.E.
26
SeeA/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
27
SeeA/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.
22

213

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Appeals to all States, especially the nuclear-weapon States, to work actively towards an early agreement
on a common approach and, in particular, on a common formula that could be included in an international
instrument of a legally binding character;
4. Recommends that further intensive efforts be devoted to the search for such a common approach or
common formula and that the various alternative approaches, including, in particular, those considered in the
Conference on Disarmament, be further explored in order to overcome the difficulties;
5. Also recommends that the Conference on Disarmament actively continue intensive negotiations with a
view to reaching early agreement and concluding effective international agreements to assure the non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, taking into account the widespread support for
the conclusion of an international convention and giving consideration to any other proposals designed to secure the
same objective;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Conclusion of
effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons”.
RESOLUTION 70/26
A/RES/70/26

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/458, para. 9),28
by a recorded vote of 179 to none, with 2 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Israel, United States of America

70/26.
A/RES/70/26.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,

Reaffirming the will of all States that the exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other
celestial bodies, shall be for peaceful purposes and shall be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all
countries, irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific development,
_______________
28

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, China, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

214

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming also the provisions of articles III and IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,29
Recalling the obligation of all States to observe the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations regarding
the use or threat of use of force in their international relations, including in their space activities,
Reaffirming paragraph 80 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,30 in
which it is stated that, in order to prevent an arms race in outer space, further measures should be taken and
appropriate international negotiations held in accordance with the spirit of the Treaty,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this issue, and taking note of the proposals submitted to the General
Assembly at its tenth special session and at its regular sessions and of the recommendations made to the competent
organs of the United Nations and to the Conference on Disarmament,
Recognizing that the prevention of an arms race in outer space would avert a grave danger for international
peace and security,
Emphasizing the paramount importance of strict compliance with existing arms limitation and disarmament
agreements relevant to outer space, including bilateral agreements, and with the existing legal regime concerning the
use of outer space,
Considering that wide participation in the legal regime applicable to outer space could contribute to enhancing
its effectiveness,
Noting that the Ad Hoc Committee on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, taking into account its
previous efforts since its establishment in 1985 and seeking to enhance its functioning in qualitative terms,
continued the examination and identification of various issues, existing agreements and existing proposals, as well
as future initiatives relevant to the prevention of an arms race in outer space, and that this contributed to a better
understanding of a number of problems and to a clearer perception of the various positions,
Noting also that there were no objections in principle in the Conference on Disarmament to the reestablishment of the Ad Hoc Committee, subject to re-examination of the mandate contained in the decision of the
Conference on Disarmament of 13 February 1992,31
Emphasizing the mutually complementary nature of bilateral and multilateral efforts for the prevention of an
arms race in outer space, and hoping that concrete results will emerge from those efforts as soon as possible,
Convinced that further measures should be examined in the search for effective and verifiable bilateral and
multilateral agreements in order to prevent an arms race in outer space, including the weaponization of outer space,
Stressing that the growing use of outer space increases the need for greater transparency and better information
on the part of the international community,
Recalling, in this context, its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 45/55 B of 4 December 1990,
47/51 of 9 December 1992 and 48/74 A of 16 December 1993, in which, inter alia, it reaffirmed the importance of
confidence-building measures as a means conducive to ensuring the attainment of the objective of the prevention of
an arms race in outer space,
Conscious of the benefits of confidence- and security-building measures in the military field,
Recognizing that negotiations for the conclusion of an international agreement or agreements to prevent an
arms race in outer space remain a priority task of the Conference on Disarmament and that the concrete proposals
on confidence-building measures could form an integral part of such agreements,
Noting with satisfaction the constructive, structured and focused debate on the prevention of an arms race in
outer space at the Conference on Disarmament in 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015,
_______________
29

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution S-10/2.
31
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27), para. 76.
30

215

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the introduction by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference on Disarmament of the draft
treaty on the prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of the threat or use of force against outer
space objects in 2008 and the submission of its updated version in 2014,32
Taking note of the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to establish for its 2009 session a working
group to discuss, substantially, without limitation, all issues related to the prevention of an arms race in outer space,
1. Reaffirms the importance and urgency of preventing an arms race in outer space and the readiness of all
States to contribute to that common objective, in conformity with the provisions of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies;29
2. Reaffirms its recognition, as stated in the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Prevention of an Arms
Race in Outer Space, that the legal regime applicable to outer space by itself does not guarantee the prevention of an
arms race in outer space, that the regime plays a significant role in the prevention of an arms race in that
environment, that there is a need to consolidate and reinforce that regime and enhance its effectiveness and that it is
important to comply strictly with existing agreements, both bilateral and multilateral;
3. Emphasizes the necessity of further measures with appropriate and effective provisions for verification
to prevent an arms race in outer space;
4. Calls upon all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to contribute actively to the
objective of the peaceful use of outer space and of the prevention of an arms race in outer space and to refrain from
actions contrary to that objective and to the relevant existing treaties in the interest of maintaining international
peace and security and promoting international cooperation;
5. Reiterates that the Conference on Disarmament, as the sole multilateral disarmament negotiating forum,
has the primary role in the negotiation of a multilateral agreement or agreements, as appropriate, on the prevention
of an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;
6. Invites the Conference on Disarmament to establish a working group under its agenda item entitled
“Prevention of an arms race in outer space” as early as possible during its 2016 session;
7. Recognizes, in this respect, the growing convergence of views on the elaboration of measures designed
to strengthen transparency, confidence and security in the peaceful uses of outer space;
8. Urges States conducting activities in outer space, as well as States interested in conducting such
activities, to keep the Conference on Disarmament informed of the progress of bilateral and multilateral negotiations
on the matter, if any, so as to facilitate its work;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Prevention of
an arms race in outer space”.
RESOLUTION 70/27
A/RES/70/27

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/458, para. 9),33
by a recorded vote of 129 to 4, with 46 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,

_______________
32

See CD/1839 and CD/1985.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Honduras, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
33

216

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Georgia, Israel, Ukraine, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

70/27.
A/RES/70/27.

No first placement of weapons in outer space

The General Assembly,

Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space and of outer space turning into an
arena for military confrontation, and bearing in mind the importance of articles III and IV of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies,34
Conscious that the prevention of an arms race in outer space would avert a grave danger to international peace
and security,
Reaffirming that practical measures should be examined and taken in the search for agreements to prevent an
arms race in outer space,
Emphasizing the paramount importance of strict compliance with the existing legal regime providing for the
peaceful use of outer space,
Reaffirming its recognition that the legal regime applicable to outer space by itself does not guarantee
prevention of an arms race in outer space and that there is a need to consolidate and reinforce that regime,
Welcoming, in this regard, the draft treaty on the prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of
the threat or use of force against outer space objects, introduced by China and the Russian Federation at the
Conference on Disarmament in 2008,35 and the submission of its updated version in 2014,36
Considering that transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities are an integral part
of the draft treaty referred to above,
Recalling its resolution 69/32 of 2 December 2014, and its resolutions 45/55 B of 4 December 1990 and
48/74 B of 16 December 1993, which, inter alia, confirm the importance of transparency and confidence-building
measures as a means conducive to ensuring the attainment of the objective of the prevention of an arms race in
outer space,
Noting the importance of the political statements made by a number of States37 that they would not be the first
to place weapons in outer space,
1. Reaffirms the importance and urgency of the objective to prevent an arms race in outer space and the
willingness of States to contribute to reaching this common goal;
_______________
34

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
See CD/1839.
36
See CD/1985.
37
Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Brazil, Cuba, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
35

217

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Reiterates that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating
forum,38 has the primary role in the negotiation of a multilateral agreement, or agreements, as appropriate, on the
prevention of an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;
3. Urges an early commencement of substantive work based on the updated draft treaty on the prevention
of the placement of weapons in outer space and of the threat or use of force against outer space objects introduced
by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference on Disarmament in 2008,35 under the agenda item entitled
“Prevention of an arms race in outer space”;
4. Stresses that, while such an agreement is not yet concluded, other measures may contribute to ensuring
that weapons are not placed in outer space;
5. Encourages all States, especially space-faring nations, to consider the possibility of upholding as
appropriate a political commitment not to be the first to place weapons in outer space;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “No first
placement of weapons in outer space”.
RESOLUTION 70/28
A/RES/70/28

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),39 by a recorded vote of 176 to none, with 3 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: India, Israel, Pakistan

70/28.

A/RES/70/28.

2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and its Preparatory Committee

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June 1968, the annex to which contains the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,40
Noting the provisions of article VIII, paragraph 3, of the Treaty regarding the convening of review conferences
at five-year intervals,

_______________
38

See resolution S-10/2.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Algeria.
40
See also United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
39

218

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling the outcomes of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,41 of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty42 and of the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty,43
Recalling also the decision of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on improving the
effectiveness of the strengthened review process for the Treaty,44 which reaffirmed the provisions in the decision on
strengthening the review process for the Treaty, adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty,45
Noting the decision on strengthening the review process for the Treaty, in which it was agreed that review
conferences should continue to be held every five years, and noting that, accordingly, the next review conference
should be held in 2020,
Recalling the decision of the 2000 Review Conference that three sessions of the Preparatory Committee
should be held in the years prior to the review conference,44
Recalling also that the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, held from 27 April to 22 May 2015, was not able to reach agreement, despite intensive
consultations on a substantive Final Document,46
1. Takes note of the decision of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,40
following appropriate consultations, to hold the first session of the Preparatory Committee in Vienna from 2 to
12 May 2017;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance and to provide such services, as may
be required, for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and its Preparatory Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/29
A/RES/70/29

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)47

70/29.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and
collecting them

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/33 of 2 December 2014 on assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons and collecting them,
_______________
41

See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2).
42
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
43
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
44
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I.
45
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex, decision 1.
46
See 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document
(NPT/CONF.2015/50 (Parts I–III)), part I.
47
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Congo,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Economic
Community of West African States), Malta, Mauritania, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

219

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Deeply concerned by the magnitude of human casualty and suffering, especially among children, caused by
the illicit proliferation and use of small arms and light weapons,
Concerned by the negative impact that the illicit proliferation and use of those weapons continue to have on
the efforts of States in the Sahelo-Saharan subregion in the areas of poverty eradication, sustainable development
and the maintenance of peace, security and stability,
Bearing in mind the Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation,
Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, adopted in Bamako on 1 December 2000,48
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General entitled “In larger freedom: towards development, security and
human rights for all”,49 in which he emphasized that States must strive just as hard to eliminate the threat of small
arms and light weapons as they do to eliminate the threat of weapons of mass destruction,
Recalling also the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, adopted on 8 December 2005,50
Recalling further the expression of support in the 2005 World Summit Outcome for the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects,51
Recalling the adoption, on 14 June 2006 in Abuja at the thirtieth ordinary summit of the Economic
Community of West African States, of the Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and
Other Related Materials, in replacement of the moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons in West Africa,
Recalling also the entry into force of the Convention on 29 September 2009,
Recalling further the decision taken by the Economic Community to establish the Small Arms Unit,
responsible for advocating appropriate policies and developing and implementing programmes, as well as the
establishment of the Economic Community’s Small Arms Control Programme, launched on 6 June 2006 in
Bamako, in replacement of the Programme for Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development,
Taking note of the latest report of the Secretary-General on assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons and collecting them and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects,52
Recalling, in that regard, the decision of the European Union to significantly support the Economic
Community in its efforts to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
Recognizing the important role that civil society organizations play, by raising public awareness, in efforts to
curb the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons,
Recalling the reports of the United Nations Conferences to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, held in New York from 26 June to 7 July 2006 and from 27 August to 7 September 2012,53
Welcoming the inclusion of small arms and light weapons in the scope of the Arms Trade Treaty,54 as well as
the inclusion of international assistance in its provisions,
1. Commends the United Nations and international, regional and other organizations for their assistance to
States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;
_______________
48

A/CONF.192/PC/23, annex.
A/59/2005.
50
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and Corr.2, annex.
51
Resolution 60/1, para. 94.
52
A/70/183.
53
A/CONF.192/2006/RC/9 and A/CONF.192/2012/RC/4.
54
See resolution 67/234 B.
49

220

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts in the context of the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 49/75 G of 15 December 1994 and the recommendations of the United Nations advisory
missions aimed at curbing the illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons and collecting them in the affected
States that so request, with the support of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa
and in close cooperation with the African Union;
3. Encourages the international community to support the implementation of the Economic Community of
West African States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials;
4. Encourages the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan subregion to facilitate the effective functioning of
national commissions to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and in that regard invites
the international community to lend its support wherever possible;
5. Encourages the collaboration of civil society organizations and associations in the efforts of the national
commissions to combat the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and in the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects;55
6. Encourages cooperation among State organs, international organizations and civil society in support of
programmes and projects aimed at combating the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;
7. Calls upon the international community to provide technical and financial support to strengthen the
capacity of civil society organizations to take action to help to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons;
8. Invites the Secretary-General and those States and organizations that are in a position to do so to
continue to provide assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting
them;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider the matter and to report to the General Assembly
at its seventy-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons and collecting them”.
RESOLUTION 70/30
A/RES/70/30

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)56

70/30.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on
disarmament and arms control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/70 M of 12 December 1995, 51/45 E of 10 December 1996, 52/38 E of
9 December 1997, 53/77 J of 4 December 1998, 54/54 S of 1 December 1999, 55/33 K of 20 November 2000,
56/24 F of 29 November 2001, 57/64 of 22 November 2002, 58/45 of 8 December 2003, 59/68 of 3 December
2004, 60/60 of 8 December 2005, 61/63 of 6 December 2006, 62/28 of 5 December 2007, 63/51 of 2 December
2008, 64/33 of 2 December 2009, 65/53 of 8 December 2010, 66/31 of 2 December 2011, 67/37 of 3 December
2012, 68/36 of 5 December 2013 and 69/55 of 2 December 2014,

_______________
55

Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
56
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).

221

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Emphasizing the importance of the observance of environmental norms in the preparation and implementation
of disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
Recognizing that it is necessary to take duly into account the agreements adopted at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, as well as prior relevant agreements, in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms limitation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 69/55,57
Noting that the Seventeenth Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Algiers from 26 to 29 May 2014, welcomed the adoption by the General Assembly, without a vote, of resolution
68/36 on the observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament
and arms control,
Mindful of the detrimental environmental effects of the use of nuclear weapons,
1. Reaffirms that international disarmament forums should take fully into account the relevant
environmental norms in negotiating treaties and agreements on disarmament and arms limitation and that all States,
through their actions, should contribute fully to ensuring compliance with the aforementioned norms in the
implementation of treaties and conventions to which they are parties;
2. Calls upon States to adopt unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral measures so as to contribute to
ensuring the application of scientific and technological progress within the framework of international security,
disarmament and other related spheres, without detriment to the environment or to its effective contribution to
attaining sustainable development;
3. Welcomes the information provided by Member States on the implementation of the measures they have
adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution;57
4. Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General information on the measures they
have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a report containing that information to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control”.
RESOLUTION 70/31
A/RES/70/31

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),58 by a recorded vote of 129 to 4, with 50 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

_______________
57

A/70/155.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
58

222

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Against: Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine

70/31.
A/RES/70/31.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation

The General Assembly,

Determined to foster strict respect for the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 56/24 T of 29 November 2001 on multilateral cooperation in the area of
disarmament and non-proliferation and global efforts against terrorism and other relevant resolutions, as well as
its resolutions 57/63 of 22 November 2002, 58/44 of 8 December 2003, 59/69 of 3 December 2004, 60/59 of
8 December 2005, 61/62 of 6 December 2006, 62/27 of 5 December 2007, 63/50 of 2 December 2008, 64/34 of
2 December 2009, 65/54 of 8 December 2010, 66/32 of 2 December 2011, 67/38 of 3 December 2012, 68/38 of
5 December 2013 and 69/54 of 2 December 2014 on the promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament
and non-proliferation,
Recalling also the purpose of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security and, to that end,
to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace and for the suppression
of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with
the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace, as enshrined in the Charter,
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration,59 in which it is stated, inter alia, that the
responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social development, as well as threats to international peace
and security, must be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally and that, as the
most universal and most representative organization in the world, the United Nations must play the central role,
Convinced that, in the globalization era and with the information revolution, arms regulation, non-proliferation
and disarmament problems are more than ever the concern of all countries in the world, which are affected in one
way or another by these problems and therefore should have the possibility to participate in the negotiations that
arise to tackle them,
Bearing in mind the existence of a broad structure of disarmament and arms regulation agreements resulting
from non-discriminatory and transparent multilateral negotiations with the participation of a large number of
countries, regardless of their size and power,
Aware of the need to advance further in the field of arms regulation, non-proliferation and disarmament on the
basis of universal, multilateral, non-discriminatory and transparent negotiations with the goal of reaching general
and complete disarmament under strict international control,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral negotiations on disarmament,
Recognizing also that the proliferation and development of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons, are among the most immediate threats to international peace and security which need to be dealt with,
with the highest priority,
Considering that the multilateral disarmament agreements provide the mechanism for States parties to consult
one another and to cooperate in solving any problems which may arise in relation to the objective of, or in the
_______________
59

Resolution 55/2.

223

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

application of, the provisions of the agreements and that such consultations and cooperation may also be undertaken
through appropriate international procedures within the framework of the United Nations and in accordance with
the Charter,
Stressing that international cooperation, the peaceful settlement of disputes, dialogue and confidence-building
measures would make an essential contribution to the creation of multilateral and bilateral friendly relations among
peoples and nations,
Being concerned at the continuous erosion of multilateralism in the field of arms regulation, non-proliferation
and disarmament, and recognizing that a resort to unilateral actions by Member States in resolving their security
concerns would jeopardize international peace and security and undermine confidence in the international security
system as well as the foundations of the United Nations itself,
Noting that the Seventeenth Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Algiers from 26 to 29 May 2014, welcomed the adoption of resolution 68/38 on the promotion of multilateralism in
the area of disarmament and non-proliferation and underlined the fact that multilateralism and multilaterally agreed
solutions, in accordance with the Charter, provide the only sustainable method of addressing disarmament and
international security issues,
Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
and determined to promote multilateralism as an essential way to develop arms regulation and disarmament
negotiations,
1. Reaffirms multilateralism as the core principle in negotiations in the area of disarmament and nonproliferation with a view to maintaining and strengthening universal norms and enlarging their scope;
2. Also reaffirms multilateralism as the core principle in resolving disarmament and non-proliferation
concerns;
3. Urges the participation of all interested States in multilateral negotiations on arms regulation, nonproliferation and disarmament in a non-discriminatory and transparent manner;
4. Underlines the importance of preserving the existing agreements on arms regulation and disarmament,
which constitute an expression of the results of international cooperation and multilateral negotiations in response to
the challenges facing mankind;
5. Calls once again upon all Member States to renew and fulfil their individual and collective
commitments to multilateral cooperation as an important means of pursuing and achieving their common objectives
in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation;
6. Requests the States parties to the relevant instruments on weapons of mass destruction to consult and
cooperate among themselves in resolving their concerns with regard to cases of non-compliance as well as on
implementation, in accordance with the procedures defined in those instruments, and to refrain from resorting or
threatening to resort to unilateral actions or directing unverified non-compliance accusations against one another to
resolve their concerns;
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General containing the replies of Member States on the
promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation, submitted pursuant to
resolution 69/54;60
8. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on the issue of the promotion of
multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation and to submit a report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation”.
_______________
60

224

A/70/157.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/32
A/RES/70/32

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)61

70/32.

Relationship between disarmament and development

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Charter of the United Nations envisages the establishment and maintenance of international
peace and security with the least diversion for armaments of the world’s human and economic resources,
Recalling also the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly
concerning the relationship between disarmament and development,62 as well as the adoption on 11 September
1987 of the Final Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and
Development,63
Recalling further its resolutions 49/75 J of 15 December 1994, 50/70 G of 12 December 1995, 51/45 D of
10 December 1996, 52/38 D of 9 December 1997, 53/77 K of 4 December 1998, 54/54 T of 1 December 1999,
55/33 L of 20 November 2000, 56/24 E of 29 November 2001, 57/65 of 22 November 2002, 59/78 of 3 December
2004, 60/61 of 8 December 2005, 61/64 of 6 December 2006, 62/48 of 5 December 2007, 63/52 of 2 December
2008, 64/32 of 2 December 2009, 65/52 of 8 December 2010, 66/30 of 2 December 2011, 67/40 of 3 December
2012, 68/37 of 5 December 2013 and 69/56 of 2 December 2014 and its decision 58/520 of 8 December 2003,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012,64
Mindful of the changes in international relations that have taken place since the adoption in 1987 of the Final
Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, including
the development agenda that has emerged over the past decade,
Bearing in mind the new challenges for the international community in the fields of development, poverty
eradication and the elimination of the diseases that afflict humanity,
Stressing the importance of the symbiotic relationship between disarmament and development and the
important role of security in this connection, and concerned at increasing global military expenditure, which could
otherwise be spent on development needs,
Recalling the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the relationship between disarmament and
development65 and its reappraisal of this significant issue in the current international context,
Bearing in mind the importance of following up on the implementation of the action programme adopted at
the 1987 International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development,63
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 69/56,66
1. Stresses the central role of the United Nations in the relationship between disarmament and
development, and requests the Secretary-General to strengthen further the role of the Organization in this field, in
particular the high-level Steering Group on Disarmament and Development, in order to ensure continued and
effective coordination and close cooperation between the relevant United Nations departments, agencies and
subagencies;
_______________
61

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
62
See resolution S-10/2.
63
See Report of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, New York,
24 August–11 September 1987 (A/CONF.130/39).
64
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.
65
See A/59/119.
66
A/70/163 and Add.1.

225

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action, through appropriate organs and within
available resources, for the implementation of the action programme adopted on 11 September 1987 at the
International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development;63
3. Urges the international community to devote part of the resources made available by the implementation
of disarmament and arms limitation agreements to economic and social development, with a view to reducing the
ever-widening gap between developed and developing countries;
4. Encourages the international community to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to make
reference to the contribution that disarmament could provide in meeting them when it reviews its progress towards
this purpose, as well as to make greater efforts to integrate disarmament, humanitarian and development activities;
5. Encourages the relevant regional and subregional organizations and institutions, non-governmental
organizations and research institutes to incorporate issues related to the relationship between disarmament and
development into their agendas and, in this regard, to take into account the report of the Group of Governmental
Experts on the relationship between disarmament and development;65
6. Reiterates its invitation to Member States to provide the Secretary-General with information regarding
measures and efforts to devote part of the resources made available by the implementation of disarmament and arms
limitation agreements to economic and social development, with a view to reducing the ever-widening gap between
developed and developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including the information provided by Member States pursuant to
paragraph 6 above;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Relationship between disarmament and development”.
RESOLUTION 70/33
A/RES/70/33

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),67 by a recorded vote of 138 to 12, with 34 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: China, Czech Republic, Estonia, France, Hungary, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Iceland, India, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Monaco, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Uzbekistan

_______________
67

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Ireland, Jamaica, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).

226

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

70/33.
A/RES/70/33.

Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 67/56 of 3 December 2012, 68/46 of 5 December 2013 and 69/41 of 2 December
2014 on taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for the achievement and maintenance of a
world without nuclear weapons,
Deeply concerned about the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons,
Recalling the Declaration of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, the first special session
devoted to disarmament,68 in which it is stated, inter alia, that all the peoples of the world have a vital interest in the
success of disarmament negotiations, and that all States have the right to participate in disarmament negotiations,
Reaffirming the role and functions of the Conference on Disarmament and the Disarmament Commission, as
set out in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,69
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,70 in which it is stated, inter alia, that responsibility for
managing worldwide economic and social development, as well as threats to international peace and security, must
be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally and that, as the most universal and
most representative organization in the world, the United Nations must play the central role,
Welcoming the efforts by Member States to secure progress in multilateral disarmament and the support of the
Secretary-General for such efforts, and recalling in this regard the Secretary-General’s five-point proposal on
nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the outcome, including the action points, of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,71
Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
and determined to promote multilateralism as an essential way to develop arms regulation and disarmament
negotiations,
Recognizing the absence of concrete outcomes of multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations within the
United Nations framework for almost two decades,
Recognizing also that the current international climate makes increased political attention to disarmament and
non-proliferation issues, the promotion of multilateral disarmament and moving towards a world without nuclear
weapons all the more urgent,
Welcoming the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament, held on 26 September
2013 pursuant to its resolution 67/39 of 3 December 2012, which highlighted the wish of the international
community for progress in this field, and noting its resolution 68/32 of 5 December 2013 as a follow-up to this
meeting,
Welcoming also the report on the work of the Open-ended Working Group to develop proposals to take
forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for the achievement and maintenance of a world without
nuclear weapons, submitted pursuant to its resolution 67/5672 and referenced in its resolution 68/46, and noting with
appreciation the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to its resolution 68/46,73 containing the views of
Member States on how to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations, including the steps that
Member States have already taken to that end,
Welcoming further the efforts by all Member States, international organizations and civil society to continue to
enrich the discussions on how to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations in the United Nations
_______________
68

Resolution S-10/2, sect. II.
Ibid., sect. IV.
70
Resolution 55/2.
71
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
72
A/68/514.
73
A/69/154 and Add.1.
69

227

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

bodies in which disarmament and peace and security are addressed, taking into account the report of the Openended Working Group and the proposals contained therein,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness, and welcoming the participation of all Member States in the efforts
to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Recognizing the important contribution that international organizations, civil society, academia and research
make to multilateral disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control processes,
Emphasizing the importance and urgency of substantive progress on priority disarmament and nonproliferation issues,
Mindful of Article 11 of the Charter of the United Nations concerning the functions and powers of the General
Assembly to consider and make recommendations with regard to, inter alia, disarmament,
1. Reiterates that the universal objective of taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations
remains the achievement and maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons, and emphasizes the importance of
addressing issues related to nuclear weapons in a comprehensive, inclusive, interactive and constructive manner, for
the advancement of multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations;
2. Reaffirms the urgency of securing substantive progress in multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations, and
to this end decides to convene an open-ended working group to substantively address concrete effective legal measures,
legal provisions and norms that will need to be concluded to attain and maintain a world without nuclear weapons;
3. Decides that the open-ended working group shall also substantively address recommendations on other
measures that could contribute to taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations, including but not
limited to (a) transparency measures related to the risks associated with existing nuclear weapons; (b) measures to
reduce and eliminate the risk of accidental, mistaken, unauthorized or intentional nuclear weapon detonations; and
(c) additional measures to increase awareness and understanding of the complexity of and interrelationship between
the wide range of humanitarian consequences that would result from any nuclear detonation;
4.

Encourages all Member States to participate in the open-ended working group;

5. Decides that the open-ended working group shall convene in Geneva, in 2016, as a subsidiary body of
the General Assembly and under its rules of procedure, for up to 15 working days, within available time frames,
with the participation and contribution of international organizations and civil society representatives, in accordance
with established practice, and shall hold its organizational session as soon as possible;
6. Calls upon States participating in the open-ended working group to make their best endeavours to reach
general agreement;
7. Decides that the open-ended working group shall submit a report on its substantive work and agreed
recommendations to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, which will assess progress made, taking into
account developments in other relevant forums;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, within available resources, the support necessary to convene
the open-ended working group and to transmit the report of the working group to the Conference on Disarmament
and the Disarmament Commission and to the international conference foreseen in paragraph 6 of resolution 68/32;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations”.
RESOLUTION 70/34
A/RES/70/34

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),74 by a recorded vote of 140 to 26, with 17 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,

_______________
74

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).

228

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Poland, Russian Federation, Slovakia,
Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Japan, Norway, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine

70/34.
A/RES/70/34.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 67/39 of 3 December 2012, 68/32 of 5 December 2013 and 69/58 of
2 December 2014,
Welcoming the convening of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament, on
26 September 2013, and recognizing its contribution to furthering the objective of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons,
Emphasizing the importance of seeking a safer world for all and achieving peace and security in a world
without nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that effective measures of nuclear disarmament have the highest priority, as affirmed at the first
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the total elimination of nuclear weapons are the only absolute
guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Acknowledging the significant contribution made by a number of countries towards realizing the objective of
nuclear disarmament by the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as by voluntary renunciation of
nuclear weapon programmes or withdrawal of all nuclear weapons from their territories, and strongly supporting the
speedy establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East,
Recalling the resolve of the Heads of State and Government, as contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,75 to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, and to
keep all options open for achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening an international conference to
identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Reaffirming the central role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament, and also reaffirming the
continued importance and relevance of multilateral disarmament machinery as mandated by the General Assembly
at its first special session devoted to disarmament,
Acknowledging the important role of civil society, including non-governmental organizations, academia,
parliamentarians and the mass media, in advancing the objective of nuclear disarmament,
Sharing the deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and
in this context reaffirming the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law,
_______________
75

Resolution 55/2.

229

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 69/58,76 and welcoming
the fact that a large number of Member States contributed their views to this report,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,77 particularly to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating
to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Expressing its deep concern that the negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament for the conclusion of a
comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons have not yet commenced,
Determined to work collectively towards the realization of nuclear disarmament,
1. Underlines the strong support, expressed at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear
disarmament, held on 26 September 2013, for taking urgent and effective measures to achieve the total elimination
of nuclear weapons;
2. Calls for urgent compliance with the legal obligations and the fulfilment of the commitments undertaken
on nuclear disarmament;
3. Endorses the wide support expressed at the high-level meeting for a comprehensive convention on
nuclear weapons;
4. Calls for the urgent commencement of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament for the early
conclusion of a comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons to prohibit their possession, development,
production, acquisition, testing, stockpiling, transfer, use or threat of use and to provide for their destruction;
5. Recalls its decision to convene, no later than 2018, a United Nations high-level international conference
on nuclear disarmament to review the progress made in this regard;
6. Stresses the need to establish a preparatory committee for the United Nations high-level international
conference in New York;
7. Takes note of the views provided by Member States with regard to achieving the objective of the total
elimination of nuclear weapons, in particular on the elements of a comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons,
as reflected in the report submitted by the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 69/58,76 and requests the
Secretary-General to forward this report to the Conference on Disarmament and the Disarmament Commission for
their early consideration;
8. Welcomes the commemoration and promotion of 26 September as the International Day for the Total
Elimination of Nuclear Weapons devoted to furthering this objective;
9. Expresses its appreciation to Member States, the United Nations system and civil society, including nongovernmental organizations, academia, parliamentarians, the mass media and individuals that developed activities in
promotion of the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons;
10. Requests the President of the General Assembly to organize, on 26 September every year, a one-day
high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly to commemorate and promote the International Day for the Total
Elimination of Nuclear Weapons;
11. Decides that the aforementioned high-level plenary meeting shall be held with the participation of
Member and observer States, represented at the highest possible level, as well as with the participation of the
President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake all arrangements necessary to commemorate and promote
the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, including through the United Nations Offices at
Geneva and Vienna, as well as the United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament;

_______________
76
77

230

A/70/182 and Add.1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

13. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, academia, parliamentarians, the mass media and individuals, to commemorate and promote the
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons through all means of educational and public
awareness-raising activities about the threat posed to humanity by nuclear weapons and the necessity for their total
elimination in order to mobilize international efforts towards achieving the common goal of a nuclear-weapon-free
world;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States with regard to achieving the
objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons, in particular on the elements of a comprehensive convention
on nuclear weapons, and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, and also to
transmit the report to the Conference on Disarmament;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on nuclear disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 70/35
A/RES/70/35

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)78

70/35.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus

The General Assembly,
Mindful of contributing to the process initiated within the framework of the United Nations reform to make
the Organization more effective in maintaining peace and security by giving it the resources and tools that it needs
for conflict prevention, peaceful resolution of disputes, peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconstruction,
Underlining the importance of a comprehensive and integrated approach to disarmament through the
development of practical measures,
Welcoming the requirement of the Arms Trade Treaty,79 which entered into force on 24 December 2014, that
States parties thereto establish and maintain a national control system to regulate the export of relevant ammunition
and munitions,
Taking note of the report of the Group of Experts on the problem of ammunition and explosives,80
Recalling the recommendation contained in paragraph 27 of the report of the Open-ended Working Group to
Negotiate an International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons,81 namely, to address the issue of small arms and light weapons ammunition in a
comprehensive manner as part of a separate process conducted within the framework of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the work and measures pursued at the regional and subregional levels with regard to
the issue of conventional ammunition,
_______________
78

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
79
See resolution 67/234 B.
80
See A/54/155.
81
A/60/88 and Corr.2.

231

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling its decision 59/515 of 3 December 2004 and its resolutions 60/74 of 8 December 2005 and 61/72 of
6 December 2006, its resolution 63/61 of 2 December 2008, by which it welcomed the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 61/72 to consider further steps to enhance cooperation
with regard to the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus,82 its resolution 64/51 of 2 December
2009, its resolution 66/42 of 2 December 2011 and its resolution 68/52 of 5 December 2013,
Taking note of the recommendations of the Group of Governmental Experts, and encouraging the use, as
appropriate, of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines, which are available to States on a voluntary
basis, as well as the recommendations of the Group on improving knowledge resource management on technical
ammunition issues within the United Nations system, and noting the subsequent establishment, within the
Secretariat, of the SaferGuard knowledge resource management programme,83
Noting that the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines are being used to support ammunition
stockpile management efforts in nearly 90 countries by national authorities and through a network of more than 20
partners from international and regional organizations, non-governmental organizations and the private sector,
1. Encourages all interested States to assess, on a voluntary basis, whether, in conformity with their
legitimate security needs, parts of their stockpiles of conventional ammunition should be considered to be in surplus,
and recognizes that the security of such stockpiles must be taken into consideration and that appropriate controls
with regard to the security and safety of stockpiles of conventional ammunition are indispensable at the national
level in order to eliminate the risk of explosion, pollution or diversion;
2. Appeals to all interested States to determine the size and nature of their surplus stockpiles of
conventional ammunition, whether they represent a security risk, their means of destruction, if appropriate, and
whether external assistance is needed to eliminate this risk;
3. Encourages States in a position to do so to assist interested States within a bilateral framework or
through international or regional organizations, on a voluntary and transparent basis, in elaborating and
implementing programmes to eliminate surplus stockpiles or to improve their management;
4. Encourages all Member States to examine the possibility of developing and implementing, within a
national, regional or subregional framework, measures to address accordingly the illicit trafficking related to the
accumulation of such stockpiles;
5. Takes note of the replies submitted by Member States in response to the request of the Secretary-General
for views regarding the risks arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus and
regarding national ways of strengthening controls on conventional ammunition;84
6. Continues to encourage States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the Group
of Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 61/72 to consider further steps to enhance cooperation
with regard to the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus;82
7. Recalls the release of the updated version of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines and the
continued implementation of the SaferGuard knowledge resource management programme for the stockpile
management of conventional ammunition, developed by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, with
the full involvement of the Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat, in
accordance with the recommendations contained in the report of the Group of Governmental Experts;
8. Welcomes the continued application of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines in the field,
including the implementation software and training materials;
9. Encourages, in this regard, the safe and secure management of ammunition stockpiles in the planning
and conduct of peacekeeping operations, including through the training of personnel of national authorities and
peacekeepers, utilizing the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines;
_______________
82

A/63/182.
Ibid., paras. 72 and 73.
84
A/61/118 and Add.1 and A/62/166 and Add.1.
83

232

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

10. Welcomes the establishment of the SaferGuard quick-response mechanism, which allows ammunition
experts to be deployed rapidly to assist States, upon request, in the urgent management of ammunition stockpiles,
including in the aftermath of unintended explosions of ammunition, and encourages States in a position to do so to
provide technical expertise or financial support to the mechanism;
11. Encourages States wishing to improve their national stockpile management capacity, prevent the growth
of conventional ammunition surpluses and address wider risk mitigation to contact the SaferGuard programme, as
well as potential national donors and regional organizations, as appropriate, with a view to developing cooperation,
including, where relevant, technical expertise;
12. Reiterates its decision to address the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus in a
comprehensive manner;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, under the item entitled
“General and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Problems arising from the accumulation of
conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus”.
RESOLUTION 70/36
A/RES/70/36

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)85

70/36.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/39 of 2 December 2014,
Recognizing the determination of the international community to combat terrorism, as evidenced in relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
Deeply concerned by the growing risk of linkages between terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, and in
particular by the fact that terrorists may seek to acquire weapons of mass destruction,
Cognizant of the steps taken by States to implement Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) on the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction, adopted on 28 April 2004,
Welcoming the entry into force on 7 July 2007 of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism,86
Welcoming also the adoption, by consensus, of amendments to strengthen the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material87 by the International Atomic Energy Agency on 8 July 2005,
Noting the support expressed in the Final Document of the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which was held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012,88 for measures to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction,

_______________
85

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
86
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2445, No. 44004.
87
Ibid., vol. 1456, No. 24631.
88
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.

233

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting also that the Group of Eight, the European Union, the Regional Forum of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and others have taken into account in their deliberations the dangers posed by the likely acquisition
by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction and the need for international cooperation in combating it, and that the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism has been launched jointly by the Russian Federation and the United
States of America,
Noting further the holding of the Nuclear Security Summit on 12 and 13 April 2010 in Washington, D.C., on
26 and 27 March 2012 in Seoul and on 24 and 25 March 2014 in The Hague,
Noting the holding of the high-level meeting on countering nuclear terrorism, with a focus on strengthening
the legal framework, in New York on 28 September 2012,
Acknowledging the consideration of issues relating to terrorism and weapons of mass destruction by the
Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters,89
Taking note of the holding by the International Atomic Energy Agency of the International Conference on
Nuclear Security: Enhancing Global Efforts, in Vienna from 1 to 5 July 2013, and the relevant resolutions adopted
by the General Conference of the Agency at its fifty-ninth regular session,
Taking note also of the tenth anniversary of the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive
Sources, approved by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency on 8 September 2003,
Taking note further of the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on 16 September 200590 and the adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy91 on 8 September 2006,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 69/39,92
Mindful of the urgent need for addressing, within the United Nations framework and through international
cooperation, this threat to humanity,
Emphasizing that progress is urgently needed in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation in order to
maintain international peace and security and to contribute to global efforts against terrorism,
1. Calls upon all Member States to support international efforts to prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery;
2. Appeals to all Member States to consider early accession to and ratification of the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism;86
3. Urges all Member States to take and strengthen national measures, as appropriate, to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery and materials and technologies related to their
manufacture;
4. Encourages cooperation among and between Member States and relevant regional and international
organizations for strengthening national capacities in this regard;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to compile a report on measures already taken by international
organizations on issues relating to the linkage between the fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and to seek the views of Member States on additional relevant measures, including national
measures, for tackling the global threat posed by the acquisition by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction and to
report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction”.
_______________
89

See A/59/361.
Resolution 60/1.
91
Resolution 60/288.
92
A/70/169 and Add.1.
90

234

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/37
A/RES/70/37

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),93 by a recorded vote of 127 to 48, with 10 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, China, Georgia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Uzbekistan

70/37.
A/RES/70/37.

Reducing nuclear danger

The General Assembly,

Bearing in mind that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to mankind and to the survival
of civilization,
Reaffirming that any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would constitute a violation of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects would seriously enhance the danger of
nuclear war,
Convinced also that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to
remove the danger of nuclear war,
Considering that, until nuclear weapons cease to exist, it is imperative on the part of the nuclear-weapon States
to adopt measures that assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering also that the hair-trigger alert of nuclear weapons carries unacceptable risks of unintentional or
accidental use of nuclear weapons, which would have catastrophic consequences for all mankind,
Emphasizing the need to adopt measures to avoid accidental, unauthorized or unexplained incidents arising
from computer anomalies or other technical malfunctions,
Conscious that limited steps relating to de-alerting and de-targeting have been taken by the nuclear-weapon
States and that further practical, realistic and mutually reinforcing steps are necessary to contribute to the
improvement in the international climate for negotiations leading to the elimination of nuclear weapons,
_______________
93

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan,
Cambodia, Chile, Congo, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Jordan, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritius, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zambia.

235

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Mindful that a diminishing role for nuclear weapons in the security policies of nuclear-weapon States would
have a positive impact on international peace and security and improve the conditions for the further reduction and
the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly94 and by the international community,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons95 that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Recalling also the call, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,96 to seek to eliminate the dangers posed
by weapons of mass destruction and the resolve to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly nuclear weapons, including the possibility of convening an international conference to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers,
1. Calls for a review of nuclear doctrines and, in this context, immediate and urgent steps to reduce the
risks of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear weapons, including through de-alerting and de-targeting nuclear
weapons;
2.
above;

Requests the five nuclear-weapon States to take measures towards the implementation of paragraph 1

3. Calls upon Member States to take the measures necessary to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons in all its aspects and to promote nuclear disarmament, with the objective of eliminating nuclear weapons;
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 5 of its resolution
69/40 of 2 December 2014;97
5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts and support initiatives that would contribute towards
the full implementation of the seven recommendations identified in the report of the Advisory Board on
Disarmament Matters that would significantly reduce the risk of nuclear war,98 and also to continue to encourage
Member States to consider the convening of an international conference, as proposed in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration,96 to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Reducing nuclear danger”.
RESOLUTION 70/38
A/RES/70/38

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),99 by a recorded vote of 121 to 48, with 12 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d'Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Papua

_______________
94

Resolution S-10/2.
A/51/218, annex.
96
Resolution 55/2.
97
A/70/181.
98
A/56/400, para. 3.
99
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the Islamic Republic of Iran and Swaziland.
95

236

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, China, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Georgia, India, Italy, Japan, Pakistan, Panama,
Samoa, Switzerland, Turkey

70/38.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its various resolutions in the field of nuclear disarmament, including resolutions 60/72 of
8 December 2005, 62/24 of 5 December 2007, 64/31 of 2 December 2009, 66/28 of 2 December 2011, 68/35 of
5 December 2013 and 69/43 and 69/48 of 2 December 2014,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June 1968, the annex to which contains the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,100
Noting the provisions of article VIII, paragraph 3, of the Treaty regarding the convening of review conferences
at five-year intervals,
Recalling its resolution 50/70 Q of 12 December 1995, in which the General Assembly noted that the States
parties to the Treaty affirmed the need to continue to move with determination towards the full realization and
effective implementation of the provisions of the Treaty, and accordingly adopted a set of principles and objectives,
Recalling also that, on 11 May 1995, the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons adopted three decisions on, respectively, strengthening the review
process for the Treaty, principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and extension of the
Treaty,101
Reaffirming the resolution on the Middle East adopted on 11 May 1995 by the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference,101 in which the Conference reaffirmed the importance of the early realization of universal adherence to
the Treaty and placement of nuclear facilities under full-scope International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Reaffirming also its resolution 55/33 D of 20 November 2000, in which the General Assembly welcomed the
adoption by consensus on 19 May 2000 of the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,102 including, in particular, the documents entitled “Review of
the operation of the Treaty, taking into account the decisions and the resolution adopted by the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference” and “Improving the effectiveness of the strengthened review process for the Treaty”,103
Taking into consideration the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, in the Final Document
of the 2000 Review Conference, to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear
disarmament, to which all States parties to the Treaty are committed under article VI of the Treaty,

_______________
100

See also United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
102
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
103
Ibid., vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I.
101

237

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Expressing concern that the ninth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, held from 27 April to 22 May 2015, was not able to reach agreement on a substantive final
document,
1. Recalls that the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons reaffirmed the continued validity of the practical steps agreed to in the Final Document of the 2000
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;104
2. Determines to pursue practical steps for systematic and progressive efforts to implement article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons100 and paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the decision on principles and
objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;101
3. Calls for practical steps, as agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be taken by all nuclear-weapon States, that would lead to nuclear
disarmament in a way that promotes international stability and, based on the principle of undiminished security
for all:
(a)

Further efforts to be made by the nuclear-weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals unilaterally;

(b) Increased transparency by the nuclear-weapon States with regard to nuclear weapons capabilities and the
implementation of agreements pursuant to article VI of the Treaty and as a voluntary confidence-building measure
to support further progress in nuclear disarmament;
(c) The further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on unilateral initiatives and as an integral
part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process;
(d)

Concrete agreed measures to reduce further the operational status of nuclear weapons systems;

(e) A diminishing role for nuclear weapons in security policies so as to minimize the risk that these weapons
will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total elimination;
(f) The engagement, as soon as appropriate, of all the nuclear-weapon States in the process leading to the
total elimination of their nuclear weapons;
4. Notes that the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences agreed that legally binding security assurances by the
five nuclear-weapon States to the non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime;
5. Urges the States parties to the Treaty to follow up on the implementation of the nuclear disarmament
obligations under the Treaty agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences within the framework of
review conferences and their preparatory committees;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, under the item entitled
“General and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed
to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons”.
RESOLUTION 70/39
A/RES/70/39

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),105 by a recorded vote of 179 to 1, with 5 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,

_______________
104
105

238

Ibid., section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Canada.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Pakistan
Abstaining: Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Syrian Arab Republic

70/39.

Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 L of 16 December 1993, 53/77 I of 4 December 1998, 55/33 Y of
20 November 2000, 56/24 J of 29 November 2001, 57/80 of 22 November 2002, 58/57 of 8 December 2003, 59/81
of 3 December 2004, 64/29 of 2 December 2009, 65/65 of 8 December 2010, 66/44 of 2 December 2011 and 67/53
of 3 December 2012, as well as its decisions 68/518 of 5 December 2013 and 69/516 of 2 December 2014 on the
subject of banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring continued international commitment and high-level attention to
making practical progress on achieving a world without nuclear weapons and on non-proliferation in all its aspects,
Mindful of the continuing importance and relevance of the Conference on Disarmament, and recalling the past
achievements of that body in successfully negotiating non-proliferation and disarmament agreements,
Convinced that a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning
the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices would represent a practical
contribution to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation efforts,
Noting with appreciation the submissions by 38 Member States and the European Union to the SecretaryGeneral of views on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices, including possible aspects thereof, and the subsequent report submitted to the General Assembly
by the Secretary-General at its sixty-eighth session,106
Welcoming the work accomplished in 2014 and 2015 by the group of 25 governmental experts convened by
the Secretary-General, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, to make recommendations on possible
aspects that could contribute to but not negotiate a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices,
1. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to agree on and implement a balanced and comprehensive
programme of work that includes the immediate commencement of negotiations on a treaty banning the production
of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices on the basis of document CD/1299 and the
mandate contained therein;
2. Welcomes the adoption by consensus of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts, mandated in
resolution 67/53, as contained in document A/70/81;

_______________
106

A/68/154 and Add.1.

239

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Calls upon the Secretary-General, building on the report contained in document A/68/154 and Add.1, to
seek the views of Member States on the report of the Group of Governmental Experts and to submit a report on the
subject to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
A/RES/70/81;

4. Urges Member States to give due consideration to the report of the Group of Governmental Experts,
calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to fully examine the report and consider further action as appropriate,
and encourages members of the Conference to include in their delegations technical experts as may be required to
facilitate deliberations on issues identified in the report;
5. Calls upon future negotiators of a treaty to take into account the work of the Group of Governmental
Experts as appropriate in their deliberations;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices”.
RESOLUTION 70/40
A/RES/70/40

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),107 by a recorded vote of 166 to 3, with 16 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: China, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Russian Federation
Abstaining: Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, France, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Mauritius, Myanmar, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, South Africa, Syrian Arab Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Zimbabwe

70/40.
A/RES/70/40.

United action with renewed determination towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to achieving a peaceful and secure world free of nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolution 69/52 of 2 December 2014,

_______________
107

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu and Zambia.

240

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling also that 2015 marks the seventieth year since the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
Japan, and the end of the Second World War,
Reaffirming the crucial importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons108 as the
cornerstone of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime and an essential foundation for the pursuit of the
three pillars of the Treaty, namely, nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy,
Expressing deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and
reaffirming the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law, while convinced that every effort should be made to avoid the use of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that the catastrophic humanitarian consequences that would result from the use of nuclear
weapons should be fully understood by all, and noting in this regard that efforts should be made to increase such
understanding,
Reaffirming that the enhancement of international peace and security and the promotion of nuclear
disarmament are mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming also that further advancement in nuclear disarmament will contribute to consolidating the
international regime for nuclear non-proliferation, which is, inter alia, essential to international peace and security,
Noting that the ultimate objective of the efforts of States in the disarmament process is general and complete
disarmament under strict and effective international control,
Stressing the importance of the decisions and the resolution on the Middle East of the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons109 and the Final
Documents of the 2000110 and 2010111 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,
Reaffirming in this context its support for the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by
the States of the region, and for the resumption of dialogue towards this end involving the States concerned,
Expressing regret over the lack of a consensus outcome at the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held from 27 April to 22 May 2015, while stressing the
importance of moving forward, paying due regard to the discussions held therein, in the next review cycle of the
2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty,
Welcoming the continuing successful implementation of the Treaty between the Russian Federation and the
United States of America on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms,
Welcoming also the announcements and recent updates on overall stockpiles of nuclear warheads by France,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, as well as the update
of the Russian Federation on its nuclear arsenal, which further enhance transparency and increase mutual
confidence,
Welcoming further the efforts undertaken towards the development of nuclear disarmament verification
capabilities that can contribute to the pursuit of a world free of nuclear weapons, including the new and continuing
initiatives pursued by Norway, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America,
_______________
108

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
110
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
111
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
109

241

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Expressing deep concern regarding the growing dangers posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, inter alia, nuclear weapons, including that caused by proliferation networks,
Recognizing the importance of the objective of nuclear security, along with the shared goals of Member States
of nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy, welcoming the Nuclear
Security Summits, in particular the Summit to be held in the United States of America in 2016, and reaffirming the
central role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in strengthening the nuclear security framework globally
and in coordinating international activities in the field of nuclear security,
Condemning in the strongest terms the nuclear tests conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
its launches using ballistic missile technology and its continued development of its nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes, recalling that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea cannot have the status of a nuclear-weapon
State in accordance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, reiterating the opposition of the
international community to its possession of nuclear weapons, and expressing serious concern about its ongoing
nuclear activities, including its uranium enrichment and plutonium production programmes,
1. Renews once again the determination of all States to take united action towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons, with a view to achieving a safer world for all and a peaceful and secure world free of nuclear
weapons;
2. Reaffirms, in this regard, the unequivocal undertaking of the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons108 are committed under article VI thereof;
3. Emphasizes that deep concerns about the humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons
continue to underpin efforts by all States towards a world free of nuclear weapons;
4. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to comply with
their obligations under all the articles of the Treaty and to implement the steps agreed to in the Final Documents of
the 1995 Review and Extension Conference109 and the 2000110 and 2010111 Review Conferences;
5. Calls upon all States not parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to accede as
non-nuclear-weapon States to the Treaty promptly and without any conditions to achieve its universality and,
pending their accession to the Treaty, to adhere to its terms and to take practical steps in support of the Treaty;
6. Calls upon all States to take further practical steps and effective measures towards the total elimination
of nuclear weapons, based on the principle of undiminished and increased security for all;
7. Encourages the Russian Federation and the United States of America to commence negotiations at an
early date to achieve greater reductions in their stockpiles of nuclear weapons, with a view to concluding such
negotiations as soon as possible;
8. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to reduce all types of nuclear weapons, strategic and non-strategic,
deployed and non-deployed, including through unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral measures, in order to
facilitate further reductions of global stockpiles;
9. Calls upon all States to apply the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency in relation to
the process of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation;
10. Calls upon States concerned to continue to review their military and security concepts, doctrines and
policies, with a view to reducing further the role and significance of nuclear weapons therein;
11. Urges all States possessing nuclear weapons to continue to undertake all efforts necessary to
comprehensively address the risks of unintended nuclear detonations;
12. Encourages the nuclear-weapon States to continue to convene regular meetings, with a view to
facilitating nuclear disarmament actions, to build upon and expand their efforts to enhance transparency and to
increase mutual confidence, including by providing more frequent and further detailed reporting on nuclear
weapons and delivery systems dismantled and reduced as part of nuclear disarmament efforts throughout the review
process of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons towards the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty;
242

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

13. Encourages all States concerned to establish further nuclear-weapon-free zones, where appropriate, in
accordance with the 1999 guidelines of the Disarmament Commission112 and to ratify the nuclear-weapon-free zone
treaties and their relevant protocols, which include, inter alia, legally binding assurances against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons;
14. Urges all States, in particular the eight remaining States listed in annex 2 to the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty,113 to take individual initiatives to sign and ratify that Treaty without further delay and without
waiting for any other State to do so, bearing in mind that 2016 is the twentieth anniversary of the opening for
signature of the Treaty, and to maintain all existing moratoriums on nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other
nuclear explosions pending the entry into force of the Treaty;
15. Urges all States concerned to immediately commence negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament
on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices and its
early conclusion on the basis of document CD/1299 of 24 March 1995 and the mandate contained therein,
welcoming the submission of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts114 requested in paragraph 3 of
resolution 67/53 of 3 December 2012, and to declare and maintain moratoriums on the production of fissile material
for use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices pending the entry into force of the treaty;
16. Encourages States to engage in appropriate multilateral forums to further explore effective measures
necessary for achieving a world free of nuclear weapons;
17. Strongly urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to refrain from conducting further nuclear
tests, to renounce its policy of building its nuclear forces, which undermines the global non-proliferation regime, to
abandon all its nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes and to return, at an early date, to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, and urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease all ongoing nuclear activities immediately, to fully comply with its
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions and to take concrete steps to honour its relevant
commitments under the joint statement of the Six-Party Talks of 19 September 2005;
18. Calls upon all States to redouble their efforts to prevent and curb the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and their means of delivery and to fully respect and comply with obligations undertaken to forswear nuclear
weapons;
19. Stresses the fundamental role of the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards and the importance
of the universalization of the comprehensive safeguards agreements, and, while noting that it is the sovereign
decision of any State to conclude an additional protocol, strongly encourages all States that have not done so to
conclude and bring into force as soon as possible the Model Additional Protocol to the Agreement(s) between States
and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards approved by the Board of Governors
of the Agency on 15 May 1997;
20. Calls upon all States to fully implement relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution
1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004;
21. Encourages every effort to secure all vulnerable nuclear and radiological material in order to, inter alia,
prevent nuclear terrorism, and calls upon all States to work cooperatively as an international community to advance
nuclear security, while requesting and providing assistance, including in the field of capacity-building, as necessary;
22. Encourages all States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations study on disarmament and non-proliferation education,115 in support of achieving a
world free of nuclear weapons;
23. Encourages every effort to raise awareness of the humanitarian impact of the use of nuclear weapons,
including through, among others, visits by leaders, youth and others, to the cities devastated by the use of nuclear
weapons, and testimonies of the atomic bomb survivors, the hibakusha;
_______________
112

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42).
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
114
A/70/81.
115
A/57/124.
113

243

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “United action with renewed determination towards the total
elimination of nuclear weapons”.
RESOLUTION 70/41
A/RES/70/41

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),116 by a recorded vote of 174 to none, with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: China, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic

70/41.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject of chemical weapons, in particular resolution 69/67 of
2 December 2014,
Determined to achieve the effective prohibition of the development, production, acquisition, transfer,
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and their destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that, since the adoption of resolution 69/67, two additional States have joined the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction,117 bringing the total number of States parties to the Convention to 192,
Reaffirming the broad support for the decision of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons to send a mission to establish the facts surrounding the allegations of the use of toxic
chemicals, reportedly chlorine, for hostile purposes in the Syrian Arab Republic, and re-emphasizing its unequivocal
support for the decision of the Director General to continue the mission, while stressing that the safety and security
of mission personnel remains the top priority,
Taking note of decision EC-M-48/DEC.1 of 4 February 2015 of the Executive Council of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on reports of the fact-finding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic and
Security Council resolutions 2209 (2015) of 6 March 2015 on toxic chemicals that have been used as a weapon in
the Syrian Arab Republic and 2235 (2015) of 7 August 2015 on the establishment and operation of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations,
_______________
116
117

244

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Poland.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming its condemnation, in the strongest possible terms, of the use of chemical weapons by anyone
under any circumstances, emphasizing that any use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time, by anyone, under
any circumstances is unacceptable and would violate international law, and expressing its strong conviction that
those individuals responsible for the use of chemical weapons should be held accountable,
Reaffirming the importance of the outcome of the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties
to Review the Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, held in The Hague from 8 to 19 April 2013 (the
Third Review Conference), including its consensus final report, in which the Conference addressed all aspects of the
Convention and made important recommendations on its continued implementation,
Emphasizing that the Third Review Conference welcomed the fact that the Convention is a unique multilateral
agreement banning an entire category of weapons of mass destruction in a non-discriminatory and verifiable manner
under strict and effective international control and noted with satisfaction that the Convention continues to be a
remarkable success and an example of effective multilateralism,
Convinced that the Convention, 18 years after its entry into force, has reinforced its role as the international
norm against chemical weapons, and that it constitutes a major contribution to:
(a)

International peace and security,

(b)

Eliminating chemical weapons and preventing their re-emergence,

(c)
control,
(d)

The ultimate objective of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
Excluding completely, for the sake of all mankind, the possibility of the use of chemical weapons,

(e) Promoting international cooperation and exchange in scientific and technical information in the field of
chemical activities among States parties for peaceful purposes in order to enhance the economic and technological
development of all States parties,
1. Emphasizes that the universality of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction117 is essential to achieving its object and
purpose and to enhancing the security of States parties, as well as to international peace and security, underlines the
fact that the objectives of the Convention will not be fully realized as long as there remains even a single State not
party to the Convention that could possess or acquire such weapons, and calls upon all States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the Convention without delay;
2. Underlines the fact that the full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of all articles of the
Convention makes a major contribution to international peace and security through the elimination of existing
stockpiles of chemical weapons and the prohibition of their acquisition and use, and provides for assistance and
protection in the event of use or threat of use of chemical weapons and for international cooperation for peaceful
purposes in the field of chemical activities;
3. Notes the impact of scientific and technological progress on the effective implementation of the
Convention and the importance for the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its policymaking
organs of taking due account of such developments;
4. Reaffirms that the obligation of the States parties to complete the destruction of chemical weapons
stockpiles and the destruction or conversion of chemical weapons production facilities in accordance with the
provisions of the Convention and the Annex on Implementation and Verification (Verification Annex) and under the
verification of the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is essential for
the realization of the object and purpose of the Convention;
5. Stresses the importance to the Convention that all possessors of chemical weapons, chemical weapons
production facilities or chemical weapons development facilities, including previously declared possessor States,
should be among the States parties to the Convention, and welcomes progress to that end;
6. Recalls that the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review the Operation of
the Chemical Weapons Convention expressed concern regarding the statement made by the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in his report to the Executive Council of the Organization at
its sixty-eighth session, provided in accordance with paragraph 2 of decision C-16/DEC.11 of 1 December 2011
245

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

adopted by the Conference of the States Parties at its sixteenth session, that three possessor States parties, namely,
Libya, the Russian Federation and the United States of America, had been unable to fully meet the final extended
deadline of 29 April 2012 for the destruction of their chemical weapons stockpiles, and also expressed
determination that the destruction of all categories of chemical weapons should be completed in the shortest time
possible in accordance with the provisions of the Convention and the Verification Annex, and with the full
application of the relevant decisions that have been taken;
7. Notes with concern that, along with the threat of the possible production, acquisition and use of chemical
weapons by States, the international community also faces the danger of the production, acquisition and use of
chemical weapons by non-State actors, including terrorists, concerns which have highlighted the necessity of
achieving universal adherence to the Convention, as well as the high level of readiness of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and stresses that the full and effective implementation of all provisions of the
Convention, including those on national implementation (article VII) and assistance and protection (article X),
constitutes an important contribution to the efforts of the United Nations in the global fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations;
8. Notes that the effective application of the verification system builds confidence in compliance with the
Convention by States parties;
9. Stresses the importance of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in verifying
compliance with the provisions of the Convention as well as in promoting the timely and efficient accomplishment
of all its objectives;
10. Underscores the substantial unresolved issues, including the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
identified by the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its report
EC-80/P/S/1, stresses the importance of fully verifying that the declaration and related submissions of the Syrian
Arab Republic are accurate and complete, as required by the Convention and the decision of 27 September 2013 of
the Executive Council of the Organization,118 and notes that the Council requested the Technical Secretariat and the
Syrian Arab Republic to expedite their efforts to resolve those gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies and further
requested that the Director General provide a report to the Council at its eighty-first session that details all
unresolved issues, in particular specifying those on which no further progress has been possible;
11. Urges all States parties to the Convention to meet in full and on time their obligations under the
Convention and to support the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its implementation
activities;
12. Welcomes progress made in the national implementation of article VII obligations, commends the States
parties and the Technical Secretariat for assisting other States parties, on request, with the implementation of the
follow-up to the plan of action regarding article VII obligations, and urges States parties that have not fulfilled their
obligations under article VII to do so without further delay, in accordance with their constitutional processes;
13. Emphasizes the continuing relevance and importance of the provisions of article X of the Convention,
welcomes the activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in relation to assistance and
protection against chemical weapons, supports further efforts by both States parties and the Technical Secretariat to
promote a high level of readiness to respond to chemical weapons threats as articulated in article X, and welcomes
the effectiveness and efficiency of the increased focus on making full use of regional and subregional capacities and
expertise, including taking advantage of established training centres;
14. Reaffirms that the provisions of the Convention shall be implemented in a manner that avoids hampering
the economic or technological development of States parties and international cooperation in the field of chemical
activities for purposes not prohibited under the Convention, including the international exchange of scientific and
technical information, and chemicals and equipment for the production, processing or use of chemicals for purposes
not prohibited under the Convention;
15. Emphasizes the importance of the provisions of article XI of the Convention relating to the economic
and technological development of States parties, recalls that the full, effective and non-discriminatory
_______________
118

246

Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), annex I.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

implementation of those provisions contributes to universality, and reaffirms the undertaking of the States parties to
foster international cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities of the States parties and the
importance of that cooperation and its contribution to the promotion of the Convention as a whole;
16. Notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to achieve the object and purpose of the Convention, to ensure the full implementation of its provisions, including
those for international verification of compliance with it, and to provide a forum for consultation and cooperation
among States parties;
17. Welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons within the framework of the relationship agreement between the United Nations and the
Organization,119 in accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction”.
RESOLUTION 70/42
A/RES/70/42

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)120

70/42.

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 58/43 of 8 December 2003, 59/87 of 3 December 2004, 60/64 of 8 December 2005,
61/81 of 6 December 2006, 62/45 of 5 December 2007, 63/45 of 2 December 2008, 64/43 of 2 December 2009,
65/47 of 8 December 2010, 66/38 of 2 December 2011, 67/61 of 3 December 2012, 68/55 of 5 December 2013 and
69/46 of 2 December 2014 on confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context,
Recalling also its resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003 on the prevention of armed conflict, in which the General
Assembly calls upon Member States to settle their disputes by peaceful means, as set out in Chapter VI of the
Charter, inter alia, by any procedures adopted by the parties,
Recalling further the resolutions and guidelines adopted by consensus by the General Assembly and the
Disarmament Commission relating to confidence-building measures and their implementation at the global,
regional and subregional levels,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures taken at the initiative and with
the agreement of all States concerned, and taking into account the specific characteristics of each region, since such
measures can contribute to regional stability,
Convinced that resources released by disarmament, including regional disarmament, can be devoted to
economic and social development and to the protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in
particular those of the developing countries,
Recognizing the need for meaningful dialogue among States concerned to avert conflict,
Welcoming the peace processes already initiated by States concerned to resolve their disputes through peaceful
means bilaterally or through mediation, inter alia, by third parties, regional organizations or the United Nations,

_______________
119

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2160, No. 1240.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Bangladesh, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Sierra Leone, Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine and Uruguay.
120

247

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recognizing that States in some regions have already taken steps towards confidence-building measures at the
bilateral, subregional and regional levels in the political and military fields, including arms control and disarmament,
and noting that such confidence-building measures have improved peace and security in those regions and
contributed to progress in the socioeconomic conditions of their people,
Concerned that the continuation of disputes among States, particularly in the absence of an effective
mechanism to resolve them through peaceful means, may contribute to the arms race and endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security and the efforts of the international community to promote arms control and
disarmament,
1. Calls upon Member States to refrain from the use or threat of use of force in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms its commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter, in
particular Article 33, which provides for a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements or other peaceful means chosen by the parties;
3. Reaffirms the ways and means regarding confidence- and security-building measures set out in the report
of the Disarmament Commission on its 1993 session;121
4. Calls upon Member States to pursue these ways and means through sustained consultations and
dialogue, while at the same time avoiding actions that may hinder or impair such a dialogue;
5. Urges States to comply strictly with all bilateral, regional and international agreements, including arms
control and disarmament agreements, to which they are party;
6. Emphasizes that the objective of confidence-building measures should be to help to strengthen
international peace and security and to be consistent with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level
of armaments;
7. Encourages the promotion of bilateral and regional confidence-building measures, with the consent and
participation of the parties concerned, to avoid conflict and prevent the unintended and accidental outbreak of
hostilities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session
containing the views of Member States on confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional
context”.
RESOLUTION 70/43
A/RES/70/43

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)122

70/43.

Regional disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/58 P of 4 December 1990, 46/36 I of 6 December 1991, 47/52 J of 9 December
1992, 48/75 I of 16 December 1993, 49/75 N of 15 December 1994, 50/70 K of 12 December 1995, 51/45 K of
10 December 1996, 52/38 P of 9 December 1997, 53/77 O of 4 December 1998, 54/54 N of 1 December 1999,
55/33 O of 20 November 2000, 56/24 H of 29 November 2001, 57/76 of 22 November 2002, 58/38 of 8 December
2003, 59/89 of 3 December 2004, 60/63 of 8 December 2005, 61/80 of 6 December 2006, 62/38 of 5 December
_______________
121

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II, sect. III.A.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Bangladesh, Ecuador, Eritrea,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Sudan and Turkey.
122

248

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2007, 63/43 of 2 December 2008, 64/41 of 2 December 2009, 65/45 of 8 December 2010, 66/36 of 2 December
2011, 67/57 of 3 December 2012, 68/54 of 5 December 2013 and 69/45 of 2 December 2014 on regional
disarmament,
Believing that the efforts of the international community to move towards the ideal of general and complete
disarmament are guided by the inherent human desire for genuine peace and security, the elimination of the danger
of war and the release of economic, intellectual and other resources for peaceful pursuits,
Affirming the abiding commitment of all States to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations in the conduct of their international relations,
Noting that essential guidelines for progress towards general and complete disarmament were adopted at the
tenth special session of the General Assembly,123
Taking note of the guidelines and recommendations for regional approaches to disarmament within the context
of global security adopted by the Disarmament Commission at its 1993 substantive session,124
Welcoming the prospects of genuine progress in the field of disarmament engendered in recent years as a result
of negotiations between the two super-Powers,
Taking note of the recent proposals for disarmament at the regional and subregional levels,
Recognizing the importance of confidence-building measures for regional and international peace and security,
Convinced that endeavours by countries to promote regional disarmament, taking into account the specific
characteristics of each region and in accordance with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of
armaments, would enhance the security of all States and would thus contribute to international peace and security by
reducing the risk of regional conflicts,
1. Stresses that sustained efforts are needed, within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament and
under the umbrella of the United Nations, to make progress on the entire range of disarmament issues;
2. Affirms that global and regional approaches to disarmament complement each other and should therefore
be pursued simultaneously to promote regional and international peace and security;
3. Calls upon States to conclude agreements, wherever possible, for nuclear non-proliferation,
disarmament and confidence-building measures at the regional and subregional levels;
4. Welcomes the initiatives towards disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and security undertaken by
some countries at the regional and subregional levels;
5. Supports and encourages efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building measures at the regional and
subregional levels to ease regional tensions and to further disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation measures at
the regional and subregional levels;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Regional disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 70/44
A/RES/70/44

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),125 by a recorded vote of 182 to 1, with 2 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,

_______________
123

Resolution S-10/2.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II.
125
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Italy, Malaysia, Mali, Pakistan, Peru, Syrian Arab Republic and Ukraine.
124

249

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: India
Abstaining: Bhutan, Russian Federation

70/44.
A/RES/70/44.

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 48/75 J of 16 December 1993, 49/75 O of 15 December 1994, 50/70 L of
12 December 1995, 51/45 Q of 10 December 1996, 52/38 Q of 9 December 1997, 53/77 P of 4 December 1998,
54/54 M of 1 December 1999, 55/33 P of 20 November 2000, 56/24 I of 29 November 2001, 57/77 of
22 November 2002, 58/39 of 8 December 2003, 59/88 of 3 December 2004, 60/75 of 8 December 2005, 61/82 of
6 December 2006, 62/44 of 5 December 2007, 63/44 of 2 December 2008, 64/42 of 2 December 2009, 65/46 of
8 December 2010, 66/37 of 2 December 2011, 67/62 of 3 December 2012, 68/56 of 5 December 2013 and 69/47 of
2 December 2014,
Recognizing the crucial role of conventional arms control in promoting regional and international peace and
security,
Convinced that conventional arms control needs to be pursued primarily in the regional and subregional
contexts since most threats to peace and security in the post-cold-war era arise mainly among States located in the
same region or subregion,
Aware that the preservation of a balance in the defence capabilities of States at the lowest level of armaments
would contribute to peace and stability and should be a prime objective of conventional arms control,
Desirous of promoting agreements to strengthen regional peace and security at the lowest possible level of
armaments and military forces,
Noting with particular interest the initiatives taken in this regard in different regions of the world, in particular
the commencement of consultations among a number of Latin American countries and the proposals for
conventional arms control made in the context of South Asia, and recognizing, in the context of this subject, the
relevance and value of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe,126 which is a cornerstone of European
security,
Believing that militarily significant States and States with larger military capabilities have a special
responsibility in promoting such agreements for regional security,
Believing also that an important objective of conventional arms control in regions of tension should be to
prevent the possibility of military attack launched by surprise and to avoid aggression,
1. Decides to give urgent consideration to the issues involved in conventional arms control at the regional
and subregional levels;
_______________
126

250

See CD/1064.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to consider the formulation of principles that can serve as a
framework for regional agreements on conventional arms control, and looks forward to a report of the Conference
on this subject;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in the meantime, to seek the views of Member States on the subject and
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional
levels”.
RESOLUTION 70/45
A/RES/70/45

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),127 by a recorded vote of 178 to 4, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: France, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Israel

70/45.
A/RES/70/45.

Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 51/45 B of 10 December 1996, 52/38 N of 9 December 1997, 53/77 Q of
4 December 1998, 54/54 L of 1 December 1999, 55/33 I of 20 November 2000, 56/24 G of 29 November 2001,
57/73 of 22 November 2002, 58/49 of 8 December 2003, 59/85 of 3 December 2004, 60/58 of 8 December 2005,
61/69 of 6 December 2006, 62/35 of 5 December 2007, 63/65 of 2 December 2008, 64/44 of 2 December 2009,
65/58 of 8 December 2010, 67/55 of 3 December 2012 and 69/35 of 2 December 2014,
Recalling also the provisions on nuclear-weapon-free zones of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, the first special session devoted to disarmament,128
Recalling further the adoption by the Disarmament Commission at its 1999 substantive session of a text
entitled “Establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the
States of the region concerned”,129
_______________
127

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Fiji, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland,
Jamaica, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Samoa, Singapore, South Africa, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
128
Resolution S-10/2.
129
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex I.

251

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Determined to pursue the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Determined also to continue to contribute to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its
aspects and to the process of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control, in
particular in the field of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, with a view to strengthening
international peace and security, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,130 which reaffirmed the conviction that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones contributes towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament,
Stressing the importance of the treaties of Tlatelolco,131 Rarotonga,132 Bangkok133 and Pelindaba134
establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as the Antarctic Treaty,135 inter alia, for achieving a world entirely
free of nuclear weapons,
Welcoming the convening by Indonesia of the Third Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties
that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, on 24 April 2015,
Noting that 115 States are currently parties and signatories to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties,
Underlining the value of enhancing cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty members by
means of mechanisms such as joint meetings of States parties, signatories and observers to those treaties,
Reaffirming the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to the freedom of the high seas and
the rights of passage through maritime space, including those of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea,136
1. Reaffirms its conviction of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones in strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and in extending the areas of the world that are nuclear-weapon-free, and calls for greater
progress towards the total elimination of all nuclear weapons;
2. Welcomes the continued contribution that the Antarctic Treaty135 and the treaties of Tlatelolco,131
Rarotonga,132 Bangkok133 and Pelindaba134 are making towards freeing the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas
covered by those treaties from nuclear weapons;
3. Notes with satisfaction that all nuclear-weapon-free zones in the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas
are now in force;
4. Calls upon all States concerned to continue to work together in order to facilitate adherence to the
protocols to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties by all relevant States that have not yet done so, in this regard
welcomes the ratification by China, France, the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland of the Protocol to the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia and the steps taken
by the United States of America towards the ratification of the protocols to the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone in Central Asia, to the Treaty of Pelindaba and to the Treaty of Rarotonga, and encourages progress with a
view to concluding consultations between the nuclear-weapon States and the parties to the Bangkok Treaty on the
Protocol to that Treaty;
5. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to withdraw any reservations or interpretive declarations contrary
to the object and purpose of the treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones;
_______________
130

2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
131
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
132
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
133
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
134
A/50/426, annex.
135
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
136
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.

252

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

6. Welcomes the steps taken to conclude further nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned, and calls upon all States to consider all
relevant proposals, including those reflected in its resolutions on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the Middle East;
7. Congratulates the States parties and signatories to the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and
Pelindaba, as well as of Central Asia and Mongolia, for their efforts to pursue the common goals envisaged in those
treaties and to promote the nuclear-weapon-free status of the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas, and calls upon
them to explore and implement further ways and means of cooperation among themselves and their treaty agencies;
8.

Encourages efforts to reinforce coordination among nuclear-weapon-free zones;

9. Encourages the competent authorities of the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties to provide assistance to
the States parties and signatories to those treaties so as to facilitate the accomplishment of the goals of the treaties;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas”.
RESOLUTION 70/46
A/RES/70/46

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)137

70/46.

Countering the threat posed by improvised explosive devices

The General Assembly,
Expressing grave concern over the devastation caused by the increasing use of improvised explosive devices
by illegal armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients,138 which has affected a large number of the
world’s countries and has resulted in thousands of casualties, both civilian and military,
Expressing concern at the serious harm that such improvised explosive device attacks have caused to United
Nations staff and peacekeepers, and to humanitarian workers by threatening their lives, increasing the cost of their
activities, limiting their freedom of movement and affecting their ability to deliver on their mandates,
Expressing concern also about the negative impact of these attacks on socioeconomic development,
infrastructure and freedom of movement, and the security and stability of States, and thus underlining the need to
address this issue in order to achieve relevant goals and targets under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,139 in particular target 16.1 to significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates
everywhere,
Recognizing that the wide spectrum of materials that can be used for the manufacture of improvised explosive
devices, including those sourced from the military and civilian industry, contributes to their diverse nature and their
deployment methods, which thus requires an appropriate approach to the formulation of measures to counter them,
Noting the important role that States can play in working with business entities to develop effective strategies
to counter the threat of improvised explosive devices,140 including to prevent the adverse impact of the diversion of
materials and the potential loss of revenue and risk to reputation,
Stressing the paramount need to prevent illegal armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients
from, and identify the networks that support them in, obtaining, handling, financing, storing, using or seeking access
_______________
137

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Montenegro, Netherlands, Nigeria, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and United States of America.
138
See resolution 69/51 and A/CONF.192/BMS/2014/2.
139
Resolution 70/1.
140
See the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy”
Framework (A/HRC/17/31, annex).

253

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

to all types of explosives, whether military or civilian, as well as other military or civilian materials and components
that can be used to manufacture improvised explosive devices, including detonators, detonating cords and chemical
components, while at the same time avoiding any undue restrictions on the legitimate use of those materials,
Stressing also the importance of securing conventional ammunition stockpiles in order to mitigate the risk of
their diversion to illicit use as materials for improvised explosive devices,
Stressing further the importance of engagement by all Member States in a comprehensive and coordinated
community of action to counter the global threat posed by improvised explosive devices in the hands of illegal
armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients, taking into account national capacities,
Noting the discussions on the issue of improvised explosive devices by the informal group of experts under
the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices as amended on
3 May 1996 (Amended Protocol II)141 and on the technical annex to the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War
(Protocol V)142 to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects,143
Noting also the multilateral efforts to counter improvised explosive devices of the Programme Global Shield,
led by the World Customs Organization and assisted by the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to prevent the smuggling and illicit diversion of
precursor chemicals that could be used to build improvised explosive devices, the network of regional and
multilateral communities of action established by States to counter improvised explosive devices, the research on
those devices being undertaken by the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research and the work undertaken
by the United Nations Mine Action Service to mitigate the threat posed by those devices to civilians, United Nations
staff, peacekeepers, and humanitarian personnel, in particular in the field,
Reaffirming the inherent right of Member States to individual or collective self-defence in accordance with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Strongly urges States to develop and implement, where appropriate, all necessary national measures to
promote the exercise of vigilance by their nationals, persons subject to their jurisdiction and firms incorporated in
their territory or subject to their jurisdiction that are involved in the production, sale, supply, purchase, transfer and
storage of precursor components and materials that could be used to make improvised explosive devices;
2. Strongly encourages States, where appropriate, to develop and adopt their own national policy to counter
improvised explosive devices that includes civilian-military cooperation, to strengthen their countermeasure
capability to combat illegal armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients in their use of improvised
explosive devices, and notes that the policy could include measures to support international and regional efforts to
prevent, protect against, respond to, recover from and mitigate attacks using improvised explosive devices and their
widespread consequences;
3. Encourages States to enhance, as appropriate, international and regional cooperation, including the
sharing of information on good practices as appropriate and where relevant, in cooperation with the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), in order to address the theft, diversion, loss and illicit use of materials
for making improvised explosive devices, while ensuring the security of sensitive information shared;
4. Also encourages States to also take measures to stem the transfer of knowledge of improvised explosive
devices and their construction and use by illegal armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients, as well
as the illicit acquisition of components over the Internet;
5. Further encourages States to participate, in accordance with their obligations and commitments, in the
ongoing work on improvised explosive devices by the informal group of experts under the Protocol on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices as amended on 3 May 1996 (Amended

_______________
141

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2048, No. 22495.
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
143
Ibid., vol. 1342, No. 22495.
142

254

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Protocol II)141 to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects;143
6. Encourages States to participate, as appropriate, in a comprehensive and coordinated community of
action to counter improvised explosive devices in accordance with their respective international obligations and
commitments, and to consider supporting the Programme Global Shield, the proposal for a counter-improvised
explosive device global alliance emanating from the inaugural International Counter-Improvised Explosive Device
Leaders’ Forum and other multilateral and regional efforts;
7. Encourages States and international, regional and other organizations with relevant expertise and that
are in a position to do so to render technical, financial and material assistance to interested States upon their request
aimed at strengthening the capacity of such States to counter the threat of improvised explosive devices, including
through assistance for developing good practices for the protection of civilians from attacks using improvised
explosive devices, and to provide appropriate assistance to the victims of such attacks;
8. Encourages States to respond to the needs of today’s peacekeepers to operate in new threat
environments involving improvised explosive devices, including providing, in consultation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat, the appropriate training, capabilities, information and knowledge
management and technology that is required to counter improvised explosive devices, and to ensure that adequate
financial resources are allocated to meet such needs;
9. Recognizes that improvised explosive devices are used in terrorist activities, takes note of the work of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and urges its further attention to the issue of improvised
explosive devices in line with the mandates of its associated entities;
10. Urges Member States to fully comply with all relevant United Nations resolutions, including those
related to the prevention of the use and access by terrorist groups of materials that can be used in the making of
improvised explosive devices;144
11. Stresses the need for States to take appropriate measures to strengthen their own national ammunition
stockpile management in order to prevent the diversion of materials for making improvised explosive devices to
illicit markets, illegal armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients, and encourages the application of
the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines for the safer and more secure management of ammunition
stockpiles, while also recognizing the importance of capacity-building in this regard;145
12. Encourages States and relevant international and regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations to continue to build upon existing awareness and risk education campaigns regarding the urgent threat
of improvised explosive devices;
13. Encourages States and relevant international and regional organizations to engage, as appropriate,
business entities in discussions and initiatives on countering improvised explosive devices, including on issues such
as accountability for dual-use components, improving the regulation of explosive precursors, where possible and as
appropriate, strengthening security for the transport of explosives and at explosive facilities, as well as enhancing the
vetting procedures for personnel with access to explosives, while avoiding undue restrictions on the legitimate use
of and access to such materials;
14. Strongly encourages States to share information on a voluntary basis on the diversion of
commercial-grade explosives and commercially available detonators to the illicit trade, and transfers to illegal armed
groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients;
15. Takes into account the existing initiatives at the international, regional and national levels to counter
improvised explosive devices, and encourages the engagement by States in an open and inclusive dialogue on steps
forward to harmonize diverse ongoing efforts;
_______________
144

Including Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 2160 (2014), 2161 (2014) and 2199 (2015).
The General Assembly, in its resolution 66/42, welcomed the completion of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines and the
establishment of the “SaferGuard” knowledge resource management programme for the stockpile management of conventional
ammunition.
145

255

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

16. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to prepare a report on the issue of improvised
explosive devices in the light of the present resolution, acknowledging and taking into account existing efforts
already being undertaken and seeking the views of Member States, and to provide in his report initial building
blocks and recommendations for ways forward on this issue for consideration by the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Countering the threat posed by improvised explosive devices”.
RESOLUTION 70/47
A/RES/70/47

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),146 by a recorded vote of 144 to 18, with 22 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, France, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Monaco, Poland, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Abstaining: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Slovakia, Slovenia

70/47.
A/RES/70/47.

Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Reiterating the deep concern about the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons,

Stressing that the immense and uncontrollable destructive capability and indiscriminate nature of nuclear
weapons cause unacceptable humanitarian consequences, as has been demonstrated through their past use and
testing,
Recalling that concern about the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons has been reflected in
numerous United Nations resolutions, including the first resolution adopted by the General Assembly, on
24 January 1946,

_______________
146

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland,
Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.

256

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling also that at the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, in 1978, the
Assembly stressed that nuclear weapons posed the greatest danger to mankind and to the survival of civilization,147
Welcoming the renewed interest and resolve of the international community, together with the International
Committee of the Red Cross and international humanitarian organizations, to address the catastrophic consequences
of nuclear weapons,
Recalling that the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons expressed deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons,148
Noting the resolution of 26 November 2011 of the Council of Delegates of the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement entitled “Working towards the elimination of nuclear weapons”,
Recalling the joint statements on the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons delivered to the General
Assembly and during the 2010–2015 cycle of the review of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,149
Welcoming the facts-based discussions on the effects of a nuclear weapon detonation that were held at the
Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons, convened by Norway, on 4 and 5 March 2013,
Mexico, on 13 and 14 February 2014, and Austria, on 8 and 9 December 2014,
Cognizant that a key message from experts and international organizations at those conferences was that no
State or international body could address the immediate humanitarian emergency caused by a nuclear weapon
detonation or provide adequate assistance to victims,
Firmly believing that it is in the interest of all States to engage in discussions on the humanitarian
consequences of nuclear weapons with the aim of further broadening and deepening the understanding of this
matter, and welcoming civil society’s ongoing engagement,
Reaffirming the role of civil society, in partnership with Governments, in raising awareness about the
unacceptable humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons,
Emphasizing that the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons affect not only Governments but each
and every citizen of our interconnected world and have deep implications for human survival, for the environment,
for socioeconomic development, for our economies and for the health of future generations,
1. Stresses that it is in the interest of the very survival of humanity that nuclear weapons never be used
again, under any circumstances;
2. Emphasizes that the only way to guarantee that nuclear weapons will never be used again is their total
elimination;
3. Stresses that the catastrophic effects of a nuclear weapon detonation, whether by accident, miscalculation
or design, cannot be adequately addressed;
4. Expresses its firm belief that awareness of the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons must
underpin all approaches and efforts towards nuclear disarmament;
5. Calls upon all States, in their shared responsibility, to prevent the use of nuclear weapons, to prevent
their vertical and horizontal proliferation and to achieve nuclear disarmament;
6.

Urges States to exert all efforts to totally eliminate the threat of these weapons of mass destruction;

_______________
147

See resolution S-10/2.
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.
149
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
148

257

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons”.
RESOLUTION 70/48
A/RES/70/48

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),150 by a recorded vote of 139 to 29, with 17 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Hungary,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Poland, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining: Albania, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, China, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Finland, Georgia,
Greece, Iceland, India, Japan, Mauritius, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia

70/48.
A/RES/70/48.

Humanitarian pledge for the prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,

Ever mindful of the unacceptable harm that victims of nuclear weapon explosions and nuclear testing have
experienced, and recognizing that the rights and needs of victims have not yet been adequately addressed,
Understanding that the immediate, medium-term and long-term consequences of a nuclear weapon explosion
would be significantly graver than was understood in the past and would not be constrained by national borders but
have regional or even global effects, potentially threatening the survival of humanity,
Recognizing the complexity of and relationship between these consequences for, inter alia, health, the
environment, infrastructure, food security, climate, development, social cohesion, displacement and the global
economy, which would be systemic and potentially irreversible,
Aware that the risk of a nuclear weapon explosion is significantly greater than previously assumed and is
indeed increasing with increased proliferation, the lowering of the technical threshold for nuclear weapon capability,
the ongoing modernization of nuclear weapon arsenals in States possessing nuclear weapons and the role that is
attributed to nuclear weapons in the nuclear doctrines of such States,

_______________
150

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Austria, Bahamas,
Belize, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Namibia, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.

258

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Cognizant that the risk of the use of nuclear weapons, with its unacceptable consequences, can be avoided
only when all nuclear weapons have been eliminated,
Emphasizing that the consequences of a nuclear weapon explosion and the risks associated with nuclear
weapons concern the security of all humanity and that all States share the responsibility to prevent any use of
nuclear weapons,
Emphasizing also that the scope of the consequences of a nuclear weapon explosion and the associated risks
raise profound moral and ethical questions that go beyond debates about the legality of nuclear weapons,
Mindful that no national or international capacity exists that would adequately respond to the human suffering
and humanitarian harm that would result from a nuclear weapon explosion in a populated area, and that such
capacity most likely will never exist,
Affirming that it is in the interest of the very survival of humanity that nuclear weapons are never used again,
under any circumstances,
Reiterating the crucial role that international organizations, relevant entities of the United Nations, the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, elected representatives, academia and civil society play in
advancing the shared objective of a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Recalling the three international conferences convened, respectively, by Norway in March 2013, Mexico in
February 2014 and Austria in December 2014 on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons, and the compelling
evidence presented at these conferences,
Welcoming the fact that 120 States have drawn inescapable conclusions from the evidence on the humanitarian
impact of nuclear weapons and, consequently, supported or endorsed the Humanitarian Pledge,151
1. Stresses the importance of having fact-based discussions and presenting findings and compelling
evidence on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons in all relevant forums and within the United Nations
framework, as they should be at the centre of all deliberations and the implementation of obligations and
commitments with regard to nuclear disarmament;
2. Appeals to all States to follow the imperative of human security for all and to promote the protection of
civilians against risks stemming from nuclear weapons;
3. Urges all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons152 to renew their
commitment to the urgent and full implementation of their existing obligations under article VI, and calls upon all
States to identify and pursue effective measures to fill the legal gap for the prohibition and elimination of nuclear
weapons and to cooperate with all stakeholders to achieve this goal;
4. Requests all States possessing nuclear weapons, pending the total elimination of their nuclear weapon
arsenals, to take concrete interim measures to reduce the risk of nuclear weapon detonations, including by reducing
the operational status of nuclear weapons and moving nuclear weapons away from deployment and into storage,
diminishing the role of nuclear weapons in military doctrines and rapidly reducing all types of nuclear weapons;
5. Calls upon all relevant stakeholders, States, international organizations, the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement, parliamentarians and civil society to cooperate in efforts to stigmatize, prohibit and
eliminate nuclear weapons in the light of their unacceptable humanitarian consequences and associated risks;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Humanitarian pledge for the prohibition and elimination of
nuclear weapons”.

_______________
151
152

See CD/2039 and www.hinw14vienna.at.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

259

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/49
A/RES/70/49

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)153

70/49.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/51 of 2 December 2014, as well as all previous resolutions on the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects, including resolution 56/24 V of 24 December 2001,
Emphasizing the importance of the continued and full implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,154 and recognizing its
important contribution to international efforts on this matter,
Emphasizing also the importance of the continued and full implementation of the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons (the
International Tracing Instrument),155
Mindful of the implementation of the outcomes adopted by the follow-up meetings on the Programme
of Action,
Recalling the commitment of States to the Programme of Action as the main framework for measures within
the activities of the international community to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects,
Underlining the need for States to enhance their efforts to build national capacity for the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument,
Welcoming the successful conclusion of the second United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York from 27 August to 7 September 2012 (the Second Review
Conference), and recalling the endorsement by the General Assembly of the outcome of the Conference,156
Welcoming also the convening of the second Open-ended Meeting of Governmental Experts on the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, in New York from 1 to 5 June 2015,
Stressing the importance of voluntary national reporting to follow up on the Programme of Action as a means
of assessing overall implementation efforts, including implementation challenges and opportunities, which could
greatly facilitate the rendering of international cooperation and assistance to affected States,
Noting that tools developed by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, including the
Programme of Action Implementation Support System, and those developed by Member States could be used to
assess progress made in the implementation of the Programme of Action,

_______________
153

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
154
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
155
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and Corr.2, annex.
156
A/CONF.192/2012/RC/4, annexes I and II.

260

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the coordinated efforts within the United Nations to implement the Programme of Action,
including by developing the Programme of Action Implementation Support System, which forms an integrated
clearing house for international cooperation and assistance for capacity-building in the area of small arms and light
weapons,
Taking into account the importance of regional approaches to the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Noting with satisfaction regional and subregional efforts being undertaken in support of the implementation of
the Programme of Action, and commending the progress that has already been made in this regard, including the
tackling of both supply and demand factors that are relevant to addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons,
Reaffirming that international cooperation and assistance are an essential aspect of the full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument,
Reiterating that illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons is a serious problem that the international
community should address urgently,
Highlighting new challenges and potential opportunities with regard to effective marking, record-keeping and
tracing resulting from developments in the manufacturing, technology and design of small arms and light weapons,
and bearing in mind the different situations, capacities and priorities of States and regions,
Recognizing the efforts undertaken by non-governmental organizations in the provision of assistance to States
for the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,157 which includes an overview of the implementation of
resolution 69/51,
Welcoming the inclusion of small arms and light weapons in the scope of the Arms Trade Treaty,158
Acknowledging efforts related to the transfer of conventional arms that may also contribute to the prevention
and eradication of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
1. Underlines the fact that the issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects
requires concerted efforts at the national, regional and international levels to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
manufacture, transfer and circulation of small arms and light weapons, and that their uncontrolled spread in many
regions of the world has a wide range of humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences and poses a serious threat
to peace, reconciliation, safety, security, stability and sustainable development at the individual, local, national,
regional and international levels;
2. Encourages all relevant initiatives, including those of the United Nations, other international
organizations, regional and subregional organizations, non-governmental organizations and civil society, for the
successful implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,154 and calls upon all Member States to contribute towards the continued
implementation of the Programme of Action at the national, regional and global levels;
3. Encourages States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 60/81 to consider further steps to enhance international
cooperation in preventing, combating and eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons;159
4. Reaffirms its endorsement of the report adopted at the Fifth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,160 and encourages all States to implement, as appropriate, the measures
highlighted in the annex to the report under the sections entitled “Way forward”;

_______________
157

A/70/183.
See resolution 67/234 B.
159
See A/62/163 and Corr.1.
160
A/CONF.192/BMS/2014/2.
158

261

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Recalls its endorsement of the outcome of the second United Nations Conference to Review Progress
Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York from 27 August to 7 September 2012 (the Second
Review Conference);156
6. Also recalls its decision, pursuant to the schedule of meetings for the period from 2012 to 2018 agreed
upon at the Second Review Conference,161 to convene, in accordance with the relevant provision of the Programme
of Action, a one-week biennial meeting of States, in New York in 2016, to consider the full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action;
7. Further recalls its decision, in accordance with the decision of the Second Review Conference,161 to
hold the third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in
2018 for a period of two weeks, preceded by a one-week preparatory committee meeting early in 2018;
8. Emphasizes the fact that initiatives by the international community with respect to international
cooperation and assistance remain essential and complementary to national implementation efforts, as well as to
those at the regional and global levels;
9. Encourages States to consider ways to enhance cooperation and assistance and to assess their
effectiveness in order to ensure the implementation of the Programme of Action;
10. Recognizes the necessity for interested States to develop effective coordination mechanisms, where they
do not exist, in order to match the needs of States with existing resources to enhance the implementation of the
Programme of Action and to make international cooperation and assistance more effective, and in this regard
encourages States to make use, as appropriate, of the Programme of Action Implementation Support System;
11. Encourages States to consider, among other mechanisms, the coherent identification of needs, priorities,
national plans and programmes that may require international cooperation and assistance from States and regional
and international organizations in a position to do so;
12. Also encourages States to take full advantage of the benefits of cooperation with the United Nations
regional centres for peace and disarmament, the World Customs Organization, the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in accordance with their mandates
and consistent with national priorities;
13. Encourages all efforts to build national capacity for the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action, including those highlighted in the outcome documents of the Second Review Conference;
14. Encourages States to submit, on a voluntary basis, national reports on their implementation of the
Programme of Action, notes that States will submit national reports on their implementation of the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons (the International Tracing Instrument),155 encourages those States in a position to do so to use the reporting
template made available by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, and reaffirms the utility of
synchronizing such reports with biennial meetings of States and review conferences as a means of increasing the
submission rate and improving the utility of reports, as well as contributing substantively to meeting discussions;
15. Also encourages States, on a voluntary basis, to make increasing use of their national reports as another
tool for communicating assistance needs and information on the resources and mechanisms available to address
such needs, and encourages States in a position to render such assistance to make use of these national reports;
16. Encourages States, relevant international and regional organizations and civil society with the capacity
to do so to cooperate with and assist other States, upon request, in the preparation of comprehensive reports on their
implementation of the Programme of Action;

_______________
161

262

A/CONF.192/2012/RC/4, annex I, sect. III, paras. 1 and 2.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

17. Calls upon all States to implement the International Tracing Instrument by, inter alia, including in their
national reports the name and contact information of the national points of contact and information on national
marking practices used to indicate country of manufacture and/or country of import, as applicable;
18. Recognizes the urgent need to maintain and enhance national controls, in accordance with the
Programme of Action, to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, including
their diversion to illicit trade, illegal armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients, taking into account,
inter alia, their adverse humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences for the affected States;
19. Encourages States in a position to do so to provide financial assistance, through a voluntary sponsorship
fund, that could be distributed, upon request, to States otherwise unable to participate in meetings on the Programme
of Action;
20. Encourages interested States and relevant international and regional organizations in a position to do so
to convene regional meetings to consider and advance the implementation of the Programme of Action, as well as
the International Tracing Instrument, including in preparation for the meetings on the Programme of Action;
21. Encourages civil society and relevant organizations to strengthen their cooperation and work with States
at the respective national and regional levels to achieve the implementation of the Programme of Action;
22. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the recommendations and requests made by the
Fifth Biennial Meeting of States, in paragraphs 27 and 38 of its outcome document, to submit a report dedicated to
these issues and on the implementation of the present resolution for consideration at the Sixth Biennial Meeting of
States, in 2016, and to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects”.
RESOLUTION 70/50
A/RES/70/50

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),162 by a recorded vote of 132 to 36, with 16 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, China, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Georgia, India, Japan, Liechtenstein, Mauritius, Pakistan, Republic of Moldova, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

_______________
162

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Austria, Botswana, Brazil, Chile,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Ghana, Guatemala, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Namibia, Nauru, Nigeria, Palau, Philippines, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Swaziland, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda,
Uruguay, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

263

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

70/50.
A/RES/70/50.

Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world

The General Assembly,

Recalling the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, which was established to save succeeding
generations from the untold suffering of the scourge of war,
Recalling also that the United Nations emerged at the time of the immense trail of death and destruction
resulting from the Second World War, 70 years ago,
Recalling further the noble principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which enjoin the international
community, individually and collectively, to spare no effort in promoting the ethical imperative of “in larger
freedom”, so that all peoples may enjoy freedom from want, freedom from fear and the freedom to live in dignity,
Convinced that, given the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risks associated with a nuclear weapon
detonation, Member States have long envisaged nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation as urgent and
interlinked ethical imperatives in achieving the objectives of the Charter, which is reflected in the first resolution,
resolution 1 (I), adopted by the General Assembly on 24 January 1946, aimed at the elimination from national
armaments of atomic weapons and of all other major weapons adaptable to mass destruction,
Acknowledging, in this connection, the ethical imperatives outlined in the provisions of its resolutions and
reports and those of other related international initiatives on the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risks
posed by a nuclear weapon detonation, including the declaration that the use of nuclear weapons would cause
indiscriminate suffering and as such is a violation of the Charter and the laws of humanity and international law,163
the condemnation of nuclear war as contrary to human conscience and a violation of the fundamental right to life,164
the threat to the very survival of humankind posed by the existence of nuclear weapons,165 the detrimental
environmental effects of the use of nuclear weapons,166 and the disquiet that was expressed at the continued
spending on the development and maintenance of nuclear arsenals,167
Acknowledging also the preamble to and article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons168 and the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons,169 in which the Court unanimously concluded that there exists an obligation to pursue in good
faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and
effective international control,
Acknowledging further the United Nations Millennium Declaration,170 in which Heads of State and
Government resolved to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons,
and to keep all options open for achieving that aim, including the possibility of convening an international
conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Concerned that, despite the long-standing recognition it has accorded to these ethical imperatives and while
much effort has been directed to addressing nuclear non-proliferation, limited progress has been made in meeting
the nuclear disarmament obligations required to achieve and maintain the nuclear-weapon-free world that the
international community demands,
Disappointed at the continued absence of progress towards multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament
in the Conference on Disarmament, despite unrelenting efforts of Member States towards this end, and the lack of
concrete outcomes of multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations within the United Nations framework,
_______________
163

See resolution 1653 (XVI).
See resolution 38/75.
165
See resolution S-10/2.
166
See resolution 50/70 M.
167
See A/59/119.
168
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
169
A/51/218, annex.
170
Resolution 55/2.
164

264

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting with satisfaction the increasing awareness, renewed attention and growing momentum that has been
generated by Member States and the international community since 2010 regarding the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences and risks associated with nuclear weapons, which underpin the ethical imperatives for nuclear
disarmament and the urgency of achieving and maintaining a nuclear-weapon-free world, together with all related
international initiatives,
Conscious of the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in relation to nuclear disarmament, and
determined to promote multilateralism as essential to nuclear disarmament negotiations,
1. Calls upon all States to acknowledge the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risks posed by a
nuclear weapon detonation, whether by accident, miscalculation or design;
2. Acknowledges the ethical imperatives for nuclear disarmament and the urgency of achieving and
maintaining a nuclear-weapon-free world, which is a “global public good of the highest order”, serving both
national and collective security interests;
3.

Declares:

(a)

That the global threat posed by nuclear weapons must urgently be eliminated;

(b) That discussions, decisions and actions on nuclear weapons must focus on the effects of these weapons
on human beings and the environment and must be guided by the unspeakable suffering and unacceptable harm that
they cause;
(c) That greater attention must be given to the impact of a nuclear weapon detonation on women and the
importance of their participation in discussions, decisions and actions on nuclear weapons;
(d) That nuclear weapons serve to undermine collective security, heighten the risk of nuclear catastrophe,
aggravate international tension and make conflict more dangerous;
(e) That arguments in favour of the retention of nuclear weapons have a negative impact on the credibility
of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime;
(f) That the long-term plans for the modernization of nuclear weapons arsenals run contrary to
commitments and obligations to nuclear disarmament and engender perceptions of the indefinite possession of these
weapons;
(g) That, in a world where basic human needs have not yet been met, the vast resources allocated to the
modernization of nuclear weapons arsenals could instead be redirected to meeting the Sustainable Development
Goals;
(h) That, given the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons, it is inconceivable that any use of nuclear
weapons, irrespective of the cause, would be compatible with the requirements of international humanitarian law or
international law, or the laws of morality, or the dictates of public conscience;
(i) That, given their indiscriminate nature and potential to annihilate humanity, nuclear weapons are
inherently immoral;
4. Notes that all responsible States have a solemn duty to take decisions that serve to protect their people
and each other from the ravages of a nuclear weapon detonation, and that the only way for States to do so is through
the total elimination of nuclear weapons;
5. Stresses that all States share an ethical responsibility to act with urgency and determination, with the
support of all relevant stakeholders, to take the effective measures, including legally binding measures, necessary
to eliminate and prohibit all nuclear weapons, given their catastrophic humanitarian consequences and associated
risks;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world”.
265

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/51
A/RES/70/51

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),171 by a recorded vote of 142 to 7, with 36 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Democratic People's Republic of Korea, France, India, Israel, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of), Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey

70/51.

A/RES/70/51.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament
commitments

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 1 (I) of 24 January 1946, 67/34 of 3 December 2012, 68/39 of 5 December 2013 and
69/37 of 2 December 2014,
Recalling the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, which was established to save succeeding
generations from the untold suffering of the scourge of war, representing a historic opportunity to reaffirm that
nuclear weapons should never be used again and to advance nuclear disarmament,
Reiterating its grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by nuclear weapons, which should inform all
deliberations, decisions and actions relating to nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,
Recalling the expression of deep concern by the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons, and its resolve to seek a safer world for all and to achieve the peace and security of a world without
nuclear weapons,172
Noting with satisfaction the renewed attention to the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risks
associated with nuclear weapons that has been generated by the international community since 2010 and the
growing awareness that these concerns should underpin the need for nuclear disarmament and the urgency of
achieving and maintaining a nuclear-weapon-free world, and noting further with satisfaction the prominence
accorded to the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons in multilateral disarmament forums,
Recalling the discussions held at the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons, hosted by
Norway on 4 and 5 March 2013, Mexico on 13 and 14 February 2014 and Austria on 8 and 9 December 2014,
_______________
171

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Brazil, Ecuador, Egypt, Haiti, Ireland,
Mali, Mexico, New Zealand, South Africa and Thailand.
172
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.

266

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

aimed at understanding and developing a greater awareness of the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons
detonations which further reinforce the urgency of nuclear disarmament,
Emphasizing the compelling evidence presented at the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons which detailed the catastrophic consequences that would result from a nuclear weapon detonation,
reaching well beyond national borders; the lack of capacity of States and international organizations to deal with the
aftermath, and the risk of an occurrence, due to an accident, systems failure or human error,
Noting in particular the research findings presented to the Vienna Conference regarding the strongly
disproportionate and gendered impact of exposure to ionizing radiation for women and girls,
Recalling the convening, on 26 September 2013, of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
nuclear disarmament and resolution 69/58 of 2 December 2014, entitled “Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament”, and the decisions contained therein, and welcoming the
commemoration and promotion of 26 September as the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons,
Welcoming resolution 69/41 of 2 December 2014 in which it encouraged Member States, international
organizations and civil society to take into account the report of the Open-ended Working Group to develop
proposals to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for the achievement and maintenance of a
world without nuclear weapons,173 as well as the report submitted by the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
68/46 of 5 December 2013 on how to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations,174 which includes
the steps already taken by Member States to promote multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations,
Underlining the importance of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation education,
Reaffirming that transparency, verifiability and irreversibility are cardinal principles applying to nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, which are mutually reinforcing processes,
Recalling the decisions and the resolution adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,175 the basis upon which the Treaty was
indefinitely extended, and the Final Documents of the 2000176 and the 2010177 Review Conferences of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and in particular the unequivocal undertaking by the
nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament,
in accordance with commitments made under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,178
Reaffirming the commitment of all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to
apply the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency in relation to the implementation of their treaty
obligations,
Recognizing the continued vital importance of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty179 to the advancement of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation objectives, and welcoming the
recent ratification of the Treaty by Angola,
Recalling that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons and the legitimate interest of non-nuclear-weapon States in receiving unequivocal and
legally binding negative security assurances from nuclear-weapon States pending the total elimination of nuclear
weapons,
_______________
173

A/68/514.
A/69/154 and Add.1.
175
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
176
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
177
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
178
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
179
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
174

267

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming the conviction that, pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, the establishment and
maintenance of nuclear-weapon-free zones enhances global and regional peace and security, strengthens the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and contributes towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament, and welcoming
the Conferences of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and
Mongolia,
Welcoming the ratification by China, France, the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland of the Protocol to the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia, and urging those
States to continue to make real progress towards strengthening all existing nuclear-weapon-free zones through, inter
alia, the withdrawal or revision of any reservations or interpretative declarations contrary to the object and purpose
of the treaties establishing such zones,
Recalling the encouragement expressed at the 2010 Review Conference for the establishment of further
nuclear-weapon-free zones, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned,
reaffirming the expectation that this will be followed by concerted international efforts to create such zones in areas
where they do not currently exist, especially in the Middle East, and in this context noting with deep disappointment
the non-fulfilment of the agreement at the 2010 Review Conference on practical steps to fully implement the 1995
resolution on the Middle East, and disappointed that no agreement could be reached at the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held in New York from 27 April to
22 May 2015, on this issue,
Deeply disappointed at the continued absence of progress towards multilateral negotiations on nuclear
disarmament, in particular in the Conference on Disarmament,
Deeply regretting the lack of any substantive outcome of the 2015 Review Conference,
Disappointed that the 2015 Review Conference missed an opportunity to further strengthen the Treaty,
enhance progress towards its full implementation and universality, and monitor the implementation of commitments
made and actions agreed at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences, and concerned about the impact of this
failure on the Treaty and the balance among its three pillars,
Acknowledging the ongoing efforts towards the full implementation of the Treaty between the Russian
Federation and the United States of America on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms, while re-emphasizing the encouragement of the 2010 Review Conference to both States to
continue discussions on follow-on measures in order to achieve deeper reductions in their nuclear arsenals,
Underlining the importance of multilateralism in relation to nuclear disarmament, while recognizing also the
value of unilateral, bilateral and regional initiatives, and the importance of compliance with the terms of these
initiatives,
Taking note of the reports presented by the nuclear-weapon States to the 2015 Review Conference, pursuant to
actions 5, 20 and 21 of the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference,180 and taking note also of the first
edition of a glossary of key nuclear terms,
1. Reiterates that each article of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons178 is binding on
the States parties at all times and in all circumstances and that all States parties should be held fully accountable with
respect to strict compliance with their obligations under the Treaty, and calls upon all States parties to comply fully
with all decisions, resolutions and commitments made at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences;

_______________
180

Implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons: report submitted by the People’s Republic of China
(NPT/CONF.2015/PC.III/13); report submitted by France under actions 5, 20 and 21 of the Final Document of the 2010 Review
Conference (NPT/CONF.2015/PC.III/14); report submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland pursuant to
actions 5, 20 and 21 of the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference (NPT/CONF.2015/PC.III/15); report submitted by the United
States of America pursuant to actions 5, 20 and 21 of the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference (NPT/CONF.2015/PC.III/16);
statement on measures taken by the Russian Federation as regards actions 5, 20 and 21 contained in the Final Document of the 2010
Review Conference (NPT/CONF.2015/PC.III/17).

268

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Also reiterates the deep concern expressed by the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons, and the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law;
3. Acknowledges the evidence presented at the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons, and calls upon Member States, in their relevant decisions and actions, to give due prominence to the
humanitarian imperatives which underpin nuclear disarmament and to the urgency of achieving this goal;
4. Recalls the reaffirmation of the continued validity of the practical steps agreed to in the Final Document
of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,181
including the specific reaffirmation of the unequivocal undertaking of the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties are committed
under article VI of the Treaty, recalls the commitment of the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate concrete progress
on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament, and calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to take all steps necessary to
accelerate the fulfilment of their commitments;
5. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their commitment to undertake further efforts to reduce
and ultimately eliminate all types of nuclear weapons, deployed and non-deployed, including through unilateral,
bilateral, regional and multilateral measures;
6. Urges all States possessing nuclear weapons to decrease the operational readiness of nuclear weapons
systems in a verifiable and transparent manner with a view to ensuring that all nuclear weapons are removed from
high alert status;
7. Encourages the nuclear-weapon States to make concrete reductions in the role and significance of
nuclear weapons in all military and security concepts, doctrines and policies, pending their total elimination;
8. Encourages all States that are part of regional alliances that include nuclear-weapon States to further
promote a diminishing role for nuclear weapons in their collective security doctrines, pending their total elimination;
9. Underlines the recognition by States parties to the Treaty of the legitimate interest of non-nuclearweapon States in the constraining by the nuclear-weapon States of the development and qualitative improvement of
nuclear weapons and their ending the development of advanced new types of nuclear weapons, and calls upon the
nuclear-weapon States to take steps in this regard;
10. Encourages further steps by all nuclear-weapon States, in accordance with the previous commitments
and obligations on nuclear disarmament, to ensure the irreversible removal of all fissile material designated by each
nuclear-weapon State as no longer required for military purposes, and calls upon all States to support, within the
context of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the development of appropriate nuclear disarmament
verification capabilities and legally binding verification arrangements, thereby ensuring that such material remains
permanently outside military programmes in a verifiable manner;
11. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty to work towards the full implementation of the resolution on
the Middle East adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which is inextricably linked to the indefinite extension of the Treaty, and
expresses disappointment and deep concern at the lack of a substantive outcome of the 2015 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, including on the process to establish a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction as contained in the 1995
resolution on the Middle East, which remains valid until fully implemented;
12. Expresses its profound disappointment at the failure to convene a conference in 2012 on the
establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction as
mandated at the 2010 Review Conference;
_______________
181

2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.

269

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

13. Stresses the fundamental role of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in achieving
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, and calls upon all States parties to spare no effort to achieve the
universality of the Treaty, and in this regard urges India, Israel and Pakistan to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclearweapon States promptly and without conditions, and to place all of their nuclear facilities under International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
14. Urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to fulfil its commitments under the Six-Party Talks,
including those in the September 2005 joint statement, to abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear
programmes, to return, at an early date, to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to adhere to
its International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards agreement,182 with a view to achieving the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula in a peaceful manner, and reaffirms its firm support for the Six-Party Talks;
15. Urges all States to work together to overcome obstacles within the international disarmament machinery
that are inhibiting efforts to advance the cause of nuclear disarmament in a multilateral context, and urges the
Conference on Disarmament once again to commence, without delay, substantive work that advances the agenda of
nuclear disarmament, particularly through multilateral negotiations;
16. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to include in their reports during the review cycle for the 2020 Review
Conference concrete and detailed information concerning the implementation of their undertakings on nuclear
disarmament;
17. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to implement their nuclear disarmament commitments, both
qualitative and quantitative, in a manner that enables the States parties to regularly monitor progress, including
through a standard detailed reporting format, thereby enhancing confidence and trust not only among the nuclearweapon States but also between the nuclear-weapon States and the non-nuclear-weapon States and contributing to
sustainable nuclear disarmament;
18. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to implement
without delay all the commitments and obligations of the 2010 Review Conference action plan;
19. Urges Member States to pursue multilateral negotiations without delay, in good faith, on effective
measures for the achievement and maintenance of a nuclear-weapon-free world, in keeping with the spirit and
purpose of General Assembly resolution 1 (I) and article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, and to this end urges Member States to explore options and support efforts to identify, elaborate and
negotiate legally binding effective measures for nuclear disarmament;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments” and to review the implementation of the present resolution
at that session.
RESOLUTION 70/52
A/RES/70/52

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),183 by a recorded vote of 127 to 43, with 15 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,

_______________
182

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1677, No. 28986.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chad, Congo, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Fiji,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Philippines, Samoa, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Uganda, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
183

270

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Austria, Belarus, Cyprus, India, Ireland, Japan, Malta, Mauritius, Montenegro, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Serbia, Sweden, Uzbekistan

70/52.
A/RES/70/52.

Nuclear disarmament

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 49/75 E of 15 December 1994 on a step-by-step reduction of the nuclear threat, and its
resolutions 50/70 P of 12 December 1995, 51/45 O of 10 December 1996, 52/38 L of 9 December 1997, 53/77 X of
4 December 1998, 54/54 P of 1 December 1999, 55/33 T of 20 November 2000, 56/24 R of 29 November 2001,
57/79 of 22 November 2002, 58/56 of 8 December 2003, 59/77 of 3 December 2004, 60/70 of 8 December 2005,
61/78 of 6 December 2006, 62/42 of 5 December 2007, 63/46 of 2 December 2008, 64/53 of 2 December 2009,
65/56 of 8 December 2010, 66/51 of 2 December 2011, 67/60 of 3 December 2012, 68/47 of 5 December 2013 and
69/48 of 2 December 2014 on nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Bearing in mind that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction of 1972184 and the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
of 1993185 have already established legal regimes on the complete prohibition of biological and chemical weapons,
respectively, and determined to achieve a comprehensive nuclear weapons convention on the prohibition of the
development, testing, production, stockpiling, loan, transfer, use and threat of use of nuclear weapons and on their
destruction, and to conclude such an international convention at an early date,
Recognizing the urgent need to take concrete practical steps towards achieving the establishment of a world
free of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,
the first special session devoted to disarmament,186 calling for the urgent negotiation of agreements for the cessation
of the qualitative improvement and development of nuclear-weapon systems and for a comprehensive and phased
programme with agreed time frames, wherever feasible, for the progressive and balanced reduction of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery, leading to their ultimate and complete elimination at the earliest possible time,
Reaffirming the conviction of the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons187
that the Treaty is a cornerstone of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, and the importance of the
decision on strengthening the review process for the Treaty, the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear

_______________
184

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
Ibid., vol. 1974, No. 33757.
186
Resolution S-10/2.
187
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
185

271

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

non-proliferation and disarmament, the decision on the extension of the Treaty and the resolution on the Middle
East, adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,188
Stressing the importance of the 13 steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to achieve the objective of
nuclear disarmament leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons, as agreed to by the States parties in the
Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,189
Recognizing the important work done at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,190 and affirming its 22-point action plan on nuclear disarmament as an impetus to
intensify work aimed at beginning negotiations for a nuclear weapons convention,
Expressing deep concern that the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held from 27 April to 22 May 2015, did not reach agreement on a substantive
final document,
Reaffirming the continued validity of agreements reached at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and
the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences until all their objectives are achieved, and calling for their full and
immediate fulfilment, including the action plan on nuclear disarmament adopted at the 2010 Review Conference,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly and by the international community,
Reiterating its call for an early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,191
Noting the new strategic arms reduction treaty between the Russian Federation and the United States of
America, in order to achieve further cuts in their deployed and non-deployed strategic nuclear weapons, and
stressing that such cuts should be irreversible, verifiable and transparent,
Noting also the positive statements by nuclear-weapon States of their intention to pursue actions in achieving a
world free of nuclear weapons, while reaffirming the need for urgent concrete actions by nuclear-weapon States to
achieve this goal within a specified framework of time, and urging them to take further measures for progress on
nuclear disarmament,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral negotiations on nuclear
disarmament, and that bilateral negotiations can never replace multilateral negotiations in this respect,
Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the
elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States, without exception or discrimination,
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances, and the multilateral efforts in the
Conference to reach agreement on such an international convention at an early date,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,192 and welcoming the unanimous reaffirmation by all judges of the Court
that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to
nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Recalling also paragraph 157 and other relevant recommendations in the Final Document of the Sixteenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August
2012,193 in which the Conference on Disarmament was called upon to establish, as soon as possible and as the
_______________
188

See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
189
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
190
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
191
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
192
A/51/218, annex.
193
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.

272

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

highest priority, an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament and to commence negotiations on a phased
programme for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified framework of time, including a
nuclear weapons convention,
Noting the adoption of the programme of work for the 2009 session by the Conference on Disarmament on
29 May 2009,194 after years of stalemate, while regretting that the Conference has not been able to undertake
substantive work on its agenda in 2015,
Welcoming the proposal submitted by the States members of the Conference on Disarmament that are
members of the Group of 21 on the follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear
disarmament, pursuant to Assembly resolution 68/32 of 5 December 2013,195
Welcoming also the re-establishment of the informal working group with a mandate to produce a programme
of work robust in substance and progressive over time in implementation by the Conference on Disarmament on
5 June 2015196 and the structured and substantive discussions on all agenda items held by the Conference during its
2015 session,
Reaffirming the importance and validity of the Conference on Disarmament as the sole multilateral
disarmament negotiating forum, and expressing the need to adopt and implement a balanced and comprehensive
programme of work on the basis of its agenda and dealing with, inter alia, four core issues, in accordance with the
rules of procedure,197 and by taking into consideration the security concerns of all States,
Reaffirming also the specific mandate conferred upon the Disarmament Commission by the General
Assembly, in its decision 52/492 of 8 September 1998, to discuss the subject of nuclear disarmament as one of its
main substantive agenda items,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,198 in which Heads of State and Government resolved
to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to keep all options
open for achieving that aim, including the possibility of convening an international conference to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers,
Underlining the importance of implementing its decision in resolution 68/32 to convene, no later than 2018, a
United Nations high-level international conference on nuclear disarmament to review the progress made in this
regard, and bearing in mind the Declaration on Nuclear Disarmament made at the Seventeenth Ministerial
Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Algiers from 26 to 29 May 2014, in which the
ministers reaffirmed the firm commitment of the Movement to the goal of a safer world for all and to achieving
peace and security in a world without nuclear weapons, and reiterated their support for the convening of a United
Nations high-level international conference,
Recalling the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament on 26 September 2013,
and the strong support for nuclear disarmament expressed therein,
Welcoming the commemoration of 26 September as the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons, as declared by the General Assembly in its resolutions 68/32 and 69/58 of 2 December 2014, devoted to
furthering this objective,
Taking note of the declaration of the States members of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean on the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, in Mexico
City on 26 September 2014,199

_______________
194

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/64/27), para. 18.
See CD/1999.
196
CD/2022.
197
CD/8/Rev.9.
198
Resolution 55/2.
199
A/C.1/69/2, annex.
195

273

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the successful convening of the first, second and third Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of
Nuclear Weapons, in Oslo on 4 and 5 March 2013, in Nayarit, Mexico, on 13 and 14 February 2014, and in Vienna
on 8 and 9 December 2014, respectively, and also noting that 120 nations have formally endorsed the Humanitarian
Pledge issued following the Third Conference,200
Welcoming the signing by the nuclear-weapon States, namely, China, France, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, of the Protocol to the
Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia, in New York on 6 May 2014,
Welcoming also the proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace on 29 January 2014
during the Second Summit of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, held in Havana on 28 and
29 January 2014,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, States should refrain from the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons in settling their disputes in international relations,
Seized of the danger of the use of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, in terrorist acts
and the urgent need for concerted international efforts to control and overcome it,
1. Urges all nuclear-weapon States to take effective disarmament measures to achieve the total elimination
of all nuclear weapons at the earliest possible time;
2. Reaffirms that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are substantively interrelated and
mutually reinforcing, that the two processes must go hand in hand and that there is a genuine need for a systematic
and progressive process of nuclear disarmament;
3. Welcomes and encourages the efforts to establish new nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of
the world, including the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons, on the basis of agreements or
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the regions concerned, which is an effective measure for limiting
the further spread of nuclear weapons geographically and contributes to the cause of nuclear disarmament;
4. Encourages States parties to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone201 and the
nuclear-weapon States to intensify ongoing efforts to resolve all outstanding issues, in accordance with the
objectives and principles of the Treaty, pertaining to the signing and ratifying of the Protocol to the Treaty;
5. Recognizes that there is a genuine need to diminish the role of nuclear weapons in strategic doctrines and
security policies to minimize the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total
elimination;
6. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to stop immediately the qualitative improvement, development,
production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and their delivery systems;
7. Also urges the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to de-alert and deactivate immediately
their nuclear weapons and to take other concrete measures to reduce further the operational status of their nuclearweapon systems, while stressing that reductions in deployments and in operational status cannot substitute for
irreversible cuts in and the total elimination of nuclear weapons;
8. Reiterates its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to carry out effective nuclear disarmament measures
with a view to achieving the total elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified framework of time;
9. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, pending the achievement of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, to agree on an internationally and legally binding instrument on a joint undertaking not to be the first to
use nuclear weapons;
_______________
200
201

274

See CD/2039.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

10. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to commence plurilateral negotiations among themselves at an
appropriate stage on further deep reductions of their nuclear weapons, in an irreversible, verifiable and transparent
manner, as an effective measure of nuclear disarmament;
11. Underlines the importance of applying the principles of transparency, irreversibility and verifiability to
the process of nuclear disarmament;
12. Also underlines the importance of the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, in the
Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all
States parties are committed under article VI of the Treaty,189 and the reaffirmation by the States parties that the total
elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;202
13. Calls for the full and effective implementation of the 13 practical steps for nuclear disarmament
contained in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference;189
14. Also calls for the full implementation of the action plan as set out in the conclusions and
recommendations for follow-on actions of the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference, particularly the
22 point action plan on nuclear disarmament;190
15. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to carry out further reductions of non-strategic nuclear weapons,
including on unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process;
16. Calls for the immediate commencement of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament, in the
context of an agreed, comprehensive and balanced programme of work, on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and
internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator203 and the mandate contained
therein;
17. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to commence as early as possible its substantive work during its
2016 session, while welcoming the re-establishment of the informal working group with a mandate to produce a
programme of work robust in substance and progressive over time in implementation, on the basis of a
comprehensive and balanced programme of work that takes into consideration all the real and existing priorities in
the field of disarmament and arms control, including the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty
with a view to their conclusion within five years;
18. Calls for the conclusion of an international legal instrument on unconditional security assurances to nonnuclear-weapon States against the threat or use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances;
19. Also calls for the early entry into force and strict observance of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty,191 while welcoming the latest ratification of the Treaty, by Angola on 20 March 2015;
20. Reiterates its call upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, as soon as possible and as the
highest priority, an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament in 2016 and to commence negotiations on a phased
programme of nuclear disarmament leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified
framework of time;
21. Calls for the convening, no later than 2018, of a United Nations high-level international conference on
nuclear disarmament to review the progress made in this regard;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Nuclear disarmament”.
_______________
202

2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VII and the security of non-nuclear-weapon States”, para. 2.
203
CD/1299.

275

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/53
A/RES/70/53

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)204

70/53.

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/66 of 8 December 2005, 61/75 of 6 December 2006, 62/43 of 5 December 2007,
63/68 of 2 December 2008, 64/49 of 2 December 2009, 65/68 of 8 December 2010, 68/50 of 5 December 2013 and
69/38 of 2 December 2014, as well as its decision 66/517 of 2 December 2011,
Recalling also the report of the Secretary-General of 15 October 1993 to the General Assembly at its fortyeighth session, the annex to which contains the study by governmental experts on the application of confidencebuilding measures in outer space,205
Reaffirming the right of all countries to explore and use outer space in accordance with international law,
Reaffirming also that preventing an arms race in outer space is in the interest of maintaining international
peace and security and is an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international cooperation in
the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Recalling, in this context, its resolutions 45/55 B of 4 December 1990 and 48/74 B of 16 December 1993, in
which, inter alia, the General Assembly recognized the need for increased transparency and confirmed the
importance of confidence-building measures as a means of reinforcing the objective of preventing an arms race in
outer space,
Noting the constructive debates that the Conference on Disarmament has held on this subject and the views
expressed by Member States,
Noting also the introduction by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference on Disarmament of the
draft treaty on prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of the threat or use of force against outer
space objects,206 and the submission of its updated version207 in 2014,
Noting further that, since 2004, several States208 have introduced a policy of not being the first State to place
weapons in outer space,
Noting the presentation by the European Union of a draft of a non-legally binding international code of
conduct for outer space activities,
Recognizing the work that takes place within the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and its Legal Subcommittee, which makes a significant contribution to the
promotion of the long-term sustainability of outer space activities,

_______________
204

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Ecuador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
205
A/48/305 and Corr.1.
206
See CD/1839.
207
See CD/1985.
208
Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Brazil, Cuba, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).

276

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the contribution of Member States that have submitted to the Secretary-General concrete proposals on
international outer space transparency and confidence-building measures pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution
61/75, paragraph 2 of resolution 62/43, paragraph 2 of resolution 63/68 and paragraph 2 of resolution 64/49,
Welcoming the work done in 2012 and 2013 by the group of governmental experts convened by the SecretaryGeneral, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, to conduct a study on outer space transparency and
confidence-building measures,
Noting the consideration of that study by the Committee during its fifty-eighth session, in 2015, at which it
found that the Committee had a fundamental role to play in enhancing transparency and confidence-building among
States, as well as in ensuring that outer space was maintained for peaceful purposes,209
Noting also the request by the Committee for a special report by the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space
Activities (UN-Space), as part of the United Nations system, for consideration at its fifty-ninth session, in 2016, on
the implementation of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Transparency and Confidence-building
Measures in Outer Space Activities,
Welcoming resolution 186 of 7 November 2014 on strengthening the role of the International
Telecommunication Union with regard to transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities,
adopted by the 2014 Plenipotentiary Conference of the Union, held in Busan, Republic of Korea, from 20 October
to 7 November 2014,
1. Stresses the importance of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Transparency and Confidence-building Measures in Outer Space Activities,210 considered
by the General Assembly on 5 December 2013;
2. Encourages Member States to continue to review and implement, to the greatest extent practicable, the
proposed transparency and confidence-building measures contained in the report, through the relevant national
mechanisms, on a voluntary basis and in a manner consistent with the national interests of Member States;
3. Also encourages Member States, in accordance with the recommendations contained in the report, with
a view to promoting the practical implementation of transparency and confidence-building measures, to hold regular
discussions in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, the Disarmament Commission and the
Conference on Disarmament on the prospects for their implementation;
4. Requests the relevant entities and organizations of the United Nations system, to which, in accordance
with resolution 68/50, the report was circulated, to assist in effectively implementing the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein, as appropriate;
5. Encourages the relevant entities and organizations of the United Nations system to coordinate, as
appropriate, on matters related to the recommendations contained in the report;
6. Welcomes the joint ad hoc meeting of the First and Fourth Committees on possible challenges to space
security and sustainability on 22 October 2015, convened in accordance with the report, and the substantive
exchange of opinions on various aspects of security in outer space that took place during the meeting;
7. Calls upon Member States and the relevant entities and organizations of the United Nations system to
support the implementation of the full range of conclusions and recommendations contained in the report;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the coordination of transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities in the United Nations
system, with an annex containing submissions from Member States giving their views on transparency and
confidence-building measures in outer space activities;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space
activities”.
_______________
209
210

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20).
A/68/189.

277

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/54
A/RES/70/54

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),211 by a recorded vote of 139 to 2, with 40 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia
Against: Russian Federation, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Bahrain, Belarus, Brazil, China, Cyprus, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Greece, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan,
Poland, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen

70/54.
A/RES/70/54.

Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/71 of 2 December 2008 on the Convention on Cluster Munitions,

Reaffirming its determination to put an end for all time to the suffering and casualties caused by cluster
munitions at the time of their use, when they fail to function as intended or when they are abandoned,
Concerned that cluster munition remnants kill or maim civilians, including women and children, obstruct
economic and social development, including through the loss of livelihood, impede post-conflict rehabilitation and
reconstruction, delay or prevent the return of refugees and internally displaced persons, can have a negative impact
on national and international peacebuilding and humanitarian assistance efforts, and have other severe consequences
for many years after use,
Deeply concerned about the dangers presented by the large national stockpiles of cluster munitions retained
for operational use, and determined to ensure their rapid destruction,
Believing it necessary to contribute effectively in an efficient, coordinated manner to resolving the challenge
of removing cluster munition remnants located throughout the world, and to ensure their destruction,
Mindful of the need to coordinate adequately efforts undertaken in various forums, including through the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,212 to address the rights and needs of victims of various types
of weapons, and resolved to avoid discrimination among victims of various types of weapons,
Reaffirming that in cases not covered by the Convention on Cluster Munitions213 or by other international
agreements, civilians and combatants remain under the protection and authority of the principles of international
law, derived from established custom, from the principles of humanity and from the dictates of public conscience,
_______________
211

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, France, Germany, Grenada, Guyana, Hungary,
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Portugal, San Marino, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Zambia.
212
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
213
Ibid., vol. 2688, No. 47713.

278

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the steps taken nationally, regionally and globally in recent years aimed at prohibiting, restricting
or suspending the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of cluster munitions, and welcoming in this regard that,
since 2014, all Central American States have joined the Convention, thus fulfilling their aspiration to become the
first cluster munitions-free region in the world,
Stressing the role of public conscience in furthering the principles of humanity, as evidenced by the global call
for an end to civilian suffering caused by cluster munitions, and recognizing the efforts to that end undertaken by the
United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Cluster Munition Coalition and numerous other
non-governmental organizations around the world,
Noting that a total of 118 States have joined the Convention on Cluster Munitions, 98 as States parties and 20
as signatories,
Taking note of the 2015 Dubrovnik Declaration and the Dubrovnik Action Plan adopted at the First Review
Conference of States Parties to the Convention on Cluster Munitions, held in Dubrovnik, Croatia, from 7 to
11 September 2015,
1. Urges all States outside the Convention on Cluster Munitions213 to join as soon as possible, whether by
ratifying or acceding to it, and all States parties that are in a position to do so to promote adherence to the
Convention through bilateral, subregional and multilateral contacts, outreach and other means;
2. Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of and compliance with the Convention,
including through the implementation of the Dubrovnik Action Plan;
3. Expresses strong concern regarding recent allegations, reports or documented evidence of the use of
cluster munitions in different parts of the world;
4. Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete and timely information as
required under article 7 of the Convention in order to promote transparency and compliance with the Convention;
5. Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to provide, on a voluntary basis,
information that could make the clearance and destruction of cluster munition remnants and related activities more
effective;
6. Reiterates its invitation and encouragement to all States parties, interested States, the United Nations,
other relevant international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Cluster Munition Coalition and other relevant non-governmental organizations to participate in the
future meetings of States parties to the Convention;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to convene the Meetings of States Parties to the Convention
on Cluster Munitions and to continue to render the necessary assistance and to provide such services as may be
necessary to fulfil the tasks entrusted to him by the Convention and the relevant decisions of the First Review
Conference;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions”.
RESOLUTION 70/55
A/RES/70/55

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),214 by a recorded vote of 168 to none, with 17 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,

_______________
214

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Belgium, Chile and Mozambique.

279

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Lebanon,
Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, United States of
America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam

70/55.

A/RES/70/55.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 54/54 B of 1 December 1999, 55/33 V of 20 November 2000, 56/24 M of
29 November 2001, 57/74 of 22 November 2002, 58/53 of 8 December 2003, 59/84 of 3 December 2004, 60/80 of
8 December 2005, 61/84 of 6 December 2006, 62/41 of 5 December 2007, 63/42 of 2 December 2008, 64/56 of
2 December 2009, 65/48 of 8 December 2010, 66/29 of 2 December 2011, 67/32 of 3 December 2012, 68/30 of
5 December 2013 and 69/34 of 2 December 2014,
Reaffirming its determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties caused by anti-personnel mines,
which kill or injure thousands of people – women, girls, boys and men – every year, and which place people living
in affected areas at risk and hinder the development of their communities,
Believing it necessary to do the utmost to contribute in an efficient and coordinated manner to facing the
challenge of removing anti-personnel mines placed throughout the world and to assure their destruction,
Wishing to do the utmost to ensure assistance for the care and rehabilitation, including the social and economic
reintegration, of mine victims,
Noting with satisfaction the work undertaken to implement the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction215 and the substantial
progress made towards addressing the global anti-personnel landmine problem,
Recalling the first to thirteenth meetings of the States parties to the Convention, held in Maputo (1999),
Geneva (2000), Managua (2001), Geneva (2002), Bangkok (2003), Zagreb (2005), Geneva (2006), the Dead Sea
(2007), Geneva (2008 and 2010), Phnom Penh (2011) and Geneva (2012 and 2013), and the First, Second and
Third Review Conferences of the States Parties to the Convention, held in Nairobi (2004), Cartagena, Colombia
(2009), and Maputo (2014),
Recalling also that, at the Third Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention, the international
community reviewed the implementation of the Convention and the States parties adopted a declaration and an
action plan for the period 2014–2019 to support enhanced implementation and promotion of the Convention,
Noting with satisfaction that 162 States have ratified or acceded to the Convention and have formally accepted
the obligations of the Convention,
Emphasizing the desirability of attracting the adherence of all States to the Convention, and determined to
work strenuously towards the promotion of its universalization and norms,

_______________
215

280

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting with regret that anti-personnel mines continue to be used in some conflicts around the world, causing
human suffering and impeding post-conflict development,
1. Invites all States that have not signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction215 to accede to it without delay;
2.
delay;

Urges the one remaining State that has signed but has not ratified the Convention to ratify it without

3. Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of and compliance with the Convention,
including through the continued implementation of the action plan for the period 2014–2019;
4. Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete and timely information as
required under article 7 of the Convention in order to promote transparency and compliance with the Convention;
5. Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to provide, on a voluntary basis,
information to make global mine action efforts more effective;
6. Renews its call upon all States and other relevant parties to work together to promote, support and
advance the care, rehabilitation and social and economic reintegration of mine victims, mine risk education
programmes and the removal and destruction of anti-personnel mines placed or stockpiled throughout the world;
7. Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political level and, where in a position to do
so, to promote adherence to the Convention through bilateral, subregional, regional and multilateral contacts,
outreach, seminars and other means;
8. Reiterates its invitation and encouragement to all interested States, the United Nations, other relevant
international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and
relevant non-governmental organizations to attend the Fourteenth Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention, to
be held in Geneva during the week of 30 November to 4 December 2015, and to participate in the future
programme of meetings of the States parties to the Convention;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with article 11, paragraph 1, of the Convention, to
undertake the preparations necessary to convene the Fifteenth Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention and,
on behalf of the States parties and in accordance with article 11, paragraph 4, of the Convention, to invite States not
parties to the Convention, as well as the United Nations, other relevant international organizations or institutions,
regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental organizations,
to attend the Fifteenth Meeting of the States Parties as observers;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction”.
RESOLUTION 70/56
A/RES/70/56

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),216 by a recorded vote of 137 to 24, with 25 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,

_______________
216

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Fiji, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.

281

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against: Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Canada, Croatia, Finland, Georgia, Iceland, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Palau, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Zambia

70/56.

A/RES/70/56.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat
or use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 49/75 K of 15 December 1994, 51/45 M of 10 December 1996, 52/38 O of
9 December 1997, 53/77 W of 4 December 1998, 54/54 Q of 1 December 1999, 55/33 X of 20 November 2000,
56/24 S of 29 November 2001, 57/85 of 22 November 2002, 58/46 of 8 December 2003, 59/83 of 3 December
2004, 60/76 of 8 December 2005, 61/83 of 6 December 2006, 62/39 of 5 December 2007, 63/49 of 2 December
2008, 64/55 of 2 December 2009, 65/76 of 8 December 2010, 66/46 of 2 December 2011, 67/33 of 3 December
2012, 68/42 of 5 December 2013 and 69/43 of 2 December 2014,
Convinced that the continuing existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to humanity and all life on Earth,
and recognizing that the only defence against a nuclear catastrophe is the total elimination of nuclear weapons and
the certainty that they will never be produced again,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the realization of the goal of a nuclearweapon-free world through the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,217 particularly to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating
to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament adopted at the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,218 the
unequivocal commitment of nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals
leading to nuclear disarmament, agreed at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,219 and the action points agreed at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as part of the conclusions and recommendations for followon actions on nuclear disarmament,220
Sharing the deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and
in this context reaffirming the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law,
_______________
217

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex, decision 2.
219
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
220
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)), vol. I, part I.
218

282

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Calling upon all nuclear-weapon States to undertake concrete disarmament efforts, and stressing that all States
need to make special efforts to achieve and maintain a world without nuclear weapons,
Noting the five-point proposal for nuclear disarmament of the Secretary-General, in which he proposes, inter
alia, the consideration of negotiations on a nuclear weapons convention or agreement on a framework of separate
mutually reinforcing instruments, backed by a strong system of verification,
Recalling the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in its resolution 50/245 of
10 September 1996, and expressing its satisfaction at the increasing number of States that have signed and ratified
the Treaty,
Recognizing with satisfaction that the Antarctic Treaty,221 the treaties of Tlatelolco,222 Rarotonga,223
Bangkok224 and Pelindaba225 and the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia, as well as Mongolia’s
nuclear-weapon-free status, are gradually freeing the entire southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered by
those treaties from nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the need for a multilaterally negotiated and legally binding instrument to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the threat or use of nuclear weapons pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming the central role of the Conference on Disarmament as the sole multilateral disarmament
negotiating forum,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence negotiations on a phased programme
for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of time,
Stressing the urgent need for the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate concrete progress on the 13 practical
steps to implement article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons leading to nuclear
disarmament, contained in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference,219
Taking note of the Model Nuclear Weapons Convention that was submitted to the Secretary-General by Costa
Rica and Malaysia in 2007 and circulated by the Secretary-General,226
Desiring to achieve the objective of a legally binding prohibition of the development, production, testing,
deployment, stockpiling, threat or use of nuclear weapons and their destruction under effective international control,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,227
1. Underlines once again the unanimous conclusion of the International Court of Justice that there exists an
obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control;
2. Calls once again upon all States immediately to fulfil that obligation by commencing multilateral
negotiations leading to an early conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention prohibiting the development,
production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, transfer, threat or use of nuclear weapons and providing for their
elimination;
3. Requests all States to inform the Secretary-General of the efforts and measures they have taken with
respect to the implementation of the present resolution and nuclear disarmament, and requests the Secretary-General
to apprise the General Assembly of that information at its seventy-first session;

_______________
221

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
Ibid., vol. 634, No. 9068.
223
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
224
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
225
A/50/426, annex.
226
A/62/650, annex.
227
A/51/218, annex.
222

283

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons”.
RESOLUTION 70/57
A/RES/70/57

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),228 by a recorded vote of 133 to 23, with 28 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Poland, Republic of Korea, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, China, Croatia, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, India, Ireland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Montenegro, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine

70/57.
A/RES/70/57.

Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World

The General Assembly,
Recalling its longstanding support for the total elimination of all nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the need to achieve a world without nuclear weapons,

Emphasizing, in this regard, the fundamental role of the agreement on the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly of 30 June 1978,229 in which it is stated, inter alia, that “effective measures
of nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war have the highest priority”,
Emphasizing also the crucial role of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons230 in achieving
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, and recalling in particular the unequivocal undertaking by the
nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament,
in accordance with commitments made under article VI of the Treaty, agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and reaffirmed by the 2010 Review
Conference,

_______________
228

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Benin,
Central African Republic, Chad, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Malawi, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Morocco, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Qatar, Samoa, Senegal, Solomon Islands, Tajikistan, Tonga,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
229
Resolution S-10/2.
230
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

284

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Bearing in mind the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,231 in which the Court concluded unanimously that there exists an
obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control,
Acknowledging the significant contribution made towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation, pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, through the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones, although they are not an end in themselves, and reaffirming the political decision of 115 States parties to
the treaties that establish nuclear-weapon-free zones and Mongolia to reject nuclear weapons,
Recalling the relevant principles and agreements of international humanitarian law and the laws of war, and
noting the expression of deep concern by the 2010 Review Conference at the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons,232
1. Adopts the Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World annexed to the
present resolution;
2. Invites States, agencies and organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to disseminate the Declaration and to promote its implementation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session a report
on the implementation of the Declaration;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session, under the item entitled
“General and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a NuclearWeapon-Free World”.
Annex
Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World
1. We, the States Members of the United Nations, declare our shared commitment to the goal of achieving
a nuclear-weapon-free world.
2. We reiterate our grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by the existence of nuclear weapons,
and reaffirm that their total elimination remains the only absolute guarantee against their use or threat of use.
3. We call upon all States to promote an atmosphere of confidence and trust to further comprehensive,
sustainable international security and stability so as to contribute to a nuclear-weapon-free world.
4. We reaffirm that any use of nuclear weapons will be in contravention of the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations and will be a violation of international law, in particular international humanitarian law, and also
reiterate that nuclear weapons pose a serious threat to the very survival of humankind.
5. We emphasize the need to ensure that national policies and practices are consistent with the goal of
achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world.
6. We reiterate our deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons, and in this context call upon all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law.

_______________
231

A/51/218, annex.
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.
232

285

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

7. We reiterate our concern at the human and economic resources that continue to be dedicated to the
development, maintenance and modernization of nuclear weapons, and stress the need to invest those resources in
strengthening peace and security and sustainable development and lifting the lives of millions of people out of
poverty.
8. We reaffirm the central role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control processes.
9. We reaffirm multilateralism as the core principle in negotiations in the area of disarmament and nonproliferation and recognize the urgent need to achieve progress towards multilateral negotiations on nuclear
disarmament, in particular to enable the Conference on Disarmament to perform its mandate as set out in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly of 30 June 1978.233
10. We reaffirm that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing processes.
11. We stress the need for effective measures of nuclear disarmament, which have the highest priority, and
call upon all nuclear-weapon-possessing States to eliminate all types of their nuclear weapons and in the meantime
diminish the role of nuclear weapons in security policies and avoid activities that hamper the achievement of a
world free of nuclear weapons.
12. We reiterate that each article of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons234 is binding on
its States parties at all times and in all circumstances and call upon the nuclear-weapon States to implement their
obligations under the Treaty and commitments made at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences.
13. We reaffirm our determination to implement nuclear disarmament commitments and obligations and to
advance additional measures to strengthen the rule of law in disarmament, including the negotiation and adoption of
a global, non-discriminatory, multilateral, legally binding instrument for the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
14. We recognize that achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world will be realized through a phased process that
should have an agreed timeline.
15. We call upon all States to take further practical steps leading to nuclear disarmament in accordance with
the principles contained in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly of
30 June 1978.
16. We reaffirm that disarmament measures concerning nuclear weapons should satisfy multilaterally
agreed criteria of strict verification, irreversibility and transparency and be undertaken through legally binding
commitments to achieve the total elimination of all nuclear weapons.
17. We encourage all States concerned to establish further nuclear-weapon-free zones in accordance with the
Disarmament Commission guidelines of 1999,235 and strongly call for the full and speedy implementation of the
General Assembly resolutions on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
18. We commend the contributions made thus far, and call upon all States, the United Nations system,
regional organizations, parliamentarians, civil society, academia, the mass media and individuals to take further
actions aimed at achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world, inter alia, through promoting the International Day for the
Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons.
19. We encourage all States, the United Nations system, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and civil society to promote disarmament and non-proliferation education aimed at achieving a
nuclear-weapon-free world.
_______________
233

Resolution S-10/2.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
235
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex I, sect. C.
234

286

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/58
A/RES/70/58

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/460,
para. 94),236 by a recorded vote of 157 to none, with 26 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Nicaragua,
Oman, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe

70/58.
A/RES/70/58.

The Arms Trade Treaty

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 61/89 of 6 December 2006, 63/240 of 24 December 2008, 64/48 of 2 December
2009, 67/234 A of 24 December 2012, 67/234 B of 2 April 2013, 68/31 of 5 December 2013 and 69/49 of
2 December 2014, and its decision 66/518 of 2 December 2011,
Recognizing that disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security,
Recognizing also the security, social, economic and humanitarian consequences of the illicit and unregulated
trade in conventional arms,
Recognizing further the legitimate political, security, economic and commercial interests of States in the
international trade in conventional arms,
Underlining the need to prevent and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional arms and to prevent their
diversion to the illicit market, or for unauthorized end use and end users, including the commission of
terrorist acts,

_______________
236

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chad, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and Uruguay.

287

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the contribution made by the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,237 as well as the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of
and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,238 and the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons,239
Recognizing the important role that civil society organizations, including non-governmental organizations, and
industry play, by raising awareness, in efforts to prevent and eradicate the unregulated and illicit trade in
conventional arms and prevent their diversion and in supporting the implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty,240
Welcoming the adoption by the General Assembly and the entry into force of the Treaty on 2 April 2013 and
24 December 2014, respectively, and noting that the Treaty remains open for accession by any State that has not
signed it,
1. Welcomes the decisions taken at the First Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty, held in
Cancun, Mexico, from 24 to 27 August 2015, and notes that the Second Conference of States Parties will be held
in 2016;
2. Acknowledges the work carried out by the provisional secretariat in preparation for the First Conference
of States Parties and the support provided;
3. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to ratify, accept, approve or accede to the Treaty,
according to their respective constitutional processes;
4. Calls upon those States parties in a position to do so to provide assistance, including legal or legislative
assistance, institutional capacity-building and technical, material or financial assistance, to requesting States in order
to promote the universalization of the Treaty;
5. Stresses the vital importance of the full and effective implementation of and compliance with all
provisions of the Treaty by States parties, and urges them to meet their obligations under the Treaty;
6. Recognizes the complementarity among all relevant international instruments on conventional arms and
the Treaty, and to this end urges all States to implement effective national measures to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit and unregulated trade in conventional arms in fulfilment of their respective international obligations and
commitments;
7. Encourages all States parties to make available their initial report, as well as their first annual report for
the preceding calendar year, as required under article 13 of the Treaty, thereby enhancing confidence, transparency,
trust and accountability;
8. Encourages States parties and signatory States in a position to do so to provide financial assistance,
through a voluntary sponsorship fund, that could contribute to meeting the costs of participation in meetings under
the Treaty for those States that would otherwise be unable to attend;
9. Encourages States parties to strengthen their cooperation with civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, industry and relevant international organizations and to work with other States parties at the national
and regional levels, with the aim of ensuring the effective implementation of the Treaty;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “The Arms Trade Treaty”, and to review the implementation of
the present resolution at that session.
_______________
237

Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
238
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2326, No. 39574.
239
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and Corr.2, annex.
240
See resolution 67/234 B.

288

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/59
A/RES/70/59

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)241

70/59.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind resolutions CM/Res.1153 (XLVIII) of 1988242 and CM/Res.1225 (L) of 1989,243 adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, concerning the dumping of nuclear and industrial
wastes in Africa,
Welcoming resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/530 establishing the Code of Practice on the International
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, adopted on 21 September 1990 by the General Conference of the
International Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-fourth regular session,
Taking note of the commitment made by the participants in the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security, held
in Moscow on 19 and 20 April 1996, to ban the dumping at sea of radioactive wastes,244
Considering its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which the General Assembly requested
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,245 inter alia, to consider effective methods of control against the
use of radiological methods of warfare,
Aware of the potential hazards underlying any use of radioactive wastes that would constitute radiological
warfare and its implications for regional and international security, in particular for the security of developing
countries,
Recalling all its resolutions on the matter since its forty-third session in 1988, including its resolution 51/45 J
of 10 December 1996,
Recalling also resolution GC(45)/RES/10, adopted by consensus on 21 September 2001 by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its forty-fifth regular session, in which States shipping
radioactive materials are invited to provide, as appropriate, assurances to concerned States, upon their request, that
the national regulations of the shipping State take into account the Agency’s transport regulations and to provide
them with relevant information relating to the shipment of such materials; with the information provided being in no
case contradictory to the measures of physical security and safety,
Welcoming the adoption, in Vienna on 5 September 1997, of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management,246 as recommended by the participants in the
Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security,
Welcoming also the convening by the International Atomic Energy Agency of the Ministerial Conference on
Nuclear Safety, in Vienna from 20 to 24 June 2011, and its outcome, the Declaration of the International Atomic
Energy Agency Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety, as well as the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, endorsed
by the General Conference of the Agency at its fifty-fifth regular session,
Noting the convening by the Secretary-General of the high-level meeting on nuclear safety and security, in
New York on 22 September 2011,
Noting with satisfaction that the Joint Convention entered into force on 18 June 2001,
_______________
241

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Belize, Dominican Republic, and Nigeria (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States).
242
See A/43/398, annex I.
243
See A/44/603, annex I.
244
A/51/131, annex I, para. 20.
245
The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament became the Committee on Disarmament as from the tenth special session of the
General Assembly. The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.
246
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2153, No. 37605.

289

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting that the first Review Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management was convened in Vienna from 3 to
14 November 2003,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, the first special session devoted to disarmament,247
1. Takes note of the part of the report of the Conference on Disarmament relating to radiological
weapons;248
2. Also takes note of the Declaration of the International Atomic Energy Agency Ministerial Conference on
Nuclear Safety, the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety and the high-level meeting on nuclear safety and security
convened by the Secretary-General;
3. Expresses grave concern regarding any use of nuclear wastes that would constitute radiological warfare
and have grave implications for the national security of all States;
4. Calls upon all States to take appropriate measures with a view to preventing any dumping of nuclear or
radioactive wastes that would infringe upon the sovereignty of States;
5. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to take into account, in any negotiations for a convention on
the prohibition of radiological weapons, radioactive wastes as part of the scope of such a convention;
6. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to continue to consider such a convention and to include in
its report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session the progress recorded in the negotiations on this subject;
7. Takes note of resolution CM/Res.1356 (LIV) of 1991, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity,249 on the Bamako Convention on the Ban on the Import of Hazardous Wastes into
Africa and on the Control of Their Transboundary Movements within Africa;
8. Expresses the hope that the effective implementation of the International Atomic Energy Agency Code
of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste will enhance the protection of all
States from the dumping of radioactive wastes on their territories;
9. Appeals to all Member States that have not yet taken the steps necessary to become party to the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management246 to do
so as soon as possible;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, under the item entitled
“General and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes”.
RESOLUTION 70/60
A/RES/70/60

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/460, para. 94)250

70/60.

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 66/43 of 2 December 2011 and 68/49 of 5 December 2013, entitled “Treaty on the
South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)”,
_______________
247

Resolution S-10/2.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/70/27), sect. III.E.
249
See A/46/390, annex I.
250
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Australia, Bangladesh, China,
Colombia, Egypt, Fiji, France, Georgia, Grenada, Guinea, Haiti, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Malaysia (on behalf of
the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the States parties to the
Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)), Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Solomon Islands, Swaziland, Timor-Leste, Tonga, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uzbekistan.
248

290

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the desire of the South-East Asian States to maintain peace and stability in the region in the spirit
of peaceful coexistence and mutual understanding and cooperation,
Noting the entry into force on 15 December 2008 of the Charter of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations,251 in which it is stated, inter alia, that one of the purposes of the Association is to preserve South-East Asia
as a nuclear-weapon-free zone, free of all other weapons of mass destruction,
Welcoming the convening by Indonesia of the third Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties
that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia on 24 April 2015,
Reaffirming its conviction of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones, established, where appropriate,
on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among States of the region concerned and in accordance with the 1999
guidelines of the Disarmament Commission,252 in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime, in
contributing towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament and in extending the areas of the world that are
free of nuclear weapons, and, with particular reference to the responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States, calling
upon all States to seek a safer world for all and to achieve peace and security in a world without nuclear weapons in
a way that promotes international stability and based on the principle of undiminished security for all,
Convinced that the establishment of a South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, as an essential component
of the Declaration on the Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality, signed in Kuala Lumpur on 27 November 1971,
will contribute towards strengthening the security of States within the Zone and towards enhancing international
peace and security as a whole,
Noting the entry into force of the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone253 on 27 March
1997 and the tenth anniversary of its entry into force, in 2007,
Welcoming the reaffirmation of South-East Asian States that the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
shall continue to play a pivotal role in the area of confidence-building measures, preventive diplomacy and the
approaches to conflict resolution as enshrined in the Declaration of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Concord II (Bali Concord II),254
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in
conformity with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,255
Recognizing that, by signing and ratifying the relevant protocols to the treaties establishing nuclear-weaponfree zones, nuclear-weapon States would undertake individual legally binding commitments to respect the status of
such zones and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against States parties to such treaties,
Recalling the statement of the Chairman of the twenty-second Association of Southeast Asian Nations Summit
and the joint communiqué of the forty-sixth, forty-seventh and forty-eighth ministerial meetings of the Association,
Recalling also the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to the freedom of the high seas
and the rights of innocent passage, archipelagic sea lanes passage or transit passage of ships and aircraft, particularly
those of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,256
1. Welcomes the commitment and efforts of the Commission for the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone to further enhance and strengthen the implementation of the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-WeaponFree Zone (Bangkok Treaty)253 by implementing the plan of action for the period 2013–2017 adopted in Bandar Seri
Begawan on 30 June 2013, with a renewed commitment and a stronger emphasis on concrete actions, and the
decision of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Political-Security Community Council, established under the
Charter of the Association,251 to give priority to the implementation of the plan of action;
_______________
251

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2624, No. 46745.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42).
253
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
254
A/58/548, annex I.
255
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
256
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.
252

291

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Bears in mind that the adoption of ASEAN 2025: Forging Ahead Together at the twenty-seventh
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Summit, in Kuala Lumpur, would set out the road map for the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations for the next 10 years, and encourages States parties to the Treaty and the nuclear-weapon
States to intensify ongoing efforts to resolve all outstanding issues, in accordance with the objectives and principles
of the Treaty, pertaining to the signing and ratifying of the Protocol to that Treaty at the earliest;
3. Underlines the value of enhancing and implementing further ways and means of cooperation among the
States parties to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties and the protocols thereto, with a view to strengthening the nonproliferation regime and to contributing towards realizing the objective of nuclear disarmament;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, under the item entitled
“General and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone (Bangkok Treaty)”.
RESOLUTION 70/61
A/RES/70/61

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/461, para. 21)257

70/61.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/83 of 8 December 2005, 61/90 of 6 December 2006, 62/50 of 5 December 2007,
63/76 of 2 December 2008, 64/58 of 2 December 2009, 65/78 of 8 December 2010, 66/53 of 2 December 2011,
67/63 of 3 December 2012, 68/57 of 5 December 2013 and 69/70 of 2 December 2014 regarding the maintenance
and revitalization of the three United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament,
Recalling also the reports of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa,258 the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the
Pacific259 and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean,260
Reaffirming its decision, taken in 1982 at its twelfth special session, to establish the United Nations
Disarmament Information Programme, the purpose of which is to inform, educate and generate public
understanding and support for the objectives of the United Nations in the field of arms control and disarmament,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 J of 3 December 1986, 42/39 D of
30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of 15 December 1989 on the regional centres for peace and disarmament in Nepal,
Peru and Togo,
Recognizing that the changes that have taken place in the world have created new opportunities and posed
new challenges for the pursuit of disarmament, and bearing in mind in this regard that the regional centres for peace
and disarmament can contribute substantially to understanding and cooperation among States in each particular
region in the areas of peace, disarmament and development,
Noting that, in paragraph 178 of the Final Document of the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran on 30 and 31 August 2012,261 the Heads of State or
Government emphasized the importance of United Nations activities at the regional level to increase the stability
and security of its Member States, which could be promoted in a substantive manner by the maintenance and
revitalization of the three regional centres for peace and disarmament,
_______________
257

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
258
A/70/116.
259
A/70/114.
260
A/70/138.
261
A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.

292

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1. Reiterates the importance of United Nations activities at the regional level to advance disarmament and
to increase the stability and security of its Member States, which could be promoted in a substantive manner by the
maintenance and revitalization of the three regional centres for peace and disarmament;
2. Reaffirms that, in order to achieve positive results, it is useful for the three regional centres to carry out
dissemination and educational programmes that promote regional peace and security and that are aimed at changing
basic attitudes with respect to peace and security and disarmament so as to support the achievement of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations;
3. Appeals to Member States in each region that are able to do so, as well as to international governmental
and non-governmental organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions to the regional centres in
their respective regions in order to strengthen their activities and initiatives;
4. Emphasizes the importance of the activities of the Regional Disarmament Branch of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all support necessary, within existing resources, to the
regional centres in carrying out their programmes of activities;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 70/62
A/RES/70/62

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/461,
para. 21),262 by a recorded vote of 130 to 48, with 8 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Belarus, Japan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Serbia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan

70/62.
A/RES/70/62.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to the survival of mankind,

_______________
262

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan,
Cambodia, Chile, Congo, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritius, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zambia.

293

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Bearing in mind the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 8 July 1996 on the legality of the
threat or use of nuclear weapons,263
Convinced that a multilateral, universal and binding agreement prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons would contribute to the elimination of the nuclear threat and to the climate for negotiations leading to the
ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons, thereby strengthening international peace and security,
Conscious that some steps taken by the Russian Federation and the United States of America towards a
reduction of their nuclear weapons and the improvement in the international climate can contribute towards the goal
of the complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Recalling that in paragraph 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly264
it is stated that all States should actively participate in efforts to bring about conditions in international relations
among States in which a code of peaceful conduct of nations in international affairs could be agreed upon and which
would preclude the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that any use of nuclear weapons would be a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and a
crime against humanity, as declared in its resolutions 1653 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 33/71 B of 14 December
1978, 34/83 G of 11 December 1979, 35/152 D of 12 December 1980 and 36/92 I of 9 December 1981,
Determined to achieve an international convention prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and
use of nuclear weapons, leading to their ultimate destruction,
Stressing that an international convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would be an
important step in a phased programme towards the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, with a specified
framework of time,
Noting with regret that the Conference on Disarmament, during its 2015 session, was unable to undertake
negotiations on this subject as called for in General Assembly resolution 69/69 of 2 December 2014,
1. Reiterates its request to the Conference on Disarmament to commence negotiations in order to reach
agreement on an international convention prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any
circumstances;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report to the General Assembly on the results of those
negotiations.
RESOLUTION 70/63
A/RES/70/63

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/461, para. 21)265

70/63.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 41/60 J of 3 December 1986, 42/39 K of 30 November 1987 and 43/76 H of
7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin
America and the Caribbean, with headquarters in Lima,
Recalling also its resolution 69/72 of 2 December 2014, as well as all previous resolutions on the Regional
Centre,
Recognizing that the Regional Centre has continued to provide substantive support for the implementation of
regional and subregional initiatives and has intensified its contribution to the coordination of United Nations efforts
towards peace and disarmament and for the promotion of economic and social development,
_______________
263

A/51/218, annex.
Resolution S-10/2.
265
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Peru (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States).
264

294

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming the mandate of the Regional Centre to provide, on request, substantive support for the initiatives
and other activities of the Member States of the region for the implementation of measures for peace and
disarmament and for the promotion of economic and social development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,266 and expressing its appreciation for the important
assistance provided, upon request, by the Regional Centre to several countries in the region, including through
capacity-building and technical assistance activities for the implementation of disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control instruments,
Welcoming the support provided by the Regional Centre to Member States in the implementation of
disarmament and non-proliferation instruments,
Emphasizing the need for the Regional Centre to develop and strengthen its activities and programmes in a
comprehensive and balanced manner, in accordance with its mandate and in line with the requests for assistance by
Member States,
Welcoming the ongoing support provided by the Regional Centre to Member States in the implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects,267
Welcoming also the assistance provided by the Regional Centre to some States, upon request, in the
management and securing of national weapons stockpiles and in the identification and destruction of surplus,
obsolete or seized weapons and ammunition, as declared by competent national authorities, in particular the
establishment of a regional training centre in Port of Spain to manage weapons stockpiles,
Welcoming further the initiative of the Regional Centre to continue to conduct activities in line with efforts to
promote the equitable representation of women in all decision-making processes with regard to matters related to
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control, as encouraged in its resolutions 65/69 of 8 December 2010, 67/48
of 3 December 2012, 68/33 of 5 December 2013 and 69/61 of 2 December 2014,
Recalling the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the relationship between disarmament and
development,268 referred to in General Assembly resolution 59/78 of 3 December 2004, which is of utmost interest
with regard to the role that the Regional Centre plays in promoting the issue in the region in pursuit of its mandate to
promote economic and social development related to peace and disarmament,
Noting that security, disarmament and development issues have always been recognized as significant topics in
Latin America and the Caribbean, the first inhabited region in the world to be declared a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Emphasizing the importance of maintaining the support provided by the Regional Centre for strengthening the
nuclear-weapon-free zone established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco),269 as well as its efforts in promoting peace and disarmament education,
Bearing in mind the important role of the Regional Centre in promoting confidence-building measures, arms
control and limitation, disarmament and development at the regional level,
Recognizing the importance of information, research, education and training for peace, disarmament and
development in order to achieve understanding and cooperation among States,
1. Reiterates its strong support for the role of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean in the promotion of activities of the United Nations at the
regional and subregional levels to strengthen peace, disarmament, stability, security and development among its
Member States;
2. Welcomes the activities carried out in the past year by the Regional Centre, and requests the Centre to
continue to take into account the proposals to be submitted by the countries of the region for the implementation of
_______________
266

A/70/138.
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
268
See A/59/119.
269
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
267

295

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

the mandate of the Centre in the areas of peace, disarmament and development and for the promotion of, inter alia,
nuclear disarmament, the prevention, combating and eradication of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
ammunition and explosives, confidence-building measures, arms control and limitation, transparency, and the
reduction and prevention of armed violence at the regional and subregional levels;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the political support provided by Member States, as well as for the
financial contributions made by Member States, international governmental and non-governmental organizations
and foundations, to strengthen the Regional Centre, its programme of activities and the implementation thereof, and
encourages them to continue to make and to increase voluntary contributions;
4. Invites all States of the region to continue to take part in the activities of the Regional Centre, proposing
items for inclusion in its programme of activities and maximizing the potential of the Centre to meet the current
challenges facing the international community with a view to fulfilling the aims of the Charter of the United Nations
in the areas of peace, disarmament and development;
5. Recognizes that the Regional Centre has an important role in the promotion and development of regional
and subregional initiatives agreed upon by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean in the field of weapons
of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and conventional arms, including small arms and light weapons,
in the relationship between disarmament and development, in the promotion of the participation of women in this
field and in strengthening voluntary confidence-building measures among the countries of the region;
6. Encourages the Regional Centre to further develop activities in all countries of the region in the
important areas of peace, disarmament and development and to provide, upon request and in accordance with its
mandate, support to Member States of the region in the national implementation of relevant instruments, inter alia,
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects267 and the Arms Trade Treaty,270 as well as in the implementation of the Caribbean 1540 programme
on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean”.
RESOLUTION 70/64
A/RES/70/64

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/461, para. 21)271

70/64.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 69/73 of 2 December 2014,
Recalling also the guidelines for general and complete disarmament adopted at its tenth special session, the
first special session devoted to disarmament,
Bearing in mind the establishment by the Secretary-General on 28 May 1992 of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, the purpose of which is to encourage arms limitation,
disarmament, non-proliferation and development in the Central Africa subregion,
_______________
270

See resolution 67/234 B.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Angola (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Economic Community of Central African States).
271

296

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming that the purpose of the Standing Advisory Committee is to conduct reconstruction and
confidence-building activities in Central Africa among its member States, including through confidence-building
and arms limitation measures,
Welcoming the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty272 on 24 December 2014, and taking note of the First
Conference of States Parties, held in Cancun, Mexico, from 24 to 27 August 2015, and taking note also of the Fifth
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York from 16 to
20 June 2014, and the second Open-ended Meeting of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in New York from 1 to 5 June 2015,
Convinced that the resources released by disarmament, including regional disarmament, can be devoted to
economic and social development and to the protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries,
Welcoming the declaration on a road map for counter-terrorism and non-proliferation of arms in Central
Africa, adopted by the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee on 8 December 2011 at their thirtythird ministerial meeting, held in Bangui from 5 to 9 December 2011,273 and the progress made towards its
implementation, including most recently through the holding of the workshop on human rights and prevention of
violent extremism, in Luanda from 24 to 26 February 2015, the workshop on money-laundering and terrorism
financing, in Libreville on 19 and 20 May 2015, the workshop on the judicial challenges arising in the context of
counter-terrorism operations, in Libreville from 29 September to 1 October 2015, and the workshop on the
validation of a draft regional strategy and plan of action on counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of small arms
and light weapons in Central Africa by national focal points, in Libreville on 1 and 2 October 2015,
Noting with appreciation the support of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre in making these
workshops possible through technical and financial support, and the substantive contribution of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate throughout the project,
Bearing in mind that the implementation of the road map should be compliant with relevant legal and
administrative obligations, as set out in Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001,
1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005 and 1963 (2010) of 20 December 2010, as well as the four pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,274
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures taken on the initiative and
with the participation of all States concerned and taking into account the specific characteristics of each region, since
such measures can contribute to regional stability and to international peace and security,
Convinced that development can be achieved only in a climate of peace, security and mutual confidence both
within and among States,
Recalling the Brazzaville Declaration on Cooperation for Peace and Security in Central Africa,275 the Bata
Declaration for the Promotion of Lasting Democracy, Peace and Development in Central Africa276 and the Yaoundé
Declaration on Peace, Security and Stability in Central Africa,277
Bearing in mind resolutions 1196 (1998) and 1197 (1998), adopted by the Security Council on 16 and
18 September 1998, respectively, following its consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,278

_______________
272

See resolution 67/234 B.
A/67/72-S/2012/159, annex, attachment I.
274
Resolution 60/288.
275
A/50/474, annex I.
276
A/53/258-S/1998/763, annex II, appendix I.
277
A/53/868-S/1999/303, annex II.
278
A/52/871-S/1998/318.
273

297

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the successful conclusion of the Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety
and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé on 24 and 25 June 2013, the inauguration in Yaoundé, on
11 September 2014, of the Interregional Coordination Centre for maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, and the
launch of the Multinational Maritime Coordination Centre in Cotonou, Benin, in March 2015,
Recalling its resolution 69/314 of 30 July 2015, the first such resolution on tackling illicit trafficking in
wildlife, and welcoming the outcome of the high-level meetings on poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking, held on
the margins of the high-level segments of the sixty-eighth and sixty-ninth sessions of the General Assembly, hosted
by Gabon and Germany,
Emphasizing the need to strengthen the capacity for conflict prevention and peacekeeping in Africa, and
taking note in this regard of the concrete conflict prevention initiatives facilitated by the Department of Political
Affairs of the Secretariat,
Welcoming the close cooperation established between the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the Economic Community of Central African States, as well as the signing of a framework of cooperation
agreement between the two entities on 3 May 2012,
Bearing in mind the increased focus of the Standing Advisory Committee on human security questions, such
as trafficking in persons, especially women and children, as an important consideration for subregional peace,
stability and conflict prevention,
Welcoming the holding of the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation, in Bangui from 4 to 11 May 2015,
chaired by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Central Africa, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, and
calling for the swift implementation of its conclusions as contained in the Republican Pact (Pacte républicain)
between the State and its citizens, and in the agreement on the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
reinsertion of former combatants,
Expressing continued concern about the situation in the Central African Republic and affected neighbouring
countries, and noting the importance of holding legislative and presidential elections before the end of 2015, with a
view to concluding the political transition and returning to constitutional order,
Expressing concern about the increasing impact of cross-border criminality, in particular the activities of the
Lord’s Resistance Army, the terrorist attacks by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin region and incidents of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea, on peace, security and development in Central Africa,
Commending the efforts by the Lake Chad Basin member States and Benin to fully operationalize the
Multinational Joint Task Force to effectively combat the threat posed by the Boko Haram terrorist group to the Lake
Chad Basin region, and taking note of the establishment of the operational headquarters of the Joint Task Force in
N’Djamena,
Considering the urgent need to prevent the possible movement of illicit weapons, mercenaries and combatants
involved in conflicts in the Sahel and in neighbouring countries in the Central African subregion,
1. Reaffirms its support for efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building measures at the regional and
subregional levels in order to ease tensions and conflicts in Central Africa and to further sustainable peace, stability
and development in the subregion;
2. Reaffirms the importance of disarmament and arms control programmes in Central Africa carried out by
the States of the subregion with the support of the United Nations, the African Union and other international
partners;
3. Encourages Member States to provide assistance to those States members of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa that have ratified the Arms Trade Treaty,272
and encourages those that have not yet done so to ratify the Treaty;
4. Welcomes the steps taken by States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to facilitate the early
entry into force of the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly
298

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(Kinshasa Convention),279 and encourages States members of the Standing Advisory Committee and other
interested States to provide financial support for the implementation of the Convention;
5. Encourages States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to implement the declaration on a
road map for counter-terrorism and non-proliferation of arms in Central Africa,273 and requests the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the
international community to support those measures;
6. Welcomes the adoption by the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee of the integrated
strategy on counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa;
7. Encourages the Economic Community of Central African States and the Economic Community of West
African States, in coordination with the African Union Commission, to accelerate joint efforts to adopt a
comprehensive strategy to more effectively and urgently combat the threat posed by Boko Haram, and in this regard
welcomes plans to convene a summit, and urges the two subregional organizations to adopt a common strategy and
develop active cooperation and coordination;
8. Encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to carry out the programmes of
activities adopted at their ministerial meetings;
9. Appeals to the international community to support the efforts undertaken by the States concerned to
implement disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes;
10. Notes the International Conference on Maritime and Energy Security, held in Luanda from 7 to
9 October 2015, encourages Member States to continue implementing the outcomes of the Summit of Heads of
State and Government on Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, including the commencement of
operations by the Interregional Coordination Centre for maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, and encourages the
holding of an African Union extraordinary summit of Heads of State and Government on maritime security and
development for Africa;
11. Expresses concern over the negative impact that poaching and illegal wildlife trafficking have on the
ecosystem, human development and regional security, and calls upon Member States to take immediate concerted
action to counter this phenomenon, including through the implementation of the provisions of resolution 69/314;
12. Expresses its full support for the efforts of the Economic Community of Central African States, the
African Union and the United Nations in the Central African Republic, and calls upon the international community
to support these efforts;
13. Encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to pursue their discussions on
concrete conflict prevention initiatives, and requests in this regard the assistance of the Secretary-General;
14. Requests the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, in collaboration with the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, to facilitate the efforts undertaken by the States members of
the Standing Advisory Committee, in particular for their execution of the Implementation Plan for the Kinshasa
Convention, as adopted on 19 November 2010 at their thirty-first ministerial meeting, held in Brazzaville from 15 to
19 November 2010;280
15. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to continue to assist the countries of Central Africa in tackling the problems of refugees and displaced persons in
their territories;
16. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to provide their full assistance for the proper functioning of the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and
Democracy in Central Africa;
_______________
279
280

See A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.
See A/65/717-S/2011/53, annex.

299

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

17. Welcomes the contribution made by Angola to the Trust Fund of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, reminds the States members of the Standing Advisory
Committee of the commitments they undertook on the adoption of the Declaration on the Trust Fund of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa (Libreville Declaration) on 8 May
2009,281 and invites those States members of the Committee that have not already done so to contribute to the
Trust Fund;
18. Urges other Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support the
activities of the Standing Advisory Committee effectively through voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund;
19. Urges the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, to strengthen the gender component of the various meetings of the
Committee relating to disarmament and international security;
20. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support to the Standing Advisory Committee,
welcomes the role played by the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, also welcomes the
recommendations of the strategic review of the Office,282 and strongly encourages the States members of the
Standing Advisory Committee and international partners to support the work of the Office, including by supporting
the recommendations of the strategic review of the Office and ensuring that it has adequate resources to undertake
its mandate;
21. Welcomes the efforts of the Standing Advisory Committee towards addressing cross-border security
threats in Central Africa, including activities of Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army, and acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, as well as the fallout from the situation in the Central African Republic,
and also welcomes the role of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in coordinating those efforts,
working closely with the Economic Community of Central African States, the African Union and all relevant
regional and international partners;
22. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support for the revitalization of the activities of
the Standing Advisory Committee, and requests him to continue to provide the assistance needed to ensure the
success of its regular biannual meetings;
23. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa”.
RESOLUTION 70/65
A/RES/70/65

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/461, para. 21)283

70/65.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 42/39 D of 30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of 15 December 1989, by which it
established the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and renamed it the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, with headquarters in Kathmandu and
_______________
281

See A/64/85-S/2009/288, annex.
See S/2015/339, sect. IV.
283
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
India, Indonesia, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Maldives, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste and Viet Nam.
282

300

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

with the mandate of providing, on request, substantive support for the initiatives and other activities mutually agreed
upon by the Member States of the Asia-Pacific region for the implementation of measures for peace and
disarmament, through appropriate utilization of available resources,
Welcoming the physical operation of the Regional Centre from Kathmandu in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 62/52 of 5 December 2007,
Taking note of the current temporary relocation of the Regional Centre to Bangkok in the aftermath of the
earthquake of 25 April 2015 in Nepal, and noting that the activities of the Centre were carried out as planned,
Recalling the mandate of the Regional Centre to provide, on request, substantive support for the initiatives and
other activities mutually agreed upon by the Member States of the Asia-Pacific region for the implementation of
measures for peace and disarmament,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,284 and expressing its appreciation to the Regional Centre
for its important work in promoting confidence-building measures through the organization of meetings,
conferences and workshops in the region, including a regional legal assistance workshop, held in Siem Reap,
Cambodia, on 18 and 19 November 2014; the thirteenth United Nations-Republic of Korea Joint Conference on
Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Issues, held on Jeju Island, Republic of Korea, on 4 and 5 December 2014; a
national capacity-building workshop on the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the Arms Trade Treaty, held in
Dhaka on 17 and 18 June 2015; and the twenty-fifth United Nations Conference on Disarmament Issues, held in
Hiroshima, Japan, from 26 to 28 August 2015,
Appreciating the timely execution by Nepal of its financial commitments for the physical operation of the
Regional Centre,
1. Expresses its satisfaction at the activities carried out in the past year by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, and invites all States of the region to continue to support
the activities of the Regional Centre, including by continuing to take part in them, where possible, and by proposing
items for inclusion in the programme of activities of the Centre, in order to contribute to the implementation of
measures for peace and disarmament;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Nepal for its cooperation and financial support, which has
enabled the Regional Centre to operate from Kathmandu;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat for providing the necessary support with a view to ensuring the smooth operation of the Regional Centre
and to enabling the Centre to function effectively;
4. Appeals to Member States, in particular those within the Asia-Pacific region, as well as to international
governmental and non-governmental organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions, the only
resources of the Regional Centre, to strengthen its programme of activities and the implementation thereof;
5. Reaffirms its strong support for the role of the Regional Centre in the promotion of activities of the
United Nations at the regional level to strengthen peace, stability and security among its Member States;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make arrangements for the early resumption of the operations of the
Regional Centre from Kathmandu;
7. Underlines the importance of the Kathmandu process for the development of the practice of region-wide
security and disarmament dialogues;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
_______________
284

A/70/114.

301

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific”.
RESOLUTION 70/66
A/RES/70/66

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/461, para. 21)285

70/66.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the provisions of Article 11, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations, in which it is
stipulated that a function of the General Assembly is to consider the general principles of cooperation in the
maintenance of international peace and security, including the principles governing disarmament and arms
limitation,
Recalling its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 D of 3 December 1986, 42/39 J of
30 November 1987 and 43/76 D of 7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa and its resolutions 46/36 F of 6 December 1991 and 47/52 G of 9 December 1992 on
regional disarmament, including confidence-building measures,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the Regional Centre, the most recent of which is resolution 69/74
of 2 December 2014,
Recalling further its resolution 67/48 of 3 December 2012, in which the General Assembly recognized the role
of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control,
Reaffirming the role of the Regional Centre in promoting disarmament, peace and security at the regional
level,
Welcoming the continuing and deepening cooperation between the Regional Centre, the African Union and
African subregional organizations, in particular their institutions in the fields of disarmament, peace and security, as
well as between the Centre and relevant United Nations bodies and programmes in Africa, and considering the
communiqué adopted by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at its 200th meeting, held in Addis
Ababa on 21 August 2009,
Recalling the decision taken by the Executive Council of the African Union at its eighth ordinary session, held
in Khartoum from 16 to 21 January 2006,286 in which the Council called upon member States to make voluntary
contributions to the Regional Centre to maintain its operations,
Recalling also the call by the Secretary-General for continued financial and in-kind support from Member
States, which would enable the Regional Centre to discharge its mandate in full and to respond more effectively to
requests for assistance from African States, which is of particular relevance in 2016 as the Regional Centre
celebrates the thirtieth anniversary of its establishment,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;287

2. Welcomes the continental dimension of the activities of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace
and Disarmament in Africa in response to the evolving needs of African Member States and the region’s new and
emerging challenges in the areas of disarmament, peace and security, including maritime security;
_______________
285

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Belize, Georgia, Nigeria (on behalf of
the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Serbia and Trinidad and Tobago.
286
A/60/693, annex II, decision EX.CL/Dec.263 (VIII).
287
A/70/116.

302

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Also welcomes the undertaking by the Regional Centre to provide capacity-building, technical assistance
programmes and advisory services to the African Union Commission, subregional organizations and African
Member States on the control of small arms and light weapons, including on stockpile management and destruction,
the Arms Trade Treaty288 and issues related to weapons of mass destruction, as detailed in the report of the
Secretary-General;
4. Further welcomes the contribution of the Regional Centre to continental disarmament, peace and
security, in particular its assistance to the African Union Commission in the elaboration and implementation of the
African Union Strategy on the Control of Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light
Weapons and the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Strategy and in the elaboration of the African Union
Common Position on an Arms Trade Treaty, as well as its assistance to the African Commission on Nuclear Energy
in its implementation of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba);289
5. Welcomes efforts by the Regional Centre to promote the role and representation of women in
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control activities;
6. Notes with appreciation the tangible achievements of the Regional Centre and the impact of the
assistance that it provided to Central African States in the implementation of the Central African Convention for the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used
for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly (Kinshasa Convention),290 as well as the substantive support provided
by the Centre to the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, to
Central and West African States in the elaboration of their respective common positions on the Arms Trade Treaty,
to West Africa on the implementation of the Economic Community of West African States Convention on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials and on security sector reform initiatives,
to East Africa on programmes to control brokering of small arms and light weapons and to African Member States
in the implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004 and of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction;291
7. Commends the Regional Centre for the support and assistance that it provided to African States, upon
request, on the Arms Trade Treaty, including through the organization of subregional and regional seminars and
workshops;
8. Urges all States, as well as international governmental and non-governmental organizations and
foundations, to make voluntary contributions to enable the Regional Centre to carry out its programmes and
activities and meet the needs of African States;
9. Urges, in particular, States members of the African Union to make voluntary contributions to the Trust
Fund for the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa in view of the celebration in
2016 of the thirtieth anniversary of the establishment of the Regional Centre and in conformity with the decision
taken by the Executive Council of the African Union in Khartoum in January 2006;286
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to facilitate close cooperation between the Regional Centre
and the African Union, in particular in the areas of disarmament, peace and security;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Regional Centre with the support
necessary for greater achievements and results;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on
the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa”.
_______________
288

See resolution 67/234 B.
A/50/426, annex.
290
See A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.
291
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
289

303

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/67
A/RES/70/67

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/462, para. 13)292

70/67.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament,293
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of
the international community, has the primary role in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament,
Recognizing the message of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as well as the addresses of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and other high-level officials in the Conference on Disarmament, as expressions of support and
concern for the endeavours of the Conference and as calls for the Conference to immediately commence
negotiations to advance disarmament goals through the adoption of a balanced and comprehensive programme
of work,
Recognizing also the need to conduct multilateral negotiations with the aim of reaching agreement on concrete
issues, and considering that the present international climate should give additional impetus to multilateral
negotiations,
Noting with renewed concern that, despite the intensive efforts by States members and successive Presidents
of the Conference on Disarmament at its 2015 session to reach consensus on a programme of work on the basis of
relevant proposals and suggestions, the Conference did not succeed in commencing its substantive work, including
negotiations, as called for by the General Assembly in its resolution 69/76 of 2 December 2014, or in agreeing on
and implementing a programme of work,
Recalling, in this respect, that the Conference on Disarmament has a number of urgent and important issues
for negotiation to achieve disarmament goals,
Welcoming the overwhelming call for greater flexibility with respect to commencing the substantive work of
the Conference on Disarmament without further delay, on the basis of a balanced and comprehensive programme
of work,
Appreciating the continued cooperation among the States members of the Conference on Disarmament as well
as the six successive Presidents of the Conference at its 2015 session,
Noting with appreciation the significant contributions made at the 2015 session to promote substantive
discussions on issues on the agenda, including the informal discussions held pursuant to the decision contained in
document CD/2021, and noting the discussions on the functioning of the Conference on Disarmament, as well as
the discussions held on other issues that could also be relevant to the current international security environment,
Emphasizing the importance of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, as a stand-alone,
autonomous institution, and the contribution that its research makes, and noting with concern its current difficult
financial and institutional situation,
Recognizing the importance of engagement between civil society and the Conference on Disarmament
according to decisions taken by the Conference,
Stressing the urgent need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence its substantive work at the
beginning of its 2016 session,
1. Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating
forum of the international community;

_______________
292
293

304

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by New Zealand.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/70/27).

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Appreciates the strong support expressed for the Conference on Disarmament at its 2015 session by
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other high-level officials, while also acknowledging their concern about its
ongoing impasse, and takes into account their calls for greater flexibility with respect to commencing the substantive
work of the Conference without further delay;
3. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to further intensify consultations and to explore possibilities
for overcoming its ongoing deadlock of almost two decades by adopting and implementing a balanced and
comprehensive programme of work at the earliest possible date during its 2016 session, bearing in mind the
decision on the programme of work adopted by the Conference on 29 May 2009,294 as well as other relevant
present, past and future proposals;
4. Welcomes the efforts of the Co-Chair of the informal working group, re-established by the decision of
the Conference on Disarmament with a mandate to produce a programme of work robust in substance and
progressive over time in implementation,295 including her report adopted by the Conference, contained in
document CD/2033;
5. Also welcomes the fact that the Conference on Disarmament, pursuant to document CD/2021, held a
series of structured and substantive informal discussions on items on the agenda of the Conference;
6. Further welcomes the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to request the current President and
the incoming President of the Conference to conduct consultations during the intersessional period and, if possible,
to make recommendations, taking into account all relevant proposals, past, present and future, including those
submitted as documents of the Conference, views presented and discussions held, and to endeavour to keep the
membership of the Conference informed, as appropriate, of their consultations;
7. Requests all States members of the Conference on Disarmament to cooperate with the current President
and successive Presidents in their efforts to guide the Conference to the early commencement of its substantive
work, including negotiations, at its 2016 session;
8. Recognizes the importance of continuing consultations in 2016 on the question of the expansion of the
membership of the Conference on Disarmament;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure and to strengthen, if needed, the provision to the
Conference on Disarmament of all necessary administrative, substantive and conference support services;
10. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session
a report on its work;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Review
of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special
session”, the sub-item entitled “Report of the Conference on Disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 70/68
A/RES/70/68

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/462, para. 13)296

70/68.

Report of the Disarmament Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament Commission,297
Recalling its resolutions 47/54 A of 9 December 1992, 47/54 G of 8 April 1993, 48/77 A of 16 December
1993, 49/77 A of 15 December 1994, 50/72 D of 12 December 1995, 51/47 B of 10 December 1996, 52/40 B of
_______________
294

Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/64/27), para. 18.
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/70/27), para. 19.
296
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Senegal (on behalf of the members of the Bureau
of the Disarmament Commission).
297
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/70/42).
295

305

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9 December 1997, 53/79 A of 4 December 1998, 54/56 A of 1 December 1999, 55/35 C of 20 November 2000,
56/26 A of 29 November 2001, 57/95 of 22 November 2002, 58/67 of 8 December 2003, 59/105 of 3 December
2004, 60/91 of 8 December 2005, 61/98 of 6 December 2006, 62/54 of 5 December 2007, 63/83 of 2 December
2008, 64/65 of 2 December 2009, 65/86 of 8 December 2010, 66/60 of 2 December 2011, 67/71 of 3 December
2012, 68/63 of 5 December 2013 and 69/77 of 2 December 2014,
Considering the role that the Disarmament Commission has been called upon to play and the contribution that
it should make in examining and submitting recommendations on various problems in the field of disarmament and
in promoting the implementation of the relevant decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special
session,
Recalling in particular General Assembly resolution 45/62 B of 4 December 1990, in which it noted with
satisfaction the adoption by consensus of a set of “Ways and means to enhance the functioning of the Disarmament
Commission”,298 Assembly decision 52/492 of 8 September 1998 concerning the efficient functioning of the
Commission and Assembly resolution 61/98, which contains additional measures for improving the effectiveness of
the methods of work of the Commission,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Disarmament Commission as the specialized, deliberative subsidiary body of
the General Assembly that allows for in-depth deliberations on specific disarmament issues, leading to the
submission of concrete recommendations on those issues, and recalling that the Commission shall make every effort
to ensure that, insofar as possible, decisions on substantive issues be adopted by consensus, as set forth in
paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,299
Emphasizing once again the important place of the Disarmament Commission within the United Nations
multilateral disarmament machinery,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Disarmament Commission;297

2. Reaffirms the importance of further enhancing the dialogue and cooperation among the First Committee,
the Disarmament Commission and the Conference on Disarmament, notes that the Commission has not submitted
any substantive recommendations to the General Assembly in the course of the past 16 years, and thus encourages
the revitalization of the work of the Commission in its current triennial cycle;
3. Emphasizes the need for a focused and results-oriented discussion on the items on the agenda of the
Disarmament Commission;
4. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance with its mandate, as set forth
in paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,299 and with
paragraph 3 of Assembly resolution 37/78 H of 9 December 1982 and to that end to make every effort to achieve
specific recommendations on the items on its agenda, taking into account the adopted “Ways and means to enhance
the functioning of the Disarmament Commission”;298
5. Welcomes the fact that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 52/492, at its 347th meeting, on
7 April 2015, the Disarmament Commission adopted the provisional agenda for its substantive session of 2015,297
on the understanding that consultations would continue on ways and means to implement resolution 69/77, and that
the Commission decided that the agenda for its substantive session of 2015 should serve for the period 2015–2017;
6. Recommends that the Disarmament Commission continue consideration of the following items at its
substantive session of 2016:
(a) Recommendations for achieving the objective of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons;
(b)

Practical confidence-building measures in the field of conventional weapons;

_______________
298
299

306

Resolution 44/119 C, annex.
Resolution S-10/2.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

7. Notes that the Disarmament Commission encourages the Chairs of its working groups to continue,
during the intersessional period, informal consultations on the agenda item allocated to each of the groups;
8. Encourages the Disarmament Commission to invite, as appropriate, the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research to prepare background papers on the items on its agenda and, if need be, other disarmament
experts to present their views, as provided for in paragraph 3 (e) of resolution 61/98, upon the invitation of the Chair
and with the prior approval of the Commission;
9. Requests the Disarmament Commission to meet for a period not exceeding three weeks during 2016,
namely from 4 to 22 April, and to submit a substantive report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session,
and stresses that the report of the Commission should contain a summary by the Chair of the proceedings to
reflect different views or positions if no agreement can be reached on the specific agenda item deliberated on, as
provided for in paragraph 3.4 of the adopted “Ways and means to enhance the functioning of the Disarmament
Commission”;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full provision to the Disarmament Commission and its
subsidiary bodies of interpretation and translation facilities in the official languages and to assign, as a matter of
priority, all the resources and services necessary, including verbatim records, to that end, and also requests the
Secretary-General to transmit to the Commission the annual report of the Conference on Disarmament on its 2015
session,300 together with all the official records of the seventieth session of the General Assembly relating to
disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that the Commission may require for implementing the present
resolution;
11. Invites Member States to submit their views and proposals on the matter early enough to enable practical
consultations among them prior to the beginning of the substantive session of 2016 of the Disarmament
Commission, with a view to facilitating its constructive outcome, and in this regard encourages the Chair-designate
to commence consultations and preparations for the substantive session of 2016 in a timely manner upon his or her
nomination;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Review
of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special
session”, the sub-item entitled “Report of the Disarmament Commission”.
RESOLUTION 70/69
A/RES/70/69

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/462, para. 13)301

70/69.

Thirty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/83 M of 11 December 1979, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
establish the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, and its resolution 39/148 H of 17 December 1984,
in which it approved the statute of the Institute,
Recalling also its resolutions 45/62 G of 4 December 1990, 55/35 A of 20 November 2000, 60/89 of
8 December 2005 and 65/87 of 8 December 2010 on the tenth, twentieth, twenty-fifth and thirtieth anniversaries of
the Institute,

_______________
300

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/70/27).
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, India,
Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru,
Poland, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland and Thailand.
301

307

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Considering the continuing need for the international community to have access to independent and in-depth
research on security issues and prospects for disarmament and non-proliferation,
Underlining the particularly relevant contribution of the Institute to thinking and analysis on international
security issues in the current context,
Recognizing the potential of the Institute, through its research, seminars, networks, outreach activities and
publications, to assist ongoing negotiations on disarmament and efforts at ensuring greater international security at a
progressively lower level of armaments and to contribute to education in this regard,
Reiterating its preoccupation over the unsustainable financing situation of the institutional operations budget
of the Institute,
Recognizing that a viable solution to the Institute’s difficulties and its effective management will be
instrumental for the Institute, as an autonomous institution within the framework of the United Nations, to take
forward its mandate in fulfilling Member States’ expectations and facilitating progress in disarmament efforts,
Noting the lack of implementation to date of the recommendations of the Advisory Board on Disarmament
Matters, and underlining the observations and recommendations of the Board contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on its work,302
Expressing its support for the Institute in its efforts to fully comply with Umoja and the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards,
1. Welcomes the thirty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research;
2.

Recognizes the importance, the timeliness and the high quality of the work of the Institute;

3. Reiterates its conviction that the Institute should continue to conduct independent research on problems
relating to disarmament and security and to undertake specialized research requiring a high degree of expertise;
4. Emphasizes the importance of the Institute as a stand-alone, autonomous institution that contributes,
through its research, analysis and activities, to progress in disarmament and, ultimately, to a safer world;
5. Underlines the contribution that the Institute makes and should continue to make in the field of
disarmament and non-proliferation education in all regions of the world;
6. Appeals to all Member States to continue to make financial contributions to the Institute, and strongly
encourages them to unearmark these contributions so as to contribute to its viability and the quality of its work over
the long term;
7. Welcomes the establishment of a revolving capital fund (the Stability Fund) in January 2015, and
encourages Member States to contribute to this fund;
8.

Requests the Secretary-General to continue to give the Institute administrative and other support;

9. Also requests the Secretary-General, as an exceptional, one-off measure to preserve the future of the
Institute and without setting a precedent, to submit, in the context of the programme budget for the biennium 2018–
2019, a funding proposal taking into account additional resources in the light of the recommendations contained in
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters;302
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to commission an assessment by an independent third party with
a mandate to prepare a report on the future structural, financial, administrative and operational aspects of the
Institute, outlining a sustainable and stable funding structure and operating model as required to achieve the mandate
and objectives of the Institute beyond the biennium 2018–2019, and to report in this regard, taking into account the
aforementioned assessment, to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session.
_______________
302

308

A/70/186.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/70
A/RES/70/70

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/463,
para. 7),303 by a recorded vote of 157 to 5, with 20 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Belgium, Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Czech Republic, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Honduras,
Hungary, India, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Panama, Poland, Rwanda, Swaziland, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland

70/70.
A/RES/70/70.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its relevant resolutions,

Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the latest of which is resolution GC(59)/RES/15, adopted on 17 September 2015,
Cognizant that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the region of the Middle East would pose a serious
threat to international peace and security,
Mindful of the immediate need for placing all nuclear facilities in the region of the Middle East under fullscope safeguards of the Agency,
Recalling the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament adopted by
the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons on 11 May 1995,304 in which the Conference urged universal adherence to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons305 as an urgent priority and called upon all States not yet parties to the Treaty to
accede to it at the earliest date, particularly those States that operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities,
Recognizing with satisfaction that, in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,306 the Conference undertook to make determined efforts towards
the achievement of the goal of universality of the Treaty, called upon those remaining States not parties to the Treaty to
accede to it, thereby accepting an international legally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear weapons or nuclear
explosive devices and to accept Agency safeguards on all their nuclear activities, and underlined the necessity of
universal adherence to the Treaty and of strict compliance by all parties with their obligations under the Treaty,
_______________
303

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the League of Arab States), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen and State of Palestine.
304
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
305
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
306
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).

309

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on 11 May 1995,304 in which the Conference noted with concern the continued existence in the
Middle East of unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, reaffirmed the importance of the early realization of universal
adherence to the Treaty, and called upon all States in the Middle East that had not yet done so, without exception, to
accede to the Treaty as soon as possible and to place all their nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards,
Noting with satisfaction that, in the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,307 the Conference emphasized the importance of a process
leading to full implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East and decided, inter alia, that the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the co-sponsors of the 1995 resolution, in consultation with the States of the
region, would convene a conference in 2012, to be attended by all States of the Middle East, on the establishment of
a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction, on the basis of arrangements
freely arrived at by the States of the region and with the full support and engagement of the nuclear-weapon States,
Expressing regret that the conference was not convened in 2012 as mandated and that little progress has been
achieved towards the implementation of the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty,
Taking note with appreciation of the note by the Secretary-General on the letters received from Member States
confirming support for declaring the Middle East a region free from weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons, as contained in document A/68/781,
Recalling that Israel remains the only State in the Middle East that has not yet become a party to the Treaty,
Concerned about the threats posed by the proliferation of nuclear weapons to the security and stability of the
Middle East region,
Stressing the importance of taking confidence-building measures, in particular the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East, in order to enhance peace and security in the region and to consolidate the
global non-proliferation regime,
Emphasizing the need for all parties directly concerned to seriously consider taking the practical and urgent
steps required for the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and, as a means of promoting this
objective, inviting the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty and, pending the establishment of the zone, to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under Agency safeguards,
Noting that 183 States have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,308 including a number of
States in the region,
1. Recalls the conclusions on the Middle East of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,309 and calls for the speedy and full implementation of the
commitments contained therein;
2. Stresses that the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty304 is an essential element of the outcome of the 1995 Conference and of the basis on
which the Treaty was indefinitely extended without a vote in 1995;
3. Reiterates that the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty remains valid until its goals and objectives are achieved;
4.

Calls for immediate steps towards the full implementation of that resolution;

_______________
307

2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).
308
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
309
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions, sect. IV.

310

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Reaffirms the importance of Israel’s accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons305 and placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards, in realizing the goal of universal adherence to the Treaty in the Middle East;
6. Calls upon that State to accede to the Treaty without further delay, not to develop, produce, test or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons, to renounce possession of nuclear weapons and to place all its unsafeguarded
nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards as an important confidence-building measure among all States
of the region and as a step towards enhancing peace and security;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “The risk of
nuclear proliferation in the Middle East”.
RESOLUTION 70/71
A/RES/70/71

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/464, para. 8)310

70/71.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/79 of 2 December 2014,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and entry into force of the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects311 and its amended article 1,312 the Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I),311 the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II)311 and its
amended version,313 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol III),311
the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV)314 and the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War
(Protocol V),315
Noting the results of the 2014 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, held in Geneva on
13 and 14 November 2014,
Welcoming the results of the Sixteenth Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended
Protocol II, held in Geneva on 12 November 2014,
Welcoming also the results of the Eighth Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V, held in
Geneva on 10 and 11 November 2014,
Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in the elaboration of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the particular efforts of various international, nongovernmental and other organizations in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of various categories
of conventional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
1. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to become parties, as soon as
possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
_______________
310

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Poland.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
312
Ibid., vol. 2260, No. 22495.
313
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
314
Ibid., vol. 2024, No. 22495.
315
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
311

311

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects311 and the Protocols thereto, as
amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these instruments at an early date and so as to
ultimately achieve their universality;
2. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to express their consent to be
bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto to include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
3. Emphasizes the importance of the universalization of the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War
(Protocol V);315
4. Welcomes the additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions to the Convention, as well as the
consents to be bound by the Protocols thereto;
5. Acknowledges the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, as depositary of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto, the Chair of the Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, the President of the
Eighth Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V and the President of the Sixteenth Annual
Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, on behalf of the High Contracting Parties, to
achieve the goal of universality;
6. Recalls the following decisions by the Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention:
(a) The adoption of an accelerated plan of action to promote universality of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto;
(b) The adoption of actions to enhance the implementation of the compliance mechanism for the
Convention and the Protocols thereto;
(c)

The continuation of the Sponsorship Programme within the framework of the Convention;

and, with recognition of the value and importance of the Sponsorship Programme, encourages States to contribute
to it;
7. Welcomes the commitment by States parties to continue to contribute to the further development of
international humanitarian law and in this context to keep under review both the development of new weapons and
uses of weapons, which may have indiscriminate effects or cause unnecessary suffering;
8. Notes with satisfaction the decision of the 2014 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention to convene in 2015 a five-day informal meeting of experts to discuss the questions related to emerging
technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems, and welcomes the informal discussions held from
13 to 17 April 2015 in that regard, and takes note of the comprehensive report of the Chair;
9. Welcomes the commitment of States parties to Protocol V to the effective and efficient implementation
of the Protocol and the implementation of the decisions of the First and Second Conferences of the High
Contracting Parties to the Protocol establishing a comprehensive framework for the exchange of information and
cooperation;
10. Notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences may be convened to examine
amendments to the Convention or to any of the Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning other
categories of conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope and application of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any proposed amendments or additional protocols;
11. Acknowledges the work of the Implementation Support Unit within the Geneva Branch of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, which was established following a decision by the 2009 Meeting of the
High Contracting Parties to the Convention;
12. Stresses the importance of transparent and inclusive preparation for the Fifth Review Conference of the
High Contracting Parties to the Convention, to be held in 2016;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to render the assistance necessary and to provide such services as may
be required for annual conferences and expert meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention and of the
High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V, as well as for any continuation of the work after
the meetings;
312

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

14. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the Convention and the Protocols
thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and
acceptances of and accessions to the Convention, its amended article 1 and the Protocols;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
RESOLUTION 70/72
A/RES/70/72

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/465, para. 7)316

70/72.

Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution 69/80 of 2 December 2014,
Reaffirming the primary role of the Mediterranean countries in strengthening and promoting peace, security
and cooperation in the Mediterranean region,
Welcoming the efforts deployed by the Euro-Mediterranean countries to strengthen their cooperation in
combating terrorism, in particular through the adoption of the Euro-Mediterranean Code of Conduct on Countering
Terrorism by the Euro-Mediterranean Summit, held in Barcelona, Spain, on 27 and 28 November 2005,
Bearing in mind all the previous declarations and commitments, as well as all the initiatives taken by the
riparian countries at the recent summits, ministerial meetings and various forums concerning the question of the
Mediterranean region,
Recalling, in this regard, the adoption on 13 July 2008 of the Joint Declaration of the Paris Summit for the
Mediterranean, which launched a reinforced partnership, named the “Barcelona Process: Union for the
Mediterranean”, and the common political will to revive efforts to transform the Mediterranean into an area of
peace, democracy, cooperation and prosperity,
Welcoming the entry into force of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba)317 as a
contribution to the strengthening of peace and security both regionally and internationally,
Recognizing the indivisible character of security in the Mediterranean and that the enhancement of
cooperation among Mediterranean countries with a view to promoting the economic and social development of all
peoples of the region will contribute significantly to stability, peace and security in the region,
Recognizing also the efforts made so far and the determination of the Mediterranean countries to intensify the
process of dialogue and consultations with a view to resolving the problems existing in the Mediterranean region
and to eliminating the causes of tension and the consequent threat to peace and security, as well as their growing
awareness of the need for further joint efforts to strengthen economic, social, cultural and environmental
cooperation in the region,
Recognizing further that prospects for closer Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in all spheres can be enhanced
by positive developments worldwide, in particular in Europe, in the Maghreb and in the Middle East,
_______________
316

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Zambia.
317
A/50/426, annex.

313

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming the responsibility of all States to contribute to the stability and prosperity of the Mediterranean
region and their commitment to respecting the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well
as the provisions of the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,318
Noting the peace negotiations in the Middle East, which should be of a comprehensive nature and represent an
appropriate framework for the peaceful settlement of contentious issues in the region,
Expressing concern at the persistent tension and continuing military activities in parts of the Mediterranean
that hinder efforts to strengthen security and cooperation in the region,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,319
1. Reaffirms that security in the Mediterranean is closely linked to European security as well as to
international peace and security;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the continuing efforts by Mediterranean countries to contribute actively to
the elimination of all causes of tension in the region and to the promotion of just and lasting solutions to the
persistent problems of the region through peaceful means, thus ensuring the withdrawal of foreign forces of
occupation and respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all countries of the
Mediterranean and the right of peoples to self-determination, and therefore calls for full adherence to the principles
of non-interference, non-intervention, non-use of force or threat of use of force and the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, in accordance with the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
3. Commends the Mediterranean countries for their efforts in meeting common challenges through
coordinated overall responses, based on a spirit of multilateral partnership, towards the general objective of turning
the Mediterranean basin into an area of dialogue, exchanges and cooperation, guaranteeing peace, stability and
prosperity, encourages them to strengthen such efforts through, inter alia, a lasting multilateral and action-oriented
cooperative dialogue among States of the region, and recognizes the role of the United Nations in promoting
regional and international peace and security;
4. Recognizes that the elimination of the economic and social disparities in levels of development and other
obstacles, as well as respect and greater understanding among cultures in the Mediterranean area, will contribute to
enhancing peace, security and cooperation among Mediterranean countries through the existing forums;
5. Calls upon all States of the Mediterranean region that have not yet done so to adhere to all the
multilaterally negotiated legal instruments related to the field of disarmament and non-proliferation, thus creating
the conditions necessary for strengthening peace and cooperation in the region;
6. Encourages all States of the region to favour the conditions necessary for strengthening the confidencebuilding measures among them by promoting genuine openness and transparency on all military matters, by
participating, inter alia, in the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures and by providing accurate data and
information to the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms;
7. Encourages the Mediterranean countries to strengthen further their cooperation in combating terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, including the possible resort by terrorists to weapons of mass destruction, taking
into account the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and in combating international crime and illicit arms
transfers and illicit drug production, consumption and trafficking, which pose a serious threat to peace, security and
stability in the region and therefore to the improvement of the current political, economic and social situation and
which jeopardize friendly relations among States, hinder the development of international cooperation and result in
the destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the democratic basis of pluralistic society;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on means to strengthen security and cooperation in the
Mediterranean region;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Strengthening
of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region”.
_______________
318
319

314

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
A/70/160 and Add.1.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 70/73
A/RES/70/73

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/466,
para. 7),320 by a recorded vote of 181 to 1, with 3 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Abstaining: India, Mauritius, Syrian Arab Republic

70/73.
A/RES/70/73.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

The General Assembly,

Reiterating that the cessation of nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions constitutes an
effective nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation measure, and convinced that this is a meaningful step in the
realization of a systematic process for achieving nuclear disarmament,
Recalling that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, adopted by the General Assembly by its
resolution 50/245 of 10 September 1996, was opened for signature on 24 September 1996,
Stressing that a universal and effectively verifiable Treaty constitutes a fundamental instrument in the field of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and that, after nearly 20 years, its entry into force is more urgent than
ever before,
Encouraged by the signing of the Treaty by 183 States, including 41 of the 44 whose ratification is needed for
its entry into force, and welcoming the ratification of the Treaty by 164 States, including 36 of the 44 whose
ratification is needed for its entry into force, among which there are 3 nuclear-weapon States,
Recalling its resolution 69/81 of 2 December 2014,
Recalling also the adoption by consensus of the conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions of
the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,321 in which
_______________
320

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
321
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.

315

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

the Conference, inter alia, reaffirmed the vital importance of the entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty as a core element of the international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime and
included specific actions to be taken in support of the entry into force of the Treaty,
Welcoming the Final Declaration adopted by the ninth Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, held in New York on 29 September 2015, convened pursuant to
article XIV of the Treaty, and recalling the Joint Ministerial Statement on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, adopted at the ministerial meeting held in New York on 26 September 2014,322
Noting that the group of eminent persons, established to support the article XIV process, met in Seoul on 25
and 26 June and in Hiroshima, Japan, on 24 and 25 August 2015, where they called for a multilateral approach to
engage the leadership of the remaining eight annex 2 States with the aim of facilitating their respective ratification
processes,
Welcoming continuing progress in the development of the Treaty’s verification regime, including as
demonstrated in the on-site inspection Integrated Field Exercise held in Jordan in November and December 2014,
1. Stresses the vital importance and urgency of signature and ratification, without delay and without
conditions, in order to achieve the earliest entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;323
2. Welcomes the contributions by the signatory States to the work of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, in particular its efforts to ensure that the verification regime
of the Treaty will be capable of meeting the verification requirements of the Treaty upon its entry into force, in
accordance with article IV of the Treaty;
3.
regime;

Underlines the need to maintain momentum towards completion of all elements of the verification

4. Urges all States not to carry out nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions, to
maintain their moratoriums in this regard and to refrain from acts that would defeat the object and purpose of the
Treaty, while stressing that these measures do not have the same permanent and legally binding effect as the entry
into force of the Treaty;
5. Shares the grave concern of the Security Council about the nuclear test conducted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on 12 February 2013, expressed in Council resolution 2094 (2013) of 7 March 2013,
recalls Council resolutions 1718 (2006) of 14 October 2006 and 1874 (2009) of 12 June 2009, calls for full
compliance with the obligations under the relevant resolutions, and reaffirms its support for the Six-Party Talks;
6. Urges all States that have not yet signed the Treaty, in particular those whose ratification is needed for its
entry into force, to sign and ratify it as soon as possible;
7. Urges all States that have signed but not yet ratified the Treaty, in particular those whose ratification is
needed for its entry into force, to accelerate their ratification processes with a view to ensuring their earliest
successful conclusion;
8. Welcomes, since its previous resolution on the subject, the ratification of the Treaty by Angola, since
every ratification is a significant step towards the early entry into force of the Treaty;
9. Also welcomes the recent expressions from among the remaining States whose ratification is needed for
the Treaty to enter into force of their intention to pursue and complete the ratification process;
10. Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political level and, where in a position to do
so, to promote adherence to the Treaty through bilateral and joint outreach, seminars and other means;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, to prepare a report on the efforts of States that have ratified
the Treaty towards its universalization and on possibilities for providing assistance on ratification procedures to
States that so request it and to submit such a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
_______________
322
323

316

A/69/629, annex.
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled
“Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty”.
RESOLUTION 70/74
A/RES/70/74

Adopted at the 67th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/467, para. 8)324

70/74.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective prohibition of bacteriological
(biological) and toxin weapons and on their destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that, with the ratification and accession of three additional States,325 there are now 173
States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction,326 including all the permanent members
of the Security Council, and stressing at the same time that, while marking the fortieth anniversary of the entry into
force of the Convention, there is a continuing need to achieve its universalization,
Reaffirming its call upon all signatory States that have not yet ratified the Convention to do so without delay,
and calling upon those States that have not signed the Convention to become parties thereto at the earliest possible
date, thus contributing to the achievement of universal adherence to the Convention,
Bearing in mind its call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate in the implementation of the
recommendations of the review conferences of the parties to the Convention, including the exchange of information
and data agreed to in the Final Declaration of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction, later amended by the Final Declaration of the Seventh Review Conference, and to provide
such information and data in conformity with the standardized procedure to the Implementation Support Unit within
the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat on an annual basis and no later than 15 April,
Welcoming the reaffirmation made in the Final Declarations of the Fourth, Sixth and Seventh Review
Conferences that under all circumstances the use of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and their
development, production and stockpiling are effectively prohibited under article I of the Convention,
Recognizing the importance of ongoing efforts by States parties to enhance international cooperation,
assistance and the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for
the use of bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins for peaceful purposes, recognizing also that there still
remain challenges and obstacles to be overcome in order to enhance international cooperation, and recognizing
further the value of building capacity through international cooperation, in line with the Final Document of the
Seventh Review Conference,
Reaffirming the importance of national measures, in accordance with constitutional processes, in strengthening
the implementation of the Convention by States parties, in line with the Final Document of the Seventh Review
Conference,
Reaffirming also the importance of the review of developments in the field of science and technology related
to the Convention,
Noting the decision of the Seventh Review Conference to retain the previous structures from the 2003–2010
intersessional process, consisting of annual meetings of States parties preceded by annual meetings of experts, and
_______________
324

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Hungary.
Myanmar on 1 December 2014 (ratification), Mauritania on 28 January 2015 (accession) and Andorra on 2 March 2015 (accession).
326
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
325

317

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

to continue to allocate five days to each meeting of States parties and each meeting of experts during the 2012–2015
intersessional process, and also noting the forthcoming conclusion of the current intersessional process,
Recalling the decision of the Seventh Review Conference that the Eighth Review Conference shall be held in
Geneva not later than 2016,
1. Notes with satisfaction the successful outcome of and the decisions on all provisions of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction326 reached at the Seventh Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention, and calls upon States parties to the Convention to participate and actively engage in their continued
implementation;
2. Notes with appreciation the outcome of the intersessional process agreed by the Seventh Review
Conference and the contributions of States parties and relevant international organizations to, as well as
presentations by the scientific and academic institutions and non-governmental organizations concerning, the
discussion and promotion of common understandings and effective action on the standing agenda items entitled
“Cooperation and assistance, with a particular focus on strengthening cooperation and assistance under Article X”,
“Review of developments in the field of science and technology related to the Convention” and “Strengthening
national implementation” and on the questions of (a) how to enable fuller participation in the confidence-building
measures, and (b) how to strengthen implementation of article VII, including consideration of detailed procedures
and mechanisms for the provision of assistance and cooperation by States parties, discussed in 2012 and 2013 and
2014 and 2015, respectively;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the meeting of States parties and the meeting of experts, held in Geneva from
1 to 5 December 2014 and from 10 to 14 August 2015, respectively, successfully addressed the three standing
agenda items and the biennial item on the agenda, and calls upon States parties to the Convention to continue to
participate in and contribute to the work of the intersessional process and, in particular, to make the most of the time
allotted to consideration of the biennial agenda item to be discussed in 2014 and 2015 on article VII in the
remaining meeting of States parties during the current intersessional process;
4. Appreciates the information and data on confidence-building measures provided by States parties to
date, recalls the discussions on the biennial item on confidence-building measures in 2012 and 2013 and relevant
paragraphs of the reports of the meetings of States parties, and calls upon all States parties to the Convention to
participate in the exchange of information and data on confidence-building measures called for in the relevant
decisions of the review conferences;
5. Notes with appreciation the decision of the Seventh Review Conference on the establishment of a
database to facilitate requests for and offers of exchange of assistance and cooperation, and urges States parties to
submit to the Implementation Support Unit, on a voluntary basis, requests for and offers of cooperation and
assistance, including in terms of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information regarding the use
of biological and toxin agents for peaceful purposes;
6. Encourages States parties to provide, at least biannually, appropriate information on their
implementation of article X of the Convention and to collaborate to offer assistance or training, upon request, in
support of the legislative and other implementation measures of States parties needed to ensure their compliance
with the Convention;
7. Notes with satisfaction the decision of the Seventh Review Conference on the establishment of a
sponsorship programme in order to support and increase the participation of developing States parties in the
meetings of the intersessional programme, and calls upon States parties in a position to do so to offer voluntary
contributions for the programme;
8. Notes with appreciation the work of the Implementation Support Unit and its contribution to supporting
the intersessional process;
9. Stresses the importance of transparent and inclusive preparation for the Eighth Review Conference, to be
held in 2016, and encourages States parties to establish a preparatory process allowing for the due and balanced
consideration of both substantial and procedural issues related to the review of the Convention and its
implementation;
318

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render the necessary assistance to the depositary
Governments of the Convention, to provide such services as may be required for the implementation of the
decisions and recommendations of the review conferences and to render the necessary assistance and to provide
such services as may be required for the remaining meeting of States parties during the current intersessional
process and for the preparation and conduct of the Eighth Review Conference;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons
and on Their Destruction”.
RESOLUTION 70/237
A/RES/70/237

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/455, para. 8)327

70/237.

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international
security

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/70 of 4 December 1998, 54/49 of 1 December 1999, 55/28 of 20 November 2000,
56/19 of 29 November 2001, 57/53 of 22 November 2002, 58/32 of 8 December 2003, 59/61 of 3 December 2004,
60/45 of 8 December 2005, 61/54 of 6 December 2006, 62/17 of 5 December 2007, 63/37 of 2 December 2008,
64/25 of 2 December 2009, 65/41 of 8 December 2010, 66/24 of 2 December 2011, 67/27 of 3 December 2012,
68/243 of 27 December 2013 and 69/28 of 2 December 2014,
Recalling also its resolutions on the role of science and technology in the context of international security, in
which, inter alia, it recognized that scientific and technological developments could have both civilian and military
applications and that progress in science and technology for civilian applications needed to be maintained and
encouraged,
Bearing in mind the results of the World Summit on the Information Society at its first phase, held in Geneva
from 10 to 12 December 2003, and at its second phase, held in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005,328
Noting that considerable progress has been achieved in developing and applying the latest information
technologies and means of telecommunication,
Affirming that it sees in this process the broadest positive opportunities for the further development of
civilization, the expansion of opportunities for cooperation for the common good of all States, the enhancement of
the creative potential of humankind and additional improvements in the circulation of information in the global
community,
Noting that the dissemination and use of information technologies and means affect the interests of the entire
international community and that optimum effectiveness is enhanced by broad international cooperation,
Expressing concern that these technologies and means can potentially be used for purposes that are
inconsistent with the objectives of maintaining international stability and security and may adversely affect the
integrity of the infrastructure of States to the detriment of their security in both civil and military fields,
_______________
327

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
328
See A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.

319

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Considering that it is necessary to prevent the use of information resources or technologies for criminal or
terrorist purposes,
Noting the importance of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the use of information and
communications technologies,
Noting also the contribution of those Member States that have submitted their assessments on issues of
information security to the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraphs 1 to 3 of resolutions 53/70, 54/49, 55/28,
56/19, 57/53, 58/32, 59/61, 60/45, 61/54, 62/17, 63/37, 64/25, 65/41, 66/24, 67/27, 68/243 and 69/28,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General containing those assessments,329
Considering that the assessments of Member States contained in the reports of the Secretary-General have
contributed to a better understanding of the substance of issues of international information security and related
notions,
Bearing in mind that the Secretary-General, in fulfilment of resolution 68/243, established in 2014, on the
basis of equitable geographical distribution, a group of governmental experts, which, in accordance with its
mandate, considered existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security and possible cooperative
measures to address them, including norms, rules or principles of responsible behaviour of States and confidencebuilding measures, the issues of the use of information and communications technologies in conflicts and how
international law applies to the use of information and communications technologies by States, and conducted a
study on relevant international concepts aimed at strengthening the security of global information and
telecommunications systems,
Welcoming the effective work of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security and the relevant outcome report
transmitted by the Secretary-General,330
Stressing the importance of the assessments and recommendations contained in the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts,
Welcoming the conclusion of the Group of Governmental Experts in its 2013 report that international law, and
in particular the Charter of the United Nations, is applicable and essential to maintaining peace and stability and
promoting an open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful information and communications technology
environment, that voluntary and non-binding norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour of States in the
use of information and communications technologies can reduce risks to international peace, security and stability,
and that, given the unique attributes of such technologies, additional norms can be developed over time,331
1. Welcomes the 2015 report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security;330
2.

Calls upon Member States:

(a) To be guided in their use of information and communications technologies by the 2015 report of the
Group of Governmental Experts;
(b) To promote further, at multilateral levels, the consideration of existing and potential threats in the field of
information security, as well as possible strategies to address the threats emerging in this field, consistent with the
need to preserve the free flow of information;
3. Considers that the purpose of such measures could be served through further examination of relevant
international concepts aimed at strengthening the security of global information and telecommunications systems;
_______________
329

A/54/213, A/55/140 and Corr.l and Add.l, A/56/164 and Add.l, A/57/166 and Add.l, A/58/373, A/59/116 and Add.l, A/60/95 and Add.1,
A/61/161 and Add.l, A/62/98 and Add.l, A/64/129 and Add.l, A/65/154, A/66/152 and Add.l, A/67/167, A/68/156 and Add.1, A/69/112 and
Add.1 and A/70/172 and Add.1.
330
A/70/174.
331
A/68/98.

320

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Invites all Member States, taking into account the assessments and recommendations contained in the
report of the Group of Governmental Experts, to continue to inform the Secretary-General of their views and
assessments on the following questions:
(a)

General appreciation of the issues of information security;

(b) Efforts taken at the national level to strengthen information security and promote international
cooperation in this field;
(c)

The content of the concepts mentioned in paragraph 3 above;

(d) Possible measures that could be taken by the international community to strengthen information security
at the global level;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a group of governmental experts, to be
established in 2016 on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, taking into account the assessments and
recommendations contained in the above-mentioned report, to continue to study, with a view to promoting common
understandings, existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security and possible cooperative
measures to address them and how international law applies to the use of information and communications
technologies by States, as well as norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour of States, confidencebuilding measures and capacity-building and the concepts referred to in paragraph 3 above, and to submit a report
on the results of the study to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Developments
in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security”.

321

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/79.

University for Peace.............................................................................................................................................. 325

70/80.

Assistance in mine action ...................................................................................................................................... 326

70/81.

Effects of atomic radiation..................................................................................................................................... 330

70/82.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.................................................................................... 332

70/83.

Assistance to Palestine refugees ............................................................................................................................. 337

70/84.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities .................................................................. 339

70/85.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ......................... 340

70/86.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues..................................................................................................... 346

70/87.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories................................................................................................ 348

70/88.

Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the other occupied
Arab territories ..................................................................................................................................................... 351

70/89.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied
Syrian Golan ........................................................................................................................................................ 353

70/90.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem ....................................................................................................................................... 356

70/91.

The occupied Syrian Golan ................................................................................................................................... 362

70/92.

Comprehensive review of special political missions ................................................................................................ 363

70/93.

Questions relating to information ........................................................................................................................... 365
A.

Information in the service of humanity .......................................................................................................... 365

B.

United Nations public information policies and activities ................................................................................ 366

70/94.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations ............................................................................................................................................ 378

70/95.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories ............ 380

70/96.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations ................................ 382

70/97.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories ................ 386

70/98.

Question of Western Sahara .................................................................................................................................. 386

70/99.

Question of New Caledonia................................................................................................................................... 388

70/100.

Question of French Polynesia ................................................................................................................................ 391

70/101.

Question of Tokelau ............................................................................................................................................. 393

70/102.

Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands ....................... 395
A.

General........................................................................................................................................................ 395

B.

Individual Territories .................................................................................................................................... 399
323

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/103.

Dissemination of information on decolonization ..................................................................................................... 409

70/230.

Matters relating to activities under the United Nations Programme on Space Applications in 2016 ............................ 411

70/231.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples .................... 411

324

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 70/79
A/RES/70/79

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/492, para. 9)1

70/79.

University for Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/83 of 10 December 2009, in which it indicated that, in its resolution 34/111 of
14 December 1979, it had approved the idea of establishing the University for Peace as a specialized international
centre for higher education, research and the dissemination of knowledge specifically aimed at training and
education for peace and its universal promotion within the United Nations system, as well as all preceding
resolutions on this item,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 35/55 of 5 December 1980, the General Assembly approved the
establishment of the University for Peace in conformity with the International Agreement for the Establishment of
the University for Peace, contained in the annex to that resolution,
Taking into account that in 2015 the University celebrates 35 years of executing the mandate given to it by the
General Assembly of educating and training leaders for peace,
Recognizing the important and varied activities carried out by the University during the period from 2012 to
2015 with the valuable assistance and contributions of Governments, foundations and non-governmental
organizations, in particular the progress made in the further development and implementation of the academic
programme and in expanding its coverage in various regions of the world,
Noting with appreciation that the University has reaffirmed its commitment to academic excellence
throughout its doctoral and master’s degree programmes in areas related to peace studies, security and the
environment, in addition to launching a new master’s degree in Spanish,
Noting that the University places special emphasis on the areas of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and the peaceful settlement of disputes and that it has launched capacity-building programmes in the
areas of access to justice, international human rights law, post-conflict consensus-building and training of academic
experts in the techniques of peaceful conflict resolution,
Noting with appreciation the support provided to the University by the host country, Costa Rica,2
Recognizing the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development3 and the need to coordinate efforts
for its implementation,
Recognizing also the relevance of Goal 4, Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote
lifelong learning opportunities for all, particularly its target 4.b, which aims to substantially expand globally the
number of scholarships available to developing countries by 2020,
Considering the importance of promoting education for peace that fosters respect for the values inherent in
peace and universal coexistence among people, including respect for the life, dignity and integrity of human beings,
as well as friendship and solidarity among people irrespective of their nationality, race, sex, religion or culture, in the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations,
Considering also the need for the University to consolidate its development and the relaunch of its activities,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 64/83,
outlining the progress made with regard to the administrative and financial stabilization of the University for Peace
and through its recent process of academic reform through the implementation of its innovative programmes on
critical subjects related to peace and security;4
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, El Salvador, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Ireland, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco,
Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Poland, Spain, Sri Lanka and Sweden.
2
Statement by the President of Costa Rica, Mr. Luis Guillermo Solís Rivera, to the General Assembly at its seventieth session (see
A/70/PV.19).
3
Resolution 70/1.
4
A/70/288.

325

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

2. Requests the University, given its role in developing new concepts and approaches to security through
education, training and research in order to respond effectively to emerging threats to peace, to find viable ways to
further strengthen cooperation with the United Nations system;
3. Recalls its resolution 64/83, and reiterates the request made to the Secretary-General to establish, under
his leadership, a trust fund for peace to facilitate the receipt of voluntary contributions to the University;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to expand the scope for using the services of the University as part of his
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts through the training of staff, especially those concerned with
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in order to strengthen their capacities in this area, and in the promotion of the
Declaration and the Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace5 and of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;3
5. Requests Member States to take the lead in supporting the mission of the University by recognizing the
institution and, when possible, making financial contributions that will make it possible for the University to offer its
programmes of study to all students who wish to participate in them, and by facilitating the University’s operations
in host countries;
6. Invites Member States that have not already done so to accede to the International Agreement for the
Establishment of the University for Peace,6 thereby demonstrating their support for an educational institution
established pursuant to a General Assembly resolution and devoted to the promotion of a universal culture of peace
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Invites the University to further strengthen and broaden the outreach of its programmes and activities for
cooperation with and capacity-building for Member States in the areas of conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding;
8. Encourages intergovernmental bodies, non-governmental organizations, interested individuals and
philanthropists to contribute to the programmes and core budget of the University to enable it to continue to perform
its valuable work worldwide in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in the
substantial transformations taking place in the context of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations with
regard to such issues as gender equality and the empowerment of women, human rights, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and climate change;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “University for
Peace”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at that session a report on the work of
the University.
RESOLUTION 70/80
A/RES/70/80

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/493, para. 8)7

70/80.

Assistance in mine action

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/72 of 11 December 2013 and all its previous resolutions on assistance in mine
clearance and on assistance in mine action, all adopted without a vote,

_______________
5

Resolutions 53/243 A and B.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1223, No. 19735.
7
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and United States of America.
6

326

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling also all relevant treaties and conventions8 and their review processes,
Noting with appreciation the extent to which the tenth anniversary of the International Day for Mine
Awareness and Assistance in Mine Action was commemorated worldwide on 4 April 2015,
Reaffirming its deep concern at the tremendous humanitarian and development problems caused by mines and
explosive remnants of war,9 in affected countries, which have serious and lasting social and economic consequences
for the populations of such countries, and negatively affect the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
Bearing in mind the serious humanitarian threat that mines and explosive remnants of war, including cluster
munitions, pose, in affected countries, to the safety, health and lives of local civilian populations, as well as of
personnel participating in humanitarian, peacekeeping, rehabilitation and mine clearance programmes and
operations,
Deeply alarmed by the still very large, albeit decreasing, number of mines and areas of square kilometres
contaminated by them, as well as the growing number of explosive remnants of war, as a result of armed conflicts,
and therefore remaining convinced of the necessity and urgency of strengthening mine action efforts by the
international community with a view to eliminating the threat and the humanitarian impact of landmines and
explosive remnants of war to civilians as soon as possible,
Recognizing the humanitarian threat posed by improvised explosive devices following conflict,
Recognizing also that, in addition to the primary role of States, the United Nations plays a significant role in
the field of assistance in mine action, in particular through the implementation of the Strategy of the United Nations
on Mine Action 2013–2018 by members of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action,10 chaired by the
United Nations Mine Action Service at working level, considering mine action to be an important and integrated
component of United Nations humanitarian assistance and development activities, and noting the integration of
mine action in numerous United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political missions mandated by the
Security Council,
Noting with appreciation the cooperation and coordination of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine
Action with non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders through meetings of the Committee on Mine
Action,11 and its active involvement in humanitarian coordination mechanisms, such as the Global Protection
Cluster, and encouraging further enhancement of that cooperation,
Recognizing the importance of the full involvement and equal opportunities for participation of both women
and men in mine action programmes,
Recognizing also the valuable mine action efforts of national, regional and international mine action
practitioners, including United Nations personnel and peacekeepers, and also experts from relevant nongovernmental organizations involved in mine action, enabling local communities and mine survivors to resume
normal lives and reclaim their livelihoods by regaining access to previously contaminated lands,
_______________
8

These include the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction, 1997; the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices, as amended in 1996
(Protocol II to the 1980 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects); the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War, 2003 (Protocol V to the 1980
Convention); the Convention on Cluster Munitions, 2008; the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and
relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, 1977 (Protocol I); and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, 2006.
9
As defined by Protocol V to the 1980 Convention.
10
Consisting of the United Nations Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United
Nations Office for Project Services, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research and the
World Bank.
11
The Committee on Mine Action is an informal information-sharing forum. The members are the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on
Mine Action, non-governmental organizations involved in mine action, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining and academic institutions.

327

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting with appreciation national, regional and subregional efforts, including the African Union Mine Action
and Explosive Remnants of War Strategic Framework 2014–2017,
Noting with satisfaction the growing inclusion of mine action in humanitarian appeals,
Stressing the pressing humanitarian need that exists when non-State actors deploy mines, improvised
explosive devices and other associated explosive devices,
Noting the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit and the elaboration of the Strategy of the United
Nations on Mine Action 2013–2018, including the creation of a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to
implement the Strategy, as well as the updating of the United Nations victim assistance policy, and encouraging the
members of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action to continue their work to improve the impact of
the United Nations in the field of mine action,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;12

2. Calls, in particular, for the continuation of the efforts of States, including through South-South, regional
and subregional cooperation, with the assistance of the United Nations and relevant organizations involved in mine
action, upon request and as appropriate and in coordination with the affected country, to foster the establishment and
development of national mine action capacities in countries in which mines and explosive remnants of war
constitute a serious threat to the safety, health and lives of the local civilian population or an impediment to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and social and economic development efforts at the national and local levels;
3. Urges all States, in particular those that have the capacity to do so, as well as the United Nations system
and other relevant organizations and institutions involved in mine action, to support mine-affected States, upon
request and as appropriate, by providing:
(a) Assistance to countries affected by mines and explosive remnants of war, including abandoned
explosive ordnance, for the establishment and development of national mine action capacities, including, where
appropriate, in the fulfilment of the relevant international obligations of those countries;
(b) Support for national programmes, where appropriate, in cooperation with the relevant bodies of the
United Nations system and relevant regional, governmental and non-governmental organizations, to reduce the risks
posed by landmines and explosive remnants of war, taking into consideration the different needs of women, girls,
boys and men;
(c) Reliable, predictable, timely and, where possible, multi-annual contributions for mine action activities,
including through national mine action efforts and mine action programmes of the United Nations and nongovernmental organizations, including those relating to rapid response in humanitarian emergencies, victim
assistance and mine risk education, especially at the local level, as well as through relevant national, regional and
global trust funds, including the Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Action;
(d) Necessary information and technical, financial and material assistance to locate, remove, destroy and
otherwise render ineffective minefields, mines, improvised explosive devices, booby traps, other devices and
explosive remnants of war, in accordance with international law, as soon as possible;
(e) Technological assistance (i) to countries affected by mines and explosive remnants of war; and (ii) to
promote user-oriented scientific research on and development of mine action techniques and technology that are
effective, sustainable, appropriate and environmentally sound;
4. Encourages efforts to conduct all mine action activities in accordance with the International Mine Action
Standards or national standards compliant with those Standards, and emphasizes the importance of ensuring the
accuracy and objectivity of reporting information as well as of using state-of-the-art technologies and an information
management system, such as the Information Management System for Mine Action, to help to facilitate mine action
activities;
_______________
12

328

A/70/207.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

5. Urges all mine-affected States, pursuant to applicable international law, to identify all areas, as
appropriate, under their jurisdiction or control containing mines and other explosive remnants of war in the most
efficient manner possible and to employ land release techniques, including non-technical survey, technical survey
and clearance when appropriate;
6. Encourages mine-affected States, with support from relevant United Nations agencies and development
partners as appropriate, to proactively mainstream mine action, including victim assistance requirements and their
linkage with health care and disabilities agendas, into development plans and processes to ensure that development
priorities include mine action and that mine action, including victim assistance requirements, is predictably funded;
7. Encourages all relevant multilateral, regional and national programmes and bodies to include activities
related to mine action, including clearance, in their peacebuilding, humanitarian, rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development assistance activities, where appropriate, bearing in mind the need to ensure national and local
ownership, sustainability and capacity-building, as well as to include a gender- and age-appropriate perspective in
all aspects of such activities;
8. Encourages States, as appropriate, and relevant organizations involved in mine action to continue efforts
to ensure that mine action programmes take into account risk education, the specific needs and requirements of
victims and persons with disabilities and are gender- and age-sensitive, so that women, girls, boys and men can
benefit equally from them, and also take into account the specific needs of refugees and internally displaced persons,
and encourages the participation of all stakeholders, as well as the further participation of women, in the
programming of mine action;
9. Urges States to provide humanitarian assistance for victims of mines and explosive remnants of war, and
to take measures to spare the civilian population consistent with the principles of international humanitarian law;
10. Encourages States to support victims’ access to appropriate medical care, physical and sensory
rehabilitation, psychosocial support, education and skills training and income-earning opportunities and to provide
those services to all, regardless of gender, age or socioeconomic status;
11. Encourages the provision of capacity-building assistance to affected countries in order to integrate
assistance for victims into their national policy frameworks on health care, social services and disability-inclusive
development by relevant United Nations agencies, civil society organizations and other entities with expertise in
those matters;
12. Stresses the importance of cooperation and coordination in mine action and of devoting existing
resources, as appropriate, to that end, emphasizes the primary responsibility of national authorities in that regard,
and also stresses the supporting role of the United Nations, with the United Nations Mine Action Service as the
coordinator for mine action within the United Nations system, and other relevant organizations in that regard;
13. Recognizes the importance of explicitly incorporating references to mine action, when appropriate, in
ceasefire and peace agreements as well as in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
as appropriate, in the light of the potential that mine action can have as a peace- and confidence-building measure in
post-conflict situations among the parties concerned;
14. Encourages the United Nations to continue to take measures to improve coordination, efficiency,
transparency and accountability, in particular by implementing the Strategy of the United Nations on Mine
Action 2013–2018;
15. Encourages those States and organizations in a position to do so to support measures by all relevant
actors aimed at improving rapid response capacity in humanitarian emergencies, as well as transparency and
accountability;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution and on follow-up to previous resolutions on assistance in mine
clearance and on assistance in mine action;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session the item entitled “Assistance
in mine action”.
329

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 70/81
A/RES/70/81

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/494, para. 8)13

70/81.

Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it established the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its subsequent resolutions on the subject, in which, inter alia, it
requested the Scientific Committee to continue its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future generations resulting from the levels of
radiation to which mankind and the environment are exposed,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information about atomic and ionizing radiation
and to analyse its effects on mankind and the environment, and conscious also of the increased volume, complexity
and diversity of that information,
Acknowledging the concerns about the radiological consequences of nuclear accidents,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work, and welcoming the increased
commitment of States members of the Committee,
Emphasizing the vital need for sufficient, assured and predictable funding, as well as efficient management, of
the work of the secretariat of the Scientific Committee to arrange the annual sessions and coordinate the
development of documents based on scientific reviews of the sources of ionizing radiation and its effects on human
health and the environment,
Recognizing the increasing importance of the scientific work of the Scientific Committee and the need to carry
out unforeseen additional work, such as after the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station,
Considering that the high quality of the work and the scientific rigour of the Scientific Committee need to be
maintained in the future,
Recognizing the importance of disseminating the findings of the Scientific Committee, in particular to the
public, and widely publicizing scientific knowledge about atomic radiation, and recalling in that context principle 10
of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,14
Noting the desirability that the resources of the Scientific Committee be sufficient, assured and predictable,
and recognizing the importance of voluntary contributions to the general trust fund established by the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to support the work of the Committee,
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for the valuable
contribution that it has been making since its inception to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects
and risks of exposure to ionizing radiation and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific authority and
independence of judgement;
2. Reaffirms the decision to maintain the present functions and independent role of the Scientific
Committee;

_______________
13

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, New Zealand, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United States of America.
14
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.

330

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

3. Notes with appreciation the work of the Scientific Committee, and takes note of the report on its sixtysecond session,15 including the reconfirmation of the Governing Principles for its work and the terms of reference
for its Bureau;
4. Appreciates that the Scientific Committee has made arrangements for activities to follow up on its 2013
evaluation of the levels and effects of radiation exposure due to the nuclear accident after the 2011 great east-Japan
earthquake and tsunami, such as the systematic review of scientific information that has been published since the
completion of the Committee’s evaluation,16 welcomes the publication of the first review, and encourages the
secretariat of the Committee to disseminate the findings of the Committee’s systematic reviews, in particular, to
the public;
5. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including its important activities to increase
knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing radiation from all sources, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session;
6. Supports the intentions and plans of the Scientific Committee for conducting its programme of work of
scientific review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly, in particular its next Global Survey of Medical
Radiation Usage and Exposures, to be conducted in close cooperation with other relevant organizations, and its
assessments of levels of ionizing radiation exposure from electrical energy production, and requests the Committee
to submit plans for its ongoing and future programme of work to the Assembly at its seventy-first session;
7. Welcomes developments in streamlining procedures for publishing the reports of the Scientific
Committee electronically on its official website and as sales publications, and calls upon the secretariat to monitor
the timely publication of those reports and to continue to strive to publish them within the same calendar year as
their approval;
8. Re-emphasizes the need for the Scientific Committee to hold regular sessions on an annual basis so that
its report can reflect the latest developments and findings in the field of ionizing radiation and thereby provide
updated information for dissemination among all States;
9. Invites the Scientific Committee to continue its consultations with scientists and experts from interested
Member States in the process of preparing its future scientific reports, and requests the secretariat to facilitate such
consultations;
10. Welcomes, in this context, the readiness of Member States to provide the Scientific Committee with
relevant information on the levels and effects of ionizing radiation, and invites the Committee to analyse and give
due consideration to such information, particularly in the light of its own findings;
11. Recalls the strategy of the Scientific Committee to improve data collection, encourages in this regard
Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations concerned to
provide further relevant data about levels, effects and risks of radiation exposure from various sources, which would
greatly help in the preparation of future reports of the Committee to the General Assembly, and encourages the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organization and
other relevant organizations to further collaborate with the secretariat on arrangements for the collection, analysis
and dissemination of data on radiation exposures of patients, workers and the public;
12. Welcomes the development by the secretariat of an online platform for collecting data on medical
exposures, encourages Member States to take part in the Scientific Committee’s Global Survey of Medical
Radiation Usage and Exposures, and also encourages Member States to nominate a national contact person to
facilitate coordination of the collection and submission of data on exposures of patients, workers and the public
within their country;
13. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue, within existing resources, to actively
support the effective conduct of the work of the Scientific Committee and the dissemination of its findings to the
General Assembly, the scientific community and the public;
_______________
15
16

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 46 (A/70/46).
Ibid., chap. II, sect. A.1.

331

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

14. Takes note, in this regard, of the Scientific Committee’s outreach strategy for the coming years, in
particular the enhancement of the website of the Committee and the publication of informative leaflets and posters
in all the official languages of the United Nations, and encourages that consideration be given to publishing the
website in all those languages;
15. Encourages the United Nations Environment Programme to continue to maintain appropriate funding
for the Scientific Committee, pursuant to paragraph 15 of General Assembly resolution 69/84 of 5 December 2014;
16. Encourages Member States to make voluntary contributions to the general trust fund established by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme and also to make contributions in kind, in order
to support the work of the Scientific Committee, and the dissemination of its findings, in a sustainable manner;
17. Recalls paragraph 19 of General Assembly resolution 66/70 of 9 December 2011, notes the expression
of interest by Member States in membership in the Scientific Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide the Assembly at its seventy-second session with a list of the Member States that have expressed their
particular interest in membership in the Committee between the sixty-sixth and seventy-second sessions, for
consideration pursuant to the above-mentioned paragraph.
RESOLUTION 70/82
A/RES/70/82

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/495, para. 16)17

70/82.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December 1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004,
61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of 17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of
10 December 2010, 65/271 of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 67/113 of 18 December 2012, 68/50 of
5 December 2013, 68/74 and 68/75 of 11 December 2013 and 69/85 of 5 December 2014,
Emphasizing the significant progress in the development of space science and technology and their
applications that has enabled humans to explore the universe, and the extraordinary achievements made over the
past 50 years in space exploration efforts, including deepening the understanding of the planetary system and the
Sun and the Earth itself, in the use of space science and technology for the benefit of all humankind and in the
development of the international legal regime governing space activities,
Recognizing, in that regard, the unique platform at the global level for international cooperation in space
activities represented by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee and Legal Subcommittee and assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat,
Welcoming the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, to be commemorated in 2018, which will be an opportunity to consider the current status and chart the
future of the contribution of the Committee to global space governance, and for which the Committee and its
subsidiary bodies have set in motion the preparatory work for their thematic sessions in 2018,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and expanding the exploration and
use of outer space, as the province of all humankind, for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all
States the benefits derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this field, for which
the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule of law, including the relevant
norms of space law and their important role in international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space
_______________
17

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Algeria (on behalf of the
Working Group of the Whole on International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space).

332

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

for peaceful purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote the peaceful uses of
outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges, especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and bearing in mind the importance
of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,18
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, should contribute actively to the
prevention of an arms race in outer space with a view to promoting and strengthening international cooperation in
the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the challenges to the long-term
sustainability of outer space activities, in particular the impact of space debris which is an issue of concern to all
nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the development of peaceful space exploration and applications as well as in
various national and cooperative space projects, and the importance of further developing the legal framework to
strengthen international cooperation in space,
Convinced that space science and technology and their applications, such as satellite communications, Earth
observation systems and satellite navigation technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long-term solutions
for sustainable development and can contribute more effectively to efforts to promote the development of all
countries and regions of the world, and stressing in that regard the need to harness the benefits of space technology
towards implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,19
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters,20 and desirous of enhancing international
coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster management and emergency response through greater
access to and use of space-based services and geospatial information for all countries and facilitating capacitybuilding and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in developing countries,
Firmly convinced that the use of space science and technology and their applications in areas such as telehealth, tele-education, disaster management, environmental protection, natural resources management and ocean
and climate monitoring contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations that
address various aspects of economic, social and cultural development, particularly poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned about the devastating effects of infectious diseases, including Ebola virus disease, to the
detriment of human life, society and development, and urging the international community to enhance the role of
space-based solutions, in particular tele-epidemiology, in monitoring, preparedness and response activities,
Recalling the fact that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, recognized the important role that space science and technology play in promoting
sustainable development,21
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its fiftyeighth session,22
1. Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its fiftyeighth session;22
2. Agrees that the Committee, at its fifty-ninth session, should consider the substantive items recommended
at its fifty-eighth session,23 taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing
countries;
_______________
18

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution 70/1.
20
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
21
Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
22
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20).
23
Ibid., para. 360.
19

333

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

3. Notes that, at its fifty-fourth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the Committee continued its work,24 as
mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 69/85;
4. Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fifty-fifth session, should consider the substantive items and
reconvene the working groups recommended by the Committee,25 taking into account the concerns of all countries,
in particular those of developing countries;
5. Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties governing the uses of outer
space26 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those treaties in accordance with their national law, as well
as incorporating them into their national legislation;
6. Notes with satisfaction that the space law curriculum developed by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of
the Secretariat and published in all official languages of the United Nations could encourage further studies within
States in cooperation with relevant entities in support of capacity-building efforts in space law and policy;
7. Notes that, at its fifty-second session, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the Committee
continued its work,27 as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 69/85;
8. Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fifty-third session, should consider the
substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by the Committee,28 taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
9. Reiterates the importance of information-sharing in discovering, monitoring and physically
characterizing potentially hazardous near-Earth objects to ensure that all countries, in particular developing countries
with limited capacity in predicting and mitigating a near-Earth object impact, are aware of potential threats,
emphasizes the need for capacity-building for effective emergency response and disaster management in the event
of a near-Earth object impact, and notes with satisfaction the establishment of and work carried out by the
International Asteroid Warning Network and the Space Mission Planning Advisory Group to implement the
recommendations for an international response to the near-Earth object impact threat;29
10. Notes with appreciation that some States are already implementing space debris mitigation measures on
a voluntary basis, through national mechanisms and consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,30 endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/217, and
invites other States to implement, through relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
11. Considers that it is essential that States pay more attention to the problem of collisions of space objects,
especially those with nuclear power sources, with space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the
continuation of national research on this question, for the development of improved technology for the monitoring
of space debris and for the compilation and dissemination of data on space debris, also considers that, to the extent
possible, information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that
international cooperation is needed to expand appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space
debris on future space missions;

_______________
24

Ibid., chap. II.C; and A/AC.105/1090.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), paras. 266–271.
26
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and
the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International
Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on Registration of
Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020); and Agreement Governing the Activities of
States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
27
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), chap. II.B; and A/AC.105/1088.
28
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), paras. 192–195.
29
Ibid., para. 153; ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), para. 144; and A/AC.105/1038, para. 198, and annex III.
30
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), annex.
25

334

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

12. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to contribute actively to the goal of
preventing an arms race in outer space as an essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
13. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority, ways and means of maintaining
outer space for peaceful purposes and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, and
agrees that the Committee should continue to consider the broader perspective of space security and associated
matters that would be instrumental in ensuring the safe and responsible conduct of space activities, including ways
to promote international, regional and interregional cooperation to that end;
14. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee, at its fifty-eighth session, endorsed the plan of work of the
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in 2018
(UNISPACE+50), welcomes the establishment of the steering committee for the preparations for UNISPACE+50
composed of the members of the bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies (the Group of 15), the Chairs
of the working groups of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies and the Director of the Office for Outer Space
Affairs, and encourages the steering committee to work with other experts, as appropriate;31
15. Recognizes the central role of the Office for Outer Space Affairs in fostering capacity-building in the use
of space science and technology and their applications for the benefit of all countries, in particular developing
countries, and urges all Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund in Support of the United Nations Programme
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in order to enhance the capacity of the Office to provide technical and legal
advisory services in its priority thematic areas;
16. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2016, as endorsed by the
Committee;32
17. Notes with satisfaction the significant achievements made and the advisory support provided to 35
Member States within the framework of the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER), with the valuable contributions of its network of regional
support offices, and encourages Member States, on a voluntary basis, to provide the programme with the additional
resources necessary to address the increasing demand for support successfully and in a timely manner;
18. Welcomes the adoption of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,33 in which
the value of space-based technology and Earth observation for disaster management and emergency response is
recognized, and notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Office for Outer Space Affairs and its UN-SPIDER
programme towards promoting international cooperation as a way to enhance the use of space-based technologies
and related services at the national and local levels;
19. Notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the International Committee on Global
Navigation Satellite Systems with the support of the Office for Outer Space Affairs, in its capacity as executive
secretariat of the International Committee, towards achieving compatibility and interoperability among global and
regional space-based positioning, navigation and timing systems and in the promotion of the use of global
navigation satellite systems and their integration into national infrastructure, particularly in developing countries,
and notes with appreciation that the International Committee marks its tenth anniversary in 2015 and will hold its
tenth meeting in Boulder, United States of America, from 1 to 6 November 2015;
20. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and technology education, affiliated
to the United Nations, namely, the African regional centres for space science and technology education in the French
and English languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Regional Centre for Space Science and
Technology Education for Asia and the Pacific, located in China, the Centre for Space Science and Technology
Education in Asia and the Pacific, located in India, the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology
Education for Latin America and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexico, and the Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education for Western Asia, located in Jordan, have continued their education
_______________
31

Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), paras. 350 and 351.
Ibid., para. 79.
33
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
32

335

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

programmes in 2015, encourages the regional centres to continue to promote greater participation of women in their
education programmes, and agrees that the regional centres should continue to report to the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on their activities;
21. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of space activities is essential to
strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute
to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,19 to that end requests relevant regional
organizations and their groups of experts to offer the assistance necessary so that countries can carry out the
recommendations of regional conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of
women in all fields of science and technology;
22. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by organizations such as the Asia-Pacific Space
Cooperation Organization and the European Space Agency and by conferences and other mechanisms such as the
African Leadership Conference on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the Asia-Pacific
Regional Space Agency Forum and the Space Conference of the Americas in strengthening regional and
international cooperation among States;
23. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its applications and to contribute to
an orderly growth of space activities favourable to sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all
countries, including strengthening sustainable spatial data infrastructure at the regional and national levels and
building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular in developing countries;
24. Reiterates the need to promote the benefits of space technology and its applications in the major United
Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and cultural development and related fields, and recognizes
that the fundamental significance of space science and technology and their applications for global, regional,
national and local sustainable development processes should be promoted in the formulation of policies and
programmes of action and their implementation, including through efforts towards achieving the objectives of those
conferences and summits and in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
25. Encourages Member States, to that end, to promote the inclusion in those conferences, summits and
processes of the relevance of space science and technology applications and the use of space-derived geospatial
data, with the involvement of the Office for Outer Space Affairs;
26. Encourages the Office for Outer Space Affairs to take active part in those conferences, summits and
processes, and other activities in support of the objectives of UNISPACE+50, as appropriate;
27. Urges the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space), under the leadership of the
Office for Outer Space Affairs, to continue to examine how space science and technology and their applications
could contribute to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and encourages entities of the United Nations
system to participate, as appropriate, in UN-Space coordination efforts;
28. Notes with satisfaction that the Office for Outer Space Affairs will issue a special report by UN-Space
for consideration by the Committee at its fifty-ninth session on the implementation of the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Transparency and Confidence-building Measures in Outer Space Activities34 as
pertaining to the United Nations system, and coordinate the preparation of that report with relevant United Nations
entities;35
29. Encourages the Office for Outer Space Affairs to conduct capacity-building and outreach activities
associated with space security and transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities, as
appropriate, and within the context of the long-term sustainability of outer space activities;
30. Welcomes the agreement of the Committee and its Legal Subcommittee, at their respective sessions in
2015, to discontinue the use of unedited transcripts and to use digital recordings on a permanent basis and that the
digital recording application should be further enhanced;36
_______________
34

A/68/189.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), para. 339.
36
Ibid., para. 355.
35

336

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

31. Endorses the composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its subcommittees for the period
2016–2017, and reiterates that the Committee and its subcommittees, at their respective sessions in 2016, should
elect their officers nominated for that period;37
32. Encourages the regional groups to promote active participation in the work of the Committee and its
subsidiary bodies by the States members of the Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.
RESOLUTION 70/83
A/RES/70/83

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/496,
para. 16),38 by a recorded vote of 167 to 1, with 11 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel
Abstaining: Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, Paraguay, United States of America, Vanuatu

70/83.

Assistance to Palestine refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948 and all its subsequent resolutions on the question,
including resolution 69/86 of 5 December 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, by which, inter alia, it established the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
Recalling further the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Aware of the fact that, for more than six decades, the Palestine refugees have suffered from the loss of their
homes, lands and means of livelihood,
Affirming the imperative of resolving the problem of the Palestine refugees for the achievement of justice and
for the achievement of lasting peace in the region,

_______________
37

Resolution 69/85, paras. 29–31; Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), paras. 353
and 354; and official communication from the Office for Outer Space Affairs to States members of the Committee dated 29 July 2015.
38
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Comoros, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Monaco,
Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.

337

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Acknowledging the essential role that the Agency has played for over 60 years since its establishment in
ameliorating the plight of the Palestine refugees through the provision of education, health, relief and social services
and ongoing work in the areas of camp infrastructure, microfinance, protection and emergency assistance,
Taking note of the report of the Commissioner-General of the Agency covering the period from 1 January to
31 December 2014,39
Taking note also of the special report of the Commissioner-General, submitted pursuant to paragraph 21 of
General Assembly resolution 302 (IV) and conveyed by the Secretary-General on 4 August 2015, regarding the
severe financial crisis of the Agency and its effect on core services,40
Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees throughout all the fields of operation, namely, Jordan,
Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Expressing grave concern at the especially difficult situation of the Palestine refugees under occupation,
including with regard to their safety, well-being and socioeconomic living conditions,
Expressing grave concern in particular at the grave humanitarian situation and socioeconomic conditions of
the Palestine refugees in the Gaza Strip, and underlining the importance of emergency and humanitarian assistance
and urgent reconstruction efforts,
Noting the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements on
13 September 1993 by the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization41 and the subsequent
implementation agreements,
1. Notes with regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees, as provided for in paragraph 11 of
General Assembly resolution 194 (III), has not yet been effected, and that, therefore, the situation of the Palestine
refugees continues to be a matter of grave concern and the Palestine refugees continue to require assistance to meet
basic health, education and living needs;
2. Also notes with regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine has been unable to
find a means of achieving progress in the implementation of paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
and reiterates its request to the Conciliation Commission to continue exerting efforts towards the implementation of
that paragraph and to report to the Assembly on the efforts being exerted in this regard as appropriate, but no later
than 1 September 2016;
3. Affirms the necessity for the continuation of the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the importance of its unimpeded operation and its provision of services,
including emergency assistance, for the well-being, protection and human development of the Palestine refugees
and for the stability of the region, pending the just resolution of the question of the Palestine refugees;
4. Calls upon all donors to continue to strengthen their efforts to meet the anticipated needs of the Agency,
including with regard to increased expenditures arising from conflicts and instability in the region and the serious
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, particularly in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, and those needs
mentioned in recent emergency, recovery and reconstruction appeals and plans for the Gaza Strip and in the regional
crisis response plans to address the situation of Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic and those Palestine
refugees who have fled to countries in the region;
5. Commends the Agency for its provision of vital assistance to the Palestine refugees and its role as a
stabilizing factor in the region and the tireless efforts of the staff of the Agency in carrying out its mandate.

_______________
39

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/70/13); and ibid., Supplement No. 13A
(A/70/13/Add.1).
40
A/70/272, annex.
41
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.

338

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 70/84
A/RES/70/84

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/496,
para. 16),42 by a recorded vote of 164 to 7, with 7 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Honduras, Liberia, Paraguay

70/84.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967, 2341 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and all subsequent
related resolutions,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967 and 259 (1968) of 27 September 1968,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of its resolution 69/87 of
5 December 2014,43
Taking note also of the report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 January to 31 December 2014,44
Concerned about the continuing human suffering resulting from the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities,
Taking note of the relevant provisions of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements of 13 September 199345 with regard to the modalities for the admission of persons displaced in 1967,
and concerned that the process agreed upon has not yet been effected,
Taking note also of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
1. Reaffirms the right of all persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities to
return to their homes or former places of residence in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967;

_______________
42

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
43
A/70/308.
44
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/70/13); and ibid., Supplement No. 13A
(A/70/13/Add.1).
45
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.

339

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

2. Stresses the necessity for an accelerated return of displaced persons, and calls for compliance with the
mechanism agreed upon by the parties in article XII of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements of 13 September 199345 on the return of displaced persons;
3. Endorses, in the meantime, the efforts of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to continue to provide humanitarian assistance, as far as
practicable, on an emergency basis, and as a temporary measure, to persons in the area who are currently displaced
and in serious need of continued assistance as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities;
4. Strongly appeals to all Governments and to organizations and individuals to contribute generously to the
Agency and to the other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned for the abovementioned purposes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, after consulting with the Commissioner-General, to report to the
General Assembly before its seventy-first session on the progress made with regard to the implementation of the
present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/85
A/RES/70/85

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/496,
para. 16),46 by a recorded vote of 169 to 6, with 5 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Nauru, Paraguay, Vanuatu

70/85.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 212 (III) of 19 November 1948, 302 (IV) of
8 December 1949 and all subsequent related resolutions, including its resolution 69/88 of 5 December 2014,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 January to 31 December 2014,47
_______________
46

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
47
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/70/13); and ibid., Supplement No. 13A (A/70/13/Add.1).

340

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Taking note of the letter dated 16 June 2015 from the Chair of the Advisory Commission of the Agency to the
Commissioner-General,48
Deeply concerned about the extremely critical financial situation of the Agency, caused in part by the
structural underfunding of the Agency, as well as its rising expenditures resulting from the deterioration of the
socioeconomic and humanitarian conditions and the conflicts and rising instability in the region and their significant
negative impact on the provision of necessary Agency services to the Palestine refugees, including its emergency,
recovery, reconstruction and development programmes in all fields of operation,
Taking note of the special report of the Commissioner-General, submitted pursuant to paragraph 21 of General
Assembly resolution 302 (IV), and transmitted by the Secretary-General on 4 August 2015, regarding the severe
financial crisis of the Agency and the negative implications for Agency services, including its education programme
for some 500,000 Palestine refugee children in more than 685 schools and some 7,000 youth in 8 vocational training
centres,49
Expressing appreciation for the mobilization of donors and host countries in response to the financial crisis,
and expressing particular appreciation to the donors that extended generous support to avert the suspension of the
Agency’s education programme, while acknowledging the steadfast support of all other donors to the Agency,
Commending the Agency for the measures taken to address the financial crisis, including internal measures to
contain costs,
Emphasizing the imperative of ensuring sustained and predictable financial support for the Agency, a pillar of
stability for a registered population of 5.3 million Palestine refugees, including through the provision of the
necessary resources to enable it to continue to deliver its vital services uninterruptedly,
Welcoming the support for the Agency reaffirmed at the ministerial meeting convened on 26 September 2015
and at the high-level conference convened on 2 June 2015 in New York to commemorate the sixty-fifth anniversary
of the commencement of the Agency’s operations,
Recalling Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations,50
Recalling also the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,51
Recalling further its resolutions 69/133 of 12 December 2014 on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and the protection of United Nations personnel and 68/102 of 13 December 2013 on the strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, calling, inter alia, upon all States to
ensure respect for and protection of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, to
respect the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of humanitarian
assistance and to respect and ensure respect for the inviolability of United Nations premises,
Affirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,52 to the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation, namely, Jordan, Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Bearing in mind the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,53 including the pledge that no one will be
left behind,

_______________
48

Ibid., Supplement No. 13 (A/70/13), pp. 8–10.
A/70/272, annex.
50
Resolution 22 A (I).
51
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.
52
Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.
53
Resolution 70/1.
49

341

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Gravely concerned about the extremely difficult socioeconomic conditions being faced by the Palestine
refugees in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly in the refugee camps in the
Gaza Strip, as a result of the recurrent military operations, continuing prolonged Israeli closures, the construction of
settlements and the wall, and the severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade,
which have deepened unemployment and poverty rates among the refugees, with potentially lasting, long-term
negative effects, while taking note of developments with regard to the situation of access there,
Deploring the conflict in and around the Gaza Strip in July and August 2014, and the civilian casualties
caused, including the killing and injury of thousands of Palestinian civilians, including children, women and the
elderly, as well as the widespread destruction of or damage to thousands of homes and civilian infrastructure,
including schools, hospitals, water, sanitation and electricity networks, economic, industrial and agricultural
properties, public institutions, religious sites and United Nations schools and facilities, as well as the internal
displacement of hundreds of thousands of civilians, and any violations of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, in this regard,
Deploring also attacks affecting United Nations installations, including Agency schools sheltering displaced
civilians, and all other breaches of the inviolability of United Nations premises during the conflict in the Gaza Strip
in July and August 2014, as reported in the summary by the Secretary-General of the report of the Board of
Inquiry54 and by the independent commission of inquiry established pursuant to Human Rights Council
resolution S-21/1,55 and stressing the imperative of ensuring accountability,
Gravely concerned about the lasting negative repercussions of the military operations in the Gaza Strip
between December 2008 and January 2009, as well as in November 2012, on the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation of the Palestine refugees in the Gaza Strip,
Commending the extraordinary efforts by the Agency to provide shelter, emergency relief, medical, food,
protection and other humanitarian assistance during the military operations of July and August 2014,
Recognizing the need for the swift implementation of all aspects of the temporary tripartite agreement
facilitated by the United Nations in September 2014, and stressing the urgent need for the lifting of all Israeli
closures and restrictions on the Gaza Strip and for the reconstruction of destroyed homes and infrastructure,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009 and Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
Calling upon Israel to ensure the unimpeded import of essential construction materials into the Gaza Strip and
to reduce the burdensome cost of importation of Agency supplies, while taking note of recent developments with
regard to the tripartite agreement facilitated by the United Nations,
Expressing concern about the severe classroom shortage in the Gaza Strip and the consequent negative impact
on the right to education of refugee children,
Stressing the urgent need for the advancement of reconstruction in the Gaza Strip, including by ensuring the
timely facilitation of construction projects and by sustaining the swift entry of construction materials needed for
projects managed by the Agency, and the need for the accelerated implementation of other urgent United Nationsled civilian reconstruction activities,
Welcoming contributions made to the Agency’s emergency appeals for the Gaza Strip following the military
operations in July and August 2014, and calling urgently upon the international community for continued support in
accordance with the Agency’s strategic response plan,
Welcoming also the convening of the Cairo International Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, on
12 October 2014, and urging the timely and full disbursement of pledges for expediting the provision of
humanitarian assistance and the reconstruction process,
_______________
54
55

342

S/2015/286, annex.
See A/HRC/29/52.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Stressing that the situation in the Gaza Strip is unsustainable and that a durable ceasefire agreement must lead
to a fundamental improvement in the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, including through
the sustained and regular opening of crossing points, and must ensure the safety and well-being of civilians on
both sides,
Affirming the need to support the Palestinian national consensus government in its assumption of full
government responsibilities in both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, in all fields, as well as through its presence at
Gaza’s crossing points,
Noting with appreciation the progress made towards rebuilding the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp, commending
the Government of Lebanon, donors, the Agency and other concerned parties for the continuing efforts to assist
affected and displaced refugees, and emphasizing the need for additional funding to complete the reconstruction of
the camp and end without delay the displacement from the camp of thousands of residents whose shelters have not
been rebuilt,
Expressing deep concern at the critical situation of Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic and at the
impact of the crisis on the Agency’s ability to deliver its services, and regretting profoundly the loss of life among
refugees and the killing of 14 staff members of the Agency in the crisis since 2012,
Emphasizing the need for increased assistance to Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic as well as
those who have fled to neighbouring countries, and emphasizing the necessity of ensuring open borders for
Palestine refugees fleeing the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic, consistent with the principles of
non-discrimination and non-refoulement under international law, and recalling in this regard the statement by the
President of the Security Council of 2 October 2013,56
Aware of the valuable work done by the Agency in providing protection to the Palestinian people, in particular
Palestine refugees, and recalling the need for the protection of all civilians in situations of armed conflict,
Deploring the endangerment of the safety of the Agency’s staff and the damage and destruction caused to the
facilities and properties of the Agency during the period covered by the report of the Commissioner-General, and
stressing the need to maintain the neutrality of and safeguard the inviolability of United Nations premises,
installations and equipment at all times,
Deploring also the breaches of the inviolability of United Nations premises, the failure to accord the property
and assets of the Organization immunity from any form of interference and the failure to protect United Nations
personnel, premises and property,
Deploring further the killing and injury of Agency staff members by the Israeli occupying forces in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory since September 2000, including the 11 Agency personnel killed during the military
operations in the Gaza Strip in July and August 2014,
Deploring the killing and wounding of refugee children and women sheltering in the Agency schools by the
Israeli occupying forces during the military operations of July and August 2014,
Affirming the need for accountability and compensation to victims of violations of international law in
accordance with international standards by all sides,
Deeply concerned about the continuing imposition of restrictions on the freedom of movement and access of
the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, and the injury, harassment and intimidation of the Agency’s staff, which
undermine and obstruct the work of the Agency, including its ability to provide essential basic and emergency
services,
Recalling the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001 and on
17 December 201457 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, including
the call upon parties to facilitate the activities of the Agency, to guarantee its protection and to refrain from levying
taxes and imposing undue financial burdens,
_______________
56
57

S/PRST/2013/15; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2013–31 July 2014 (S/INF/69).
A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.

343

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware of the agreement between the Agency and the Government of Israel,
Taking note of the agreement reached on 24 June 1994, embodied in an exchange of letters between the
Agency and the Palestine Liberation Organization,58
1. Reaffirms that the effective functioning of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East remains essential in all fields of operation;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the Agency, as well as to all the staff of the
Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable work, particularly in the light of the difficult conditions, instability and
crises faced during the past year;
3. Expresses special commendation to the Agency for the essential role that it has played for more than
65 years since its establishment in providing vital services for the well-being, human development and protection of
the Palestine refugees and the amelioration of their plight;
4. Commends the extraordinary efforts of the Agency, in cooperation with other United Nations agencies
on the ground, to provide emergency humanitarian assistance, including shelter, food and medical aid, to refugees
and affected civilians during the military operations in the Gaza Strip in July and August 2014, and recognizes its
exemplary capacity to mobilize in emergency situations while continuously carrying out its core human
development programmes;
5. Expresses its appreciation for the important support and cooperation provided by the host Governments
to the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
6. Also expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the Agency, and requests it to continue
its efforts and to keep the General Assembly informed of its activities;
7. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East59 and the efforts to assist in ensuring the financial
security of the Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary services and assistance to the
Working Group for the conduct of its work;
8. Commends the Agency’s six-year medium-term strategy for 2016–2021 and the continuing efforts of the
Commissioner-General to increase the budgetary transparency and efficiency of the Agency, as reflected in the
Agency’s programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;60
9. Also commends the Agency for sustaining its reform efforts, despite difficult operational circumstances,
and urges it to continue to apply maximum efficiency procedures to reduce operational and administrative costs and
to maximize the use of resources;
10. Takes note of the special report of the Commissioner-General, submitted pursuant to paragraph 21 of
General Assembly resolution 302 (IV) and transmitted by the Secretary-General on 4 August 2015, regarding the
severe financial crisis of the Agency,49 and urges all States and international organizations to actively engage in
efforts to address the conclusions and proposals therein;
11. Commends the Agency for its far-reaching measures to address its current financial crisis, and
encourages the Agency to take further steps to reduce the deficit in its General Fund in order to safeguard the
delivery of services, including the current provision of basic education to 500,000 children, primary health care to
more than 3 million beneficiaries and assistance to 1.5 million of the most vulnerable Palestine refugees;
12. Calls upon all donors and relevant stakeholders to support the Agency, with a view to ensuring a
sustainable and stable financial situation for the Agency in order to safeguard core programmes, pending the just
resolution of the question of the Palestine refugees;
_______________
58

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/49/13), annex I.
A/70/379.
60
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 13A (A/70/13/Add.1).
59

344

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

13. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the
management capacity of the Agency,61 and urges all Member States to carefully consider the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein, including the continued provision of financial resources from the regular
budget of the United Nations;
14. Endorses the efforts of the Commissioner-General to continue to provide humanitarian assistance, as far
as is practicable, on an emergency basis and as a temporary measure, to persons in the area who are internally
displaced and in serious need of continuing assistance as a result of recent crises in the Agency’s fields of operation;
15. Encourages the Agency to provide increased assistance, in accordance with its mandate, to affected
Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic as well as to those who have fled to neighbouring countries, as
detailed in the Syrian regional crisis response plans, and calls upon donors to urgently ensure sustained support to
the Agency in this regard in the light of the continuing grave deterioration of the situation and the growing needs of
the refugees;
16. Welcomes the progress made thus far by the Agency in rebuilding the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in
northern Lebanon, and calls for donor funding to enable the expeditious completion of its reconstruction, for the
continued provision of relief assistance to those displaced following its destruction in 2007 and for the alleviation of
their ongoing suffering through the provision of the necessary support and financial assistance until the
reconstruction of the camp is complete;
17. Encourages the Agency, in close cooperation with other relevant United Nations entities, to continue to
make progress in addressing the needs, rights and protection of children, women and persons with disabilities in its
operations, including through the provision of necessary psychosocial and humanitarian support, in accordance with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child,62 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women63 and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;64
18. Recognizes the acute protection needs of Palestine refugees across the region, and encourages the
Agency’s efforts to contribute to a coordinated and sustained response in accordance with international law;
19. Commends, in this regard, the Agency’s provision of humanitarian and psychosocial support and other
initiatives that provide recreational, cultural and educational activities for children during the summer, including in
the Gaza Strip, and, recognizing their positive contribution, calls for full support for such initiatives by donor and
host countries and encourages the building and strengthening of partnerships to facilitate and enhance the provision
of these services;
20. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply fully with the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;52
21. Also calls upon Israel to abide by Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations50 in order to ensure the safety of the personnel
of the Agency, the protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, at all times;
22. Takes note of the investigations into the incidents affecting the Agency’s facilities during the conflict in
the Gaza Strip in July and August 2014, and calls for ensuring accountability for all violations of international law;
23. Urges the Government of Israel to expeditiously reimburse the Agency for all transit charges incurred
and other financial losses sustained as a result of the delays and restrictions on movement and access imposed
by Israel;
24. Calls upon Israel particularly to cease obstructing the movement and access of the staff, vehicles and
supplies of the Agency and to cease the levying of taxes, extra fees and charges, which affect the Agency’s
operations detrimentally;
_______________
61

A/65/705.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
63
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
64
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
62

345

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

25. Reiterates its call upon Israel to fully lift the restrictions impeding or delaying the import of necessary
construction materials and supplies for the reconstruction and repair of thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee
shelters, and for the implementation of suspended and urgently needed civilian infrastructure projects in refugee
camps in the Gaza Strip;
26. Requests the Commissioner-General to proceed with the issuance of identification cards for Palestine
refugees and their descendants in the Occupied Palestinian Territory;
27. Notes with appreciation the positive contribution of the Agency’s microfinance and job creation
programmes, encourages efforts to enhance the sustainability and benefits of microfinance services to a greater
number of Palestine refugees, especially in view of the high unemployment rates affecting them, and youth in
particular, and calls upon the Agency, in close cooperation with the relevant agencies, to continue to contribute to the
development of the economic and social stability of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation;
28. Reiterates its appeals to all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to
continue and to augment their contributions to the regular budget of the Agency, to increase their special allocations
for grants and scholarships for higher education to Palestine refugees and to contribute to the establishment of
vocational training centres for Palestine refugees, and requests the Agency to act as the recipient and trustee for the
special allocations for grants and scholarships;
29. Urges all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to support the Agency’s
valuable and necessary work in assisting the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation by providing or increasing
their contributions to the Agency in order to address the serious financial constraints and underfunding affecting its
regular budget, noting that financial needs have been exacerbated by conflicts and instability in the recent period and
the deteriorating humanitarian situation on the ground;
30. Calls, in this regard, for the full and timely funding by donors of the Agency’s emergency, recovery and
reconstruction programmes as set out in its emergency appeals and response plans;
31. Urges the Agency to further explore innovative and diversified means to mobilize resources, including
through partnerships with international financial institutions, the private sector and civil society.
RESOLUTION 70/86
A/RES/70/86

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/496,
para. 16),65 by a recorded vote of 167 to 7, with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,

_______________
65

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Comoros, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco,
Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.

346

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Paraguay, Vanuatu

70/86.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948 and 36/146 C of 16 December 1981 and all its
subsequent resolutions on the question,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to its resolution 69/89 of 5 December
2014,66 as well as that of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine for the period from
1 September 2014 to 31 August 2015,67
Recalling that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights68 and the principles of international law uphold the
principle that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his or her property,
Recalling in particular its resolution 394 (V) of 14 December 1950, in which it directed the Conciliation
Commission, in consultation with the parties concerned, to prescribe measures for the protection of the rights,
property and interests of the Palestine refugees,
Noting the completion of the programme of identification and evaluation of Arab property, as announced by
the Conciliation Commission in its twenty-second progress report,69 and the fact that the Land Office had a schedule
of Arab owners and a file of documents defining the location, area and other particulars of Arab property,
Expressing its appreciation for the preservation and modernization of the existing records, including the land
records, of the Conciliation Commission, and stressing the importance of such records for a just resolution of the
plight of the Palestine refugees in conformity with resolution 194 (III),
Recalling that, in the framework of the Middle East peace process, the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Government of Israel agreed, in the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of
13 September 1993,70 to commence negotiations on permanent status issues, including the important issue of the
refugees,
1. Reaffirms that the Palestine refugees are entitled to their property and to the income derived therefrom,
in conformity with the principles of equity and justice;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropriate steps, in consultation with the United Nations
Conciliation Commission for Palestine, for the protection of Arab property, assets and property rights in Israel;
3. Calls once again upon Israel to render all facilities and assistance to the Secretary-General in the
implementation of the present resolution;
4. Calls upon all the parties concerned to provide the Secretary-General with any pertinent information in
their possession concerning Arab property, assets and property rights in Israel that would assist him in the
implementation of the present resolution;
5. Urges the Palestinian and Israeli sides, as agreed between them, to deal with the important issue of
Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues within the framework of the final status peace negotiations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
_______________
66

A/70/340.
A/70/319, annex.
68
Resolution 217 A (III).
69
Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session, Annexes, Annex No. 11, document A/5700.
70
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
67

347

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 70/87
A/RES/70/87

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/497,
para. 19),71 by a recorded vote of 92 to 9, with 75 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo,
Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Gabon, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, Panama, United
States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu

70/87.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Guided also by international humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,72 as well as international standards of human rights, in
particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights73 and the International Covenants on Human Rights,74
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 2443 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and 69/90 of
5 December 2014, and the relevant resolutions of the Human Rights Council, including resolutions S-12/1 of
16 October 2009,75 S-21/1 of 23 July 201476 and 29/25 of 3 July 2015,77
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Taking into account the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,78 and recalling in this regard
its resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,

_______________
71

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
72
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
73
Resolution 217 A (III).
74
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
75
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/64/53/Add.1), chap. I.
76
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. VI.
77
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. II.
78
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.

348

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001 and on
17 December 201479 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
welcoming initiatives by States parties, both individually and collectively, according to article 1 of the Convention
and aimed at ensuring respect for the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Recalling also its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Taking note of the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the implications
of the Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people
throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,80
Convinced that occupation itself represents a gross and grave violation of human rights,
Gravely concerned about the continuing detrimental impact of ongoing unlawful Israeli practices and
measures in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, including the excessive use of force by the
Israeli occupying forces against Palestinian civilians, resulting in the death and injury of civilians and the
widespread destruction of property and vital infrastructure, including during the Israeli military operations in the
Gaza Strip in July and August 2014, as well as ongoing settlement activities and construction of the wall, the
internal forced displacement of civilians, the imposition of collective punishment measures, particularly against the
civilian population in the Gaza Strip, where continuing severe restrictions on movement amount to a blockade, and
the detention and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians,
Expressing grave concern about tensions, instability and violence in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, due to the illegal policies and practices of Israel, the occupying Power, especially
provocations and incitements regarding the holy places of Jerusalem, including the Haram al-Sharif,
Gravely concerned about all acts of violence, intimidation and provocation by Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians and properties, including homes, mosques, churches and agricultural lands,
Gravely concerned also by reports regarding serious human rights violations and grave breaches of
international humanitarian law committed during the military operations in the Gaza Strip between December 2008
and January 2009, including the findings in the summary by the Secretary-General of the report of the Board of
Inquiry81 and in the report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,82 and reiterating the
necessity for serious follow-up by all parties to the recommendations addressed to them towards ensuring
accountability and justice,
Deploring the killing and injury of thousands of civilians, including women and children, during the military
operations in the Gaza Strip in July and August 2014,
Taking note of the report of the independent commission of inquiry established pursuant to Human Rights
Council resolution S-21/1,83 and stressing the imperative of ensuring accountability for all violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law in order to end impunity, ensure justice, deter further
violations, protect civilians and promote peace,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories84 and the relevant reports of the
Secretary-Genera1,85
Recalling the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of 13 September 199386
and the subsequent implementation agreements between the Palestinian and Israeli sides,
_______________
79

A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.
A/HRC/22/63.
81
See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
82
A/HRC/12/48.
83
A/HRC/29/52.
84
A/70/406 and Corr.1.
85
A/70/133, A/70/312, A/70/341, A/70/351 and A/70/421.
86
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
80

349

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Stressing the urgency of bringing a complete end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and thus an end
to the violation of the human rights of the Palestinian people, and of allowing for the realization of their inalienable
human rights, including their right to self-determination and their independent State,
Taking note of the application of Palestine for admission to membership in the United Nations, submitted on
23 September 2011,87
Recalling its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, by which, inter alia, Palestine was accorded non-member
observer State status in the United Nations, and taking note of the follow-up report of the Secretary-General,88
Noting the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law conventions,
as well as other international treaties,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices `Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it
by the General Assembly and for its impartiality;
2. Reiterates its demand that Israel, the occupying Power, cooperate, in accordance with its obligations as a
State Member of the United Nations, with the Special Committee in implementing its mandate, and deplores the
continued lack of cooperation in this regard;
3. Deplores those policies and practices of Israel that violate the human rights of the Palestinian people and
other Arabs of the occupied territories, as reflected in the report of the Special Committee covering the reporting
period;84
4. Expresses grave concern about the critical situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, particularly in the Gaza Strip, as a result of unlawful Israeli practices and measures, and especially
condemns and calls for the immediate cessation of all illegal Israeli settlement activities and the construction of the
wall, the lifting of the blockade of the Gaza Strip, as well as a complete cessation of the excessive and indiscriminate
use of force and military operations against the civilian population, settler violence, the destruction and confiscation
of properties, including home demolitions as a measure of reprisal, the forced displacement of civilians, all measures
of collective punishment, and the detention and imprisonment of thousands of civilians;
5. Requests the Special Committee, pending complete termination of the Israeli occupation, to continue to
investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, especially Israeli violations of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,72 and to consult, as appropriate, with the
International Committee of the Red Cross according to its regulations in order to ensure that the welfare and human
rights of the peoples of the occupied territories, including prisoners and detainees, are safeguarded and to report to
the Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever the need arises thereafter;
6. Also requests the Special Committee to submit regularly to the Secretary-General periodic reports on the
current situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
7. Further requests the Special Committee to continue to investigate the treatment and status of the
thousands of prisoners and detainees, including children and women, in Israeli prisons and detention centres in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
and expresses grave concern about harsh conditions and ill-treatment of prisoners and recent hunger strikes,
stressing the need for respect for all applicable rules of international law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention,72
the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules)89 and the
United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders
(the Bangkok Rules);90
_______________
87

A/66/371-S/2011/592.
A/67/738.
89
Resolution 70/175, annex.
90
Resolution 65/229, annex.
88

350

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

8.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To provide the Special Committee with all necessary facilities, including those required for its visits to
the occupied territories, so that it may investigate the Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to make available such staff as may be necessary to assist the Special Committee in the
performance of its tasks;
(c)

To circulate regularly to Member States the periodic reports mentioned in paragraph 6 above;

(d) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports of the Special Committee and of information regarding its
activities and findings, by all means available, through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and,
where necessary, to reprint those reports of the Special Committee that are no longer available;
(e) To report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the tasks entrusted to him in the present
resolution;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Report of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other
Arabs of the Occupied Territories”.
RESOLUTION 70/88
A/RES/70/88

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/497,
para. 19),91 by a recorded vote of 163 to 6, with 8 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, Liberia, Paraguay, Togo, Vanuatu

70/88.

Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and the other occupied Arab territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolution 69/91 of 5 December 2014,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,

_______________
91

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.

351

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the Regulations annexed to the Hague Convention IV of 1907, the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,92 and relevant provisions of customary law,
including those codified in Additional Protocol I93 to the four Geneva Conventions,94
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories95 and the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General,96
Considering that the promotion of respect for the obligations arising from the Charter of the United Nations
and other instruments and rules of international law is among the basic purposes and principles of the United
Nations,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice,97 and also
recalling General Assembly resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,
Noting in particular the Court’s reply, including that the Fourth Geneva Convention92 is applicable in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and that Israel is in breach of several of the provisions of
the Convention,
Recalling the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention on measures to
enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, held on 15 July 1999, as
well as the declarations adopted by the reconvened Conference on 5 December 2001 and on 17 December 2014,98
and the urgent need for the parties to follow up the implementation of those declarations,
Welcoming and encouraging the initiatives by States parties to the Convention, both individually and
collectively, according to article 1 common to the four Geneva Conventions, aimed at ensuring respect for the
Convention, as well as the continuing efforts of the depositary State of the Geneva Conventions in this regard,
Noting the accession by Palestine on 1 April 2014 to the Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocol I,
Stressing that Israel, the occupying Power, should comply strictly with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law,
1. Reaffirms that the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,92 is applicable to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
2. Demands that Israel accept the de jure applicability of the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, and that it comply
scrupulously with the provisions of the Convention;
3. Calls upon all High Contracting Parties to the Convention, in accordance with article 1 common to the
four Geneva Conventions94 and as mentioned in the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 9 July
2004,97 to continue to exert all efforts to ensure respect for its provisions by Israel, the occupying Power, in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
4. Notes the reconvening by Switzerland, the depositary State, of the Conference of High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention on 17 December 2014, and calls for efforts to uphold the obligations
reaffirmed in the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001 and on 17 December 2014;98
5. Welcomes initiatives by States parties, in accordance with article 1 of the Convention, aimed at ensuring
respect for the Convention;
_______________
92

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
94
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
95
A/70/406 and Corr.1.
96
A/70/133, A/70/312, A/70/341, A/70/351 and A/70/421.
97
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
98
A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.
93

352

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

6. Reiterates the need for speedy implementation of the relevant recommendations contained in the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, including at its tenth emergency special session and including
resolution ES-10/15, with regard to ensuring respect by Israel, the occupying Power, for the provisions of the
Convention;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/89
A/RES/70/89

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/497,
para. 19),99 by a recorded vote of 161 to 7, with 8 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, Honduras, Paraguay, Togo, Vanuatu

70/89.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the
occupied Syrian Golan

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and affirming the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolution 69/92 of 5 December 2014, as well as those resolutions
adopted at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including resolutions 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967, 446 (1979) of 22 March 1979, 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980, 476 (1980) of 30 June 1980,
478 (1980) of 20 August 1980, 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981 and 904 (1994) of 18 March 1994,
Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949,100 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and to the occupied
Syrian Golan,

_______________
99

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Comoros, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jordan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen and State of Palestine.
100
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

353

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Affirming that the transfer by the occupying Power of parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies constitutes a breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention100 and relevant provisions of customary law,
including those codified in Additional Protocol I101 to the four Geneva Conventions,102
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,103 and recalling also General
Assembly resolutions ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Noting that the International Court of Justice concluded that “the Israeli settlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory (including East Jerusalem) have been established in breach of international law”,104
Taking note of the recent reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,105
Recalling the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the implications of the
Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people throughout the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,106
Recalling also the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001 and on
17 December 2014107 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention on measures
to enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, aimed at ensuring respect
for the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Recalling further the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of 13 September
1993108 and the subsequent implementation agreements between the Palestinian and Israeli sides,
Recalling the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,109 and
emphasizing specifically its call for a freeze on all settlement activity, including so-called natural growth, and the
dismantlement of all settlement outposts erected since March 2001, and the need for Israel to uphold its obligations
and commitments in this regard,
Recalling also its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Noting the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law conventions,
as well as other international treaties,
Aware that Israeli settlement activities involve, inter alia, the transfer of nationals of the occupying Power into
the occupied territories, the confiscation of land, the forced transfer of Palestinian civilians, including Bedouin
families, the exploitation of natural resources, the fragmentation of territory and other actions against the Palestinian
civilian population and the civilian population in the occupied Syrian Golan that are contrary to international law,
Bearing in mind the extremely detrimental impact of Israeli settlement policies, decisions and activities on the
ongoing regional and international efforts to resume and advance the peace process, on the prospects for the
achievement of peace in the Middle East in accordance with the two-State solution of Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security within recognized borders, on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, and on the
viability and credibility of that solution,
Expressing grave concern about the continuation by Israel, the occupying Power, of settlement activities in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and condemning those activities as violations of
_______________
101

Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
103
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
104
Ibid., advisory opinion, para. 120.
105
A/HRC/25/67; see also A/70/392.
106
A/HRC/22/63.
107
A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.
108
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
109
S/2003/529, annex.
102

354

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

international humanitarian law, relevant United Nations resolutions, the agreements reached between the parties and
obligations under the Quartet road map and as actions in defiance of the calls by the international community to
cease all settlement activities,
Deploring settlement activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the
occupied Syrian Golan and any activities involving the confiscation of land, the disruption of the livelihood of
protected persons, the forced transfer of civilians and the de facto annexation of land,
Deploring in particular Israel’s construction and expansion of settlements in and around occupied East
Jerusalem, including its so-called E-1 plan that aims to connect its illegal settlements around and further isolate
occupied East Jerusalem, the continuing demolition of Palestinian homes and eviction of Palestinian families from
the city, the revocation of Palestinian residency rights in the city, and ongoing settlement activities in the
Jordan Valley,
Deploring the continuing unlawful construction by Israel of the wall inside the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, and expressing its concern in particular about the route of the wall in
departure from the Armistice Line of 1949, which is causing humanitarian hardship and a serious decline of
socioeconomic conditions for the Palestinian people, is fragmenting the territorial contiguity of the Territory and
undermining its viability, and could prejudge future negotiations and make the two-State solution physically
impossible to implement,
Deeply concerned that the wall’s route has been traced in such a way as to include the great majority of the
Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Condemning acts of violence and terror against civilians on both sides, and recalling the need to end all acts of
violence, including acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction,
Condemning also all acts of violence, destruction, harassment, provocation and incitement by Israeli settlers in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, against Palestinian civilians, including children, and
their properties, including historic and religious sites, and agricultural lands, as well as acts of terror by several
extremist Israeli settlers, and calling for accountability for the illegal actions perpetrated in this regard,
Taking note of the relevant reports of the Secretary-Genera1,110
Noting the special meeting of the Security Council convened on 26 September 2008, as well as the meeting of
the Council of 18 February 2011,
1. Reaffirms that the Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and
in the occupied Syrian Golan are illegal and an obstacle to peace and economic and social development;
2. Calls upon Israel to accept the de jure applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,100 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and to the occupied Syrian Golan and to abide scrupulously by the provisions of the Convention, in
particular article 49, and to comply with all of its obligations under international law and cease immediately all
actions causing the alteration of the character, status and demographic composition of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the occupied Syrian Golan;
3. Reiterates its demand for the immediate and complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in all
of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan, and calls in this
regard for the full implementation of all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including, inter alia,
resolutions 446 (1979), 452 (1979) of 20 July 1979, 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003;
4. Stresses that a complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities is essential for salvaging the twoState solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders;
5. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal obligations, as mentioned in the
advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice;103
_______________
110

A/70/133, A/70/312, A/70/341, A/70/351, A/70/406 and Corr.1 and A/70/421.

355

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

6. Reiterates its call for the prevention of all acts of violence, destruction, harassment and provocation by
Israeli settlers, especially against Palestinian civilians and their properties, including historic and religious sites and
including in Occupied East Jerusalem, and agricultural lands;
7. Calls for accountability for the illegal actions perpetrated by Israeli settlers in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, and stresses in this regard the need for the implementation of Security Council resolution 904 (1994), in
which the Council called upon Israel, the occupying Power, to continue to take and implement measures, including
confiscation of arms, aimed at preventing illegal acts of violence by Israeli settlers, and called for measures to be
taken to guarantee the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilians in the occupied territory;
8. Stresses the responsibility of Israel, the occupying Power, to investigate all acts of settler violence against
Palestinian civilians and their properties and to ensure accountability for these acts;
9. Encourages all States and international organizations to continue to actively pursue policies that ensure
respect for their obligations under international law with regard to all illegal Israeli practices and measures in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly Israeli settlement activities;
10. Recalls, in this regard, the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001
and on 17 December 2014107 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention on
measures to enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and welcomes
in this regard initiatives by States parties, both individually and collectively, in accordance with article 1 of the
Convention, aimed at ensuring respect for the Convention;
11. Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies to take all necessary measures and actions within their
mandates to ensure full respect for and compliance with Human Rights Council resolution 17/4 of 16 June 2011,111
concerning the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights,112 and other relevant international laws and
standards, and to ensure the implementation of the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,
which provides a global standard for upholding human rights in relation to business activities that are connected
with Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/90
A/RES/70/90

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/497,
para. 19),113 by a recorded vote of 158 to 8, with 10 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,

_______________
111

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. III, sect. A.
A/HRC/17/31, annex.
113
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
112

356

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Honduras, Liberia, Malawi, Paraguay, Togo,
Vanuatu

70/90.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,114
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,115 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights115 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,116 and affirming that these
human rights instruments must be respected in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Reaffirming its relevant resolutions, including resolution 69/93 of 5 December 2014 as well as those adopted
at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Human Rights Council,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and stressing the need for their
implementation,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories117 and the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the Special Committee,118
Taking note of the recent reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,119 as well as of other relevant recent reports of the
Human Rights Council,
Aware of the responsibility of the international community to promote human rights and ensure respect for
international law, and recalling in this regard its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice,120 and recalling
also General Assembly resolutions ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Noting in particular the Court’s reply, including that the construction of the wall being built by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and its associated
regime are contrary to international law,
Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Noting the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law conventions,
as well as other international treaties,
Reaffirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
_______________
114

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
116
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
117
A/70/406 and Corr.1.
118
A/70/341.
119
A/HRC/20/32; see also A/70/392.
120
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
115

357

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Reaffirming also the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,121 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
Reaffirming further the obligation of the States parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention121 under articles 146,
147 and 148 with regard to penal sanctions, grave breaches and responsibilities of the High Contracting Parties,
Recalling the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001 and on
17 December 2014122 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention on measures
to enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, aimed at ensuring respect
for the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Reaffirming that all States have the right and the duty to take actions in conformity with international law and
international humanitarian law to counter deadly acts of violence against their civilian population in order to protect
the lives of their citizens,
Stressing the need for full compliance with the Israeli-Palestinian agreements reached within the context of the
Middle East peace process, including the Sharm el-Sheikh understandings, and the implementation of the Quartet
road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,123
Stressing also the need for the full implementation of the Agreement on Movement and Access and the
Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, both of 15 November 2005, to allow for the freedom of movement of the
Palestinian civilian population within and into and out of the Gaza Strip,
Gravely concerned by the tensions and violence in the recent period throughout the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem and including with regard to the holy places of Jerusalem, including the Haram
al-Sharif, and deploring the loss of innocent civilian life,
Recognizing that security measures alone cannot remedy the escalating tensions, instability and violence, and
calling for full respect for international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, including for the
protection of civilian life, as well as for the promotion of human security, the de-escalation of the situation, the
exercise of restraint, including from provocative actions and rhetoric, and the establishment of a stable environment
conducive to the pursuit of peace,
Expressing grave concern about the continuing systematic violation of the human rights of the Palestinian
people by Israel, the occupying Power, including that arising from the excessive use of force and military operations
causing death and injury to Palestinian civilians, including children, women and non-violent, peaceful
demonstrators; the arbitrary imprisonment and detention of Palestinians, some of whom have been imprisoned for
decades; the use of collective punishment; the closure of areas; the confiscation of land; the establishment and
expansion of settlements; the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory in departure from the
Armistice Line of 1949; the destruction of property and infrastructure; the forced displacement of civilians; and all
other actions by it designed to change the legal status, geographical nature and demographic composition of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Gravely concerned, in this regard, by the ongoing demolition of Palestinian homes by Israel, the occupying
Power, in particular in Occupied East Jerusalem, including if carried out as an act of collective punishment in
violation of international humanitarian law, and by the revocation of residence permits and eviction of Palestinian
residents of the City,
Deploring the conflict in and around the Gaza Strip in July and August 2014 and the civilian casualties caused,
including the killing and injury of thousands of Palestinian civilians, including children, women and the elderly, the
widespread destruction of thousands of homes and civilian infrastructure, including schools, hospitals, water,
sanitation and electricity networks, economic, industrial and agricultural properties, public institutions, religious
sites, and United Nations schools and facilities, the internal displacement of hundreds of thousands of civilians, and
any violations of international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, in this regard,
_______________
121

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.
123
S/2003/529, annex.
122

358

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Gravely concerned about the disastrous humanitarian situation and the critical socioeconomic and security
situation in the Gaza Strip, including that resulting from the prolonged closures and severe economic and movement
restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade and deepen poverty and despair among the Palestinian civilian
population, and from the continuing and vastly negative repercussions of the military operations between December
2008 and January 2009, in November 2012 and in July and August 2014, as well as about the firing of rockets
into Israel,
Recalling the statement by the President of the Security Council of 28 July 2014,124
Stressing the need for the full implementation by all parties of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of
8 January 2009 and General Assembly resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009,
Stressing also that the situation in the Gaza Strip is unsustainable and that a durable ceasefire agreement must
lead to a fundamental improvement in the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, including
through the sustained and regular opening of crossing points, and ensure the safety and well-being of civilians on
both sides, and regretting the lack of progress made in this regard,
Gravely concerned by reports regarding serious human rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law committed during the military operations in the Gaza Strip between December 2008 and January
2009, including the findings in the summary by the Secretary-General of the report of the Board of Inquiry125 and in
the report of the United Nations Fact-finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,126 and the findings of the United
Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry into certain incidents that occurred in the Gaza Strip between 8 July and
26 August 2014127 and of the independent commission of inquiry established pursuant to Human Rights Council
resolution S-21/1,128 and reiterating the necessity for serious follow-up by all parties of the recommendations
addressed to them towards ensuring accountability and justice,
Expressing deep concern about the short- and long-term detrimental impact of such widespread destruction
and the continued impeding of the reconstruction process by Israel, the occupying Power, on the human rights
situation and on the socioeconomic and humanitarian conditions of the Palestinian civilian population,
Expressing deep concern also about the Israeli policy of closures and the imposition of severe restrictions,
including through hundreds of obstacles to movement, checkpoints and a permit regime, all of which obstruct the
freedom of movement of persons and goods, including medical and humanitarian goods, and the follow-up and
access to donor-funded projects of development cooperation and humanitarian assistance, throughout the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and impair the Territory’s contiguity, consequently violating the
human rights of the Palestinian people and negatively impacting their socioeconomic situation and the efforts aimed
at rehabilitating and developing the Palestinian economy, which remains that of a critical humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip, while taking note of developments with regard to the situation of access there and the resumption of
some trade from Gaza to the West Bank for the first time since 2007, and calling for the full lifting of restrictions,
Expressing grave concern that thousands of Palestinians, including many children and women, continue to be
held in Israeli prisons or detention centres under harsh conditions, including, inter alia, unhygienic conditions,
solitary confinement, the extensive use of administrative detention of excessive duration without charge and denial
of due process, lack of proper medical care and widespread medical neglect, including for prisoners who are ill, with
the risk of fatal consequences, and denial of family visits, that impair their well-being, and expressing grave concern
also about the ill-treatment and harassment and all reports of torture of any Palestinian prisoners,
Expressing deep concern about the recent hunger strikes by numerous Palestinian prisoners in protest of the
harsh conditions of their imprisonment and detention by the occupying Power, while taking note of the agreement
reached in May 2012 on conditions of detention in Israeli prisons and calling for its full and immediate
implementation,
_______________
124

S/PRST/2014/13; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2013–31 July 2014 (S/INF/69).
See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
126
A/HRC/12/48.
127
See S/2015/286, annex.
128
A/HRC/29/52.
125

359

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules)129 and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for
Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),130 and calling for respect for those Rules,
Recalling also the prohibition under international humanitarian law of the deportation of civilians from
occupied territories,
Stressing the need for the prevention of all acts of violence, harassment, provocation and incitement by
extremist Israeli settlers and groups of armed settlers, especially against Palestinian civilians, including children, and
their properties, including homes, agricultural lands and historic and religious sites, including in Occupied East
Jerusalem, and deploring the violation of the human rights of Palestinians in this regard, including acts of violence
leading to death and injury among civilians,
Convinced of the need for an international presence to monitor the situation, to contribute to ending the
violence and protecting the Palestinian civilian population and to help the parties to implement the agreements
reached, and in this regard recalling the positive contribution of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron,
Noting the continued efforts and tangible progress made in the Palestinian security sector, and noting also the
continued cooperation that benefits both Palestinians and Israelis, in particular by promoting security and building
confidence, and expressing the hope that such progress will be extended to all major population centres,
Urging the parties to observe calm and restraint and to refrain from provocative actions, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric, especially in areas of religious and cultural sensitivity, including in East Jerusalem, and to
take every possible step to defuse tensions and promote conditions conducive to the credibility and success of the
peace negotiations,
Emphasizing the right of all people in the region to the enjoyment of human rights as enshrined in the
international human rights covenants,
1. Reiterates that all measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, in violation of the relevant provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,121 and contrary to the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, are illegal and have no validity;
2. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease all practices and actions that violate the human rights
of the Palestinian people, including the killing and injury of civilians, the arbitrary detention and imprisonment of
civilians, the forced displacement of civilians, and the destruction and confiscation of civilian property, including
home demolitions, including if carried out as collective punishment in violation of international humanitarian law,
and that it fully respect human rights law and comply with its legal obligations in this regard, including in
accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions;
3. Also demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply fully with the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949121 and cease immediately all measures and actions taken in violation and in breach of the
Convention;
4. Calls for urgent measures to ensure the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilian population in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law and as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 904 (1994) of 18 March 1994;
5. Also calls for full cooperation by Israel with the relevant special rapporteurs and other relevant
mechanisms and inquiries of the Human Rights Council, including the facilitation of entry to the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, for monitoring and reporting on the human rights situation therein;
6. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease all of its settlement activities, the construction of the
wall and any other measures aimed at altering the character, status and demographic composition of the Occupied
_______________
129
130

360

Resolution 70/175, annex.
Resolution 65/229, annex.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, all of which, inter alia, gravely and detrimentally
impact the human rights of the Palestinian people and the prospects for achieving without delay an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides;
7. Calls for urgent attention to the plight and the rights, in accordance with international law, of Palestinian
prisoners and detainees in Israeli jails, and calls for efforts between the two sides for the further release of prisoners
and detainees, and also calls for respect for the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules)129 and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules);130
8. Condemns all acts of violence, including all acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction,
especially the excessive use of force by the Israeli occupying forces against Palestinian civilians, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, which have caused extensive loss of life and vast numbers of injuries, including among thousands of
children and women, massive damage and destruction to homes, economic, industrial and agricultural properties,
vital infrastructure, including water, sanitation and electricity networks, religious sites and public institutions,
including hospitals and schools, and United Nations facilities, and agricultural lands, and large-scale internal
displacement of civilians;
9. Expresses grave concern at the firing of rockets against Israeli civilian areas resulting in loss of life
and injury;
10. Reiterates its demand for the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009);
11. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal obligations under international law, as
mentioned in the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice120 and as demanded
in General Assembly resolutions ES-10/15 and ES-10/13 of 21 October 2003, and that it immediately cease the
construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, dismantle
forthwith the structure situated therein, repeal or render ineffective all legislative and regulatory acts relating thereto,
and make reparations for all damage caused by the construction of the wall, which has gravely impacted the human
rights and the socioeconomic living conditions of the Palestinian people;
12. Reiterates the need for respect for the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory and for guarantees of the freedom of movement of persons and goods within the Palestinian
territory, including movement into and from East Jerusalem, into and from the Gaza Strip, between the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip, and to and from the outside world;
13. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its imposition of prolonged closures and economic and
movement restrictions, including those amounting to a blockade on the Gaza Strip, and in this regard to fully
implement the Agreement on Movement and Access and the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, both of
15 November 2005, in order to allow for the sustained and regular movement of persons and goods and for the
acceleration of long overdue and massive reconstruction needs and economic recovery in the Gaza Strip, while
noting the recent tripartite agreement facilitated by the United Nations in this regard;
14. Urges Member States to continue to provide emergency assistance to the Palestinian people to alleviate
the financial crisis and the dire socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, particularly in the Gaza Strip;
15. Emphasizes the need to preserve and develop the Palestinian institutions and infrastructure for the
provision of vital public services to the Palestinian civilian population and the promotion of human rights, including
civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, and welcomes in this regard the formation of the Palestinian
national consensus government under the leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas, consistent with the Palestine
Liberation Organization commitments and the Quartet principles;
16. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system to continue
to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their inalienable human rights, including their
right to self-determination;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
361

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 70/91
A/RES/70/91

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/497,
para. 19),131 by a recorded vote of 160 to 1, with 16 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Israel
Abstaining: Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Honduras, Liberia, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, Paraguay, Togo, Tonga, United States of America, Vanuatu

70/91.

The occupied Syrian Golan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories,132
Deeply concerned that the Syrian Golan, occupied since 1967, has been under continued Israeli military
occupation,
Recalling Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
Recalling also its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was resolution 69/94 of
5 December 2014,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of resolution 69/94,133
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions in which, inter alia, it called upon Israel to put an end to its
occupation of the Arab territories,
Reaffirming once more the illegality of the decision of 14 December 1981 taken by Israel to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian Golan, which has resulted in the effective annexation of that
territory,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,134 to the occupied Syrian Golan,
_______________
131

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
132
A/70/406 and Corr.1.
133
A/70/312.
134
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

362

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967,
Welcoming the convening at Madrid of the Peace Conference on the Middle East on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973 aimed at the realization
of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, and expressing grave concern about the stalling of the peace process on
all tracks,
1. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with the relevant resolutions on the occupied Syrian
Golan, in particular Security Council resolution 497 (1981), in which the Council, inter alia, decided that the Israeli
decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian Golan was null and void and
without international legal effect and demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, rescind forthwith its decision;
2. Also calls upon Israel to desist from changing the physical character, demographic composition,
institutional structure and legal status of the occupied Syrian Golan and in particular to desist from the establishment
of settlements;
3. Determines that all legislative and administrative measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, that purport to alter the character and legal status of the occupied Syrian Golan are null and void,
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,134 and have no legal effect;
4. Calls upon Israel to desist from imposing Israeli citizenship and Israeli identity cards on the Syrian
citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan, and from its repressive measures against the population of the occupied
Syrian Golan;
5. Deplores the violations by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;
6. Calls once again upon Member States not to recognize any of the legislative or administrative measures
and actions referred to above;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/92
A/RES/70/92

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/499, para. 9)135

70/92.

Comprehensive review of special political missions

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 67/123 of 18 December 2012, 68/85 of 11 December 2013 and 69/95 of 5 December
2014 on the comprehensive review of special political missions,
Reaffirming its commitment to respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
all States,
Recalling the primary role of the United Nations and the respective roles and authority of the General
Assembly and the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the
Charter, and recalling also in this context the contribution of regional and subregional arrangements, as appropriate,

_______________
135

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Central African Republic, Costa Rica,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mexico,
Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey and Uruguay.

363

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Encouraging enhanced exchanges of information, in an appropriate manner, among the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, on overall policy matters pertaining to special political missions,
Reaffirming the principles of impartiality, consent of the parties, national ownership and national
responsibility, and stressing the significance of the views of and dialogue with countries hosting special political
missions,
Recalling the relevant reports on the review of arrangements for funding and backstopping special political
missions,136 which addressed the financial and administrative arrangements pertaining to such missions, recognizing
that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities
for administrative and budgetary matters,
Stressing the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the pacific settlement of
disputes, including mediation, conflict prevention and conflict resolution, for the maintenance of international peace
and security,
Acknowledging the significant increase in the number and complexity of special political missions and the
challenges faced by them,
Recognizing the important role of the special political mission as a flexible tool for the maintenance of
international peace and security,
Recognizing also the need for system-wide coherence between special political missions and the United
Nations system, and emphasizing the importance of close cooperation between special political missions,
peacekeeping operations and United Nations country teams for maintaining sustainable peace, conflict prevention
and conflict resolution,
Recognizing further the need for special political missions to operate under clear, credible and achievable
mandates, including through the articulation of their goals and purposes, and the need to review their progress as
stipulated in their respective mandates,
Recognizing the importance of efforts towards improving broad geographical representation, gender balance
and expertise in the composition of all special political missions,
Reaffirming the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
and recognizing the importance of the equal and effective participation and the full involvement of women at all
levels, at all stages and in all aspects of the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and conflict
resolution,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General137 and the report of the High-level Independent Panel,138
and acknowledging their emphasis on the primacy of political solutions to conflicts,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 69/95;139

2. Requests the Secretary-General to hold regular, inclusive and interactive dialogue on the overall policy
matters pertaining to special political missions, and encourages the Secretariat to reach out to Member States prior to
the holding of such dialogue to ensure wide and meaningful participation;
3. Respects the purview of the mandate of special political missions, as stipulated in the respective relevant
resolutions, recognizes the specificity of each mandate of such missions, and emphasizes the role of the General
Assembly in discussing the overall policy matters pertaining to special political missions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a timely
report on the overall policy matters pertaining to special political missions, including efforts towards improving
_______________
136

A/66/340 and A/66/7/Add.21.
A/70/357-S/2015/682.
138
See A/70/95-S/2015/446.
139
A/70/400.
137

364

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

transparency, accountability, geographical representation, gender participation, expertise and effectiveness in respect
of all special political missions, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to include relevant detailed
information on these matters in the report;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled
“Comprehensive review of special political missions” and to consider the above-mentioned report of the SecretaryGeneral under that item.
RESOLUTIONS 70/93 A and B
A/RES/70/93AandB

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/500, para. 9)140

70/93.

Questions relating to information
A
INFORMATION IN THE SERVICE OF HUMANITY

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the comprehensive and important report of the Committee on Information,141
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General,142
Urges all countries, organizations of the United Nations system as a whole and all others concerned,
reaffirming their commitment to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to the principles of freedom
of the press and freedom of information, as well as to those of the independence, pluralism and diversity of the
media, deeply concerned by the disparities existing between developed and developing countries and the
consequences of every kind arising from those disparities that affect the capability of the public, private or other
media and individuals in developing countries to disseminate information and communicate their views and their
cultural and ethical values through endogenous cultural production, as well as to ensure the diversity of sources and
their free access to information, and recognizing the call in this context for what in the United Nations and at various
international forums has been termed “a new world information and communication order, seen as an evolving and
continuous process”:
(a) To cooperate and interact with a view to reducing existing disparities in information flows at all levels by
increasing assistance for the development of communications infrastructures and capabilities in developing
countries, with due regard for their needs and the priorities attached to such areas by those countries, and in order to
enable them and the public, private or other media in developing countries to develop their own information and
communications policies freely and independently and increase the participation of media and individuals in the
communication process, and to ensure a free flow of information at all levels;
(b) To ensure for journalists the free and effective performance of their professional tasks and condemn
resolutely all attacks against them;
(c) To provide support for the continuation and strengthening of practical training programmes for
broadcasters and journalists from public, private and other media in developing countries;
(d) To enhance regional efforts and cooperation among developing countries, as well as cooperation
between developed and developing countries, to strengthen communications capacities and to improve the media
infrastructure and communications technology in developing countries, especially in the areas of training and
dissemination of information;

_______________
140

The draft resolutions recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee were submitted by the Committee on Information.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/70/21).
142
A/70/220.
141

365

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

(e) To aim at, in addition to bilateral cooperation, providing all possible support and assistance to
developing countries and their media, public, private or other, with due regard to their interests and needs in the field
of information and to action already adopted within the United Nations system, including:
(i) The development of the human and technical resources that are indispensable for the improvement of
information and communications systems in developing countries and support for the continuation and
strengthening of practical training programmes, such as those already operating under both public and private
auspices throughout the developing world;
(ii) The creation of conditions that will enable developing countries and their media, public, private or other,
to have, by using their national and regional resources, the communications technology suited to their national
needs, as well as the necessary programme material, especially for radio and television broadcasting;
(iii) Assistance in establishing and promoting telecommunication links at the subregional, regional and
interregional levels, especially among developing countries;
(iv) Facilitation, as appropriate, of access by developing countries to advanced communications technology
available on the open market;
(f) To provide full support for the International Programme for the Development of Communication of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which should support both public and
private media.
B
UNITED NATIONS PUBLIC INFORMATION POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES
The General Assembly,
Emphasizing that the Committee on Information is its main subsidiary body mandated to make
recommendations to it relating to the work of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat,
Reaffirming its resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946, by which the General Assembly established the
Department of Public Information, with a view to promoting to the greatest possible extent an informed
understanding of the work and purposes of the United Nations among the peoples of the world, and all other
relevant resolutions of the Assembly related to the activities of the Department,
Emphasizing that the contents of public information and communications should be placed at the heart of the
strategic management of the United Nations and that a culture of communications and transparency should
permeate all levels of the Organization as a means of fully informing the peoples of the world of the aims and
activities of the United Nations, in accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, in order to create broad-based global support for the United Nations,
Stressing that the primary mission of the Department of Public Information is to provide, through its outreach
activities, accurate, impartial, comprehensive, balanced, timely, relevant and multilingual information to the public
on the tasks and responsibilities of the United Nations in order to strengthen international support for the activities of
the Organization with the greatest transparency,
Recalling its resolutions 69/96 A and B of 5 December 2014, which provided an opportunity to take due steps
to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the Department of Public Information and to maximize the use of its
resources,
Expressing its concern that the gap in information and communications technology between the developed
and the developing countries has continued to widen and that vast segments of the population in developing
countries are not benefiting from the information and communications technologies that are currently available, and
in this regard underlining the necessity of rectifying the imbalances in the present development of and access to
information and communications technologies in order to create a more just, equitable, accessible and effective
environment in this regard,
Recognizing that developments in information and communications technologies open vast new opportunities
for economic growth and social development and can play an important role in the eradication of poverty in
developing countries, and at the same time emphasizing that the development of these technologies poses
challenges and risks and could lead to the further widening of disparities between and within countries,
366

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling its resolution 69/324 of 11 September 2015 on multilingualism, and emphasizing the importance of
making appropriate use of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the activities of the Department of
Public Information, including in coordination with other departments of the Secretariat, with the aim of eliminating
the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other official languages, as well as the importance of
ensuring the full and equitable treatment of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the activities of the
Department,
I
Introduction
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in respect of the public information policies and activities of the United
Nations, to continue to implement fully the recommendations contained in relevant resolutions;
2. Reaffirms that the United Nations remains the indispensable foundation of a peaceful and just world and
that its voice must be heard in a clear and effective manner, and emphasizes the essential role of the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat in this context;
3. Stresses the importance of the provision of clear, timely, accurate and comprehensive information by the
Secretariat to Member States, upon their request, within the framework of existing mandates and procedures;
4. Also stresses that Member States should abstain from using information and communications
technologies in contravention of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations;
5. Reaffirms the central role of the Committee on Information in United Nations public information
policies and activities, including the prioritization of those activities, and decides that recommendations relating to
the programme of the Department of Public Information shall originate, to the extent possible, in the Committee and
shall be considered by the Committee;
6. Requests the Department of Public Information, following the priorities set out by the General Assembly
in its resolution 69/17 of 18 November 2014, and recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration143 and the
2005 World Summit Outcome,144 to pay particular attention to peace and security, development and human rights
and to major issues such as the eradication of poverty, including the global food crisis, conflict prevention,
sustainable development, the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the Ebola outbreak, disarmament, including nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and the needs of
the African continent;
7. Requests the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information centres to
pay particular attention to progress in implementing the internationally agreed development goals, including those
contained in the Millennium Declaration, the discussions on the post-2015 development agenda, including on the
elaboration of sustainable development goals, and the outcomes of the major related United Nations summits and
conferences in carrying out their activities, and calls upon the Department to play an active role in raising public
awareness of the after-effects and ongoing adverse impacts of the world financial and economic crisis and its impact
on development, including the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, financing for development, and
the discussion of options for a facilitation mechanism that promotes the development, transfer and dissemination of
clean and environmentally sound technologies, and of the global challenge of climate change, in particular the
actions taken in accordance with the objective, principles and provisions of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change,145 especially in the context of the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, particularly in the context of the Conference of the Parties and of the Meetings of the Parties to the
Kyoto Protocol;

_______________
143

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
145
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
144

367

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

II
General activities of the Department of Public Information
8. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Public
Information;146
9. Requests the Department of Public Information to maintain its commitment to a culture of evaluation
and to continue to evaluate its products and activities with the objective of enhancing their effectiveness, and to
continue to cooperate and coordinate with Member States and the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the
Secretariat;
10. Reaffirms the importance of more effective coordination between the Department of Public Information
and the Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
consistency in the messages of the Organization;
11. Notes the efforts of the Department of Public Information to continue to publicize the work and
decisions of the General Assembly, and requests the Department to continue to enhance its working relationship
with the Office of the President of the General Assembly;
12. Encourages continued collaboration between the Department of Public Information and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the promotion of culture and in the fields of education
and communication, bridging the existing gap between the developed and the developing countries;
13. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Department of Public Information to work at the local level
with other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to enhance the coordination of their
communications activities, urges the Department to encourage the United Nations Communications Group to
promote linguistic diversity in its work, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to report to the Committee
on Information at its thirty-eighth session on progress achieved in this regard;
14. Reaffirms that the Department of Public Information must prioritize its work programme, while
respecting existing mandates and in line with regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme
Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of
Evaluation,147 to focus its message and better concentrate its efforts and to match its programmes with the needs of
its target audiences, including the linguistic dimension, on the basis of improved feedback and evaluation
mechanisms;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to exert all efforts to ensure that publications and other
information services of the Secretariat, including the United Nations website and the United Nations News Service,
contain comprehensive, balanced, objective and equitable information in all official languages about the issues
before the Organization and that they maintain editorial independence, impartiality, accuracy and full consistency
with resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly;
16. Underlines the critical need to address violations of the relevant international rules and regulations that
govern the area of broadcasting, including television, radio and satellite broadcasting, in the most appropriate
manner;
17. Reiterates its request to the Department of Public Information and content-providing offices of the
Secretariat to ensure that United Nations publications are produced in all six official languages, as well as in an
environmentally friendly and cost-neutral manner, and to continue to coordinate closely with all other entities,
including all other departments of the Secretariat and funds and programmes of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates, in order to avoid duplication in the issuance of United Nations publications;
18. Encourages, in this regard, the Department of Public Information and the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat to consult on opportunities for merging their publishing
activities and to develop new collaborative arrangements to enhance multilingualism in other outputs in a cost_______________
146
147

368

A/AC.198/2015/2–4.
ST/SGB/2000/8.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

neutral manner, bearing in mind the importance of ensuring the full and equitable treatment of all the official
languages of the United Nations, and to report thereon to the Committee on Information at its thirty-eighth session;
19. Emphasizes that the Department of Public Information should maintain and improve its activities in the
areas of special interest to developing countries and, where appropriate, other countries with special needs, and that
the activities of the Department should contribute to bridging the existing gap between the developing and the
developed countries in the crucial field of public information and communications;
20. Reiterates its growing concern that the issuance of daily press releases has not been expanded to all
official languages, as requested in previous resolutions and in full respect of the principle of parity of all six official
languages, recalls the relevant report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Public
Information,148 and requests the Department, as a matter of priority, to design a strategy to deliver daily press
releases in all six official languages through creative schemes, in a cost-neutral manner and in accordance with the
relevant General Assembly resolutions, at the latest by the thirty-eighth session of the Committee on Information,
and to report thereon to the Committee at that session;
Multilingualism and public information
21. Underlines the responsibility of the Secretariat in the mainstreaming of multilingualism into all of its
communication and information activities, within existing resources on an equitable basis, calls upon the
Department of Public Information to continue to work with the Coordinator for Multilingualism on best practices
throughout the Secretariat to fulfil this responsibility, and requests the Secretary-General to report on such best
practices and their implementation in his upcoming report to the Committee on Information;
22. Emphasizes the importance of making use of all the official languages of the United Nations, ensuring
their full and equitable treatment in all the activities of all divisions and offices of the Department of Public
Information with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other official
languages, in this regard reaffirms its request that the Secretary-General ensure that the Department has the
necessary capacity in all the official languages to undertake all of its activities, and requests that this aspect be
included in future programme budget proposals for the Department, bearing in mind the principle of parity of all six
official languages, while respecting the workload in each official language;
23. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Department of Public Information to enhance multilingualism in all
of its activities, stresses the importance of ensuring that the texts of all new public United Nations documents in all
six official languages, information materials and all older United Nations documents are made available through the
United Nations websites and are accessible to Member States without delay, and further stresses the importance of
fully implementing its resolution 69/324;
24. Encourages the Department of Public Information to continue to use other languages in addition to the
official languages, when appropriate, according to the target audience, with a view to reaching the widest possible
spectrum of audiences and extending the United Nations message to all corners of the world in order to strengthen
international support for the activities of the Organization;
25. Notes the proposal by the Chair of the Committee on Information to establish a group of friends of the
Chair on multilingualism;
Bridging the digital divide
26. Requests the Department of Public Information to contribute to raising the awareness of the international
community of the importance of the implementation of the outcome documents of the World Summit on the
Information Society149 and of the possibilities that the use of the Internet and other information and communications
technologies can bring to societies and economies, as well as of ways to bridge the digital divide, including by
commemorating World Telecommunication and Information Society Day on 17 May;

_______________
148
149

A/AC.198/2015/3.
See A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.

369

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Network of United Nations information centres
27. Emphasizes the importance of the network of United Nations information centres in enhancing the
public image of the United Nations, in disseminating messages on the United Nations to local populations,
especially in developing countries, bearing in mind that information in local languages has the strongest impact on
local populations, and in mobilizing support for the work of the United Nations at the local level;
28. Welcomes the work done by the network of United Nations information centres, including the United
Nations Regional Information Centre, in favour of the publication of United Nations information materials and the
translation of important documents into languages other than the official languages of the United Nations,
encourages information centres to continue their important multilingual activities in the interactive and proactive
aspects of their work and to develop web pages in local languages, and encourages the Department of Public
Information to provide the necessary resources and technical facilities, with a view to reaching the widest possible
spectrum of audiences and extending the United Nations message to all corners of the world in order to strengthen
international support for the activities of the Organization, and encourages the continuation of efforts in this regard;
29. Stresses the importance of rationalizing the network of United Nations information centres, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to make proposals in this direction, including through the
redeployment of resources where necessary, and to report to the Committee on Information at its successive sessions;
30. Reaffirms that the rationalization of United Nations information centres must be carried out on a caseby-case basis in consultation with all concerned Member States in which existing information centres are located,
the countries served by those information centres and other interested countries in the region, taking into
consideration the distinctive characteristics of each region;
31. Recognizes that the network of United Nations information centres, especially in developing countries,
should continue to enhance its impact and activities, including through strategic communications support, and calls
upon the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of this approach to the Committee on Information at its
successive sessions;
32. Requests the Department of Public Information, through the United Nations information centres, to
strengthen its cooperation with all other United Nations entities at the country level and in the context of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, in order to enhance coherence in communications and to avoid
duplication of work;
33. Stresses the importance of taking into account the special needs and requirements of developing
countries in the field of information and communications technology for the effective flow of information in those
countries;
34. Also stresses the importance of efforts to strengthen the outreach activities of the United Nations to those
Member States remaining outside the network of United Nations information centres, and encourages the SecretaryGeneral, within the context of rationalization, to extend the services of the network of information centres to those
Member States;
35. Further stresses that the Department of Public Information should continue to review the allocation of
both staff and financial resources to the United Nations information centres in developing countries, taking into
account the specific needs of the least developed countries;
36. Welcomes the support of some Member States, including developing countries, in offering, inter alia,
rent-free premises for the United Nations information centres because of lack of funding, bearing in mind that such
support should not be a substitute for the full allocation of financial resources for the information centres in the
context of the programme budget of the United Nations;
37. Notes the concern of many Member States regarding the measures taken by the Secretariat in relation to
the information centres in Mexico City, Pretoria and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, expresses the hope that these measures
will not have an adverse impact on the ability of the centres to act as bridges between the United Nations and local
audiences, and therefore requests the Secretary-General to report on the impact of these measures and to explore
ways to strengthen the United Nations information centres in Cairo, Mexico City, Pretoria and Rio de Janeiro,
keeping in mind the need to do so within existing resources, and encourages the Secretary-General to explore the
strengthening of other centres, especially in Africa, in cooperation with the Member States concerned and in a costneutral manner;
370

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

38. Recalls its resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009, in which the General Assembly requested the
Secretary-General to establish a United Nations information centre in Luanda as a contribution towards addressing
the needs of Portuguese-speaking African countries, reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in coordination
with the Government of Angola, to take the measures necessary for the prompt establishment of the information
centre, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-eighth session on
the progress made in this regard;
39. Takes note with appreciation of the offer made by the Government of the Republic of Korea to host a
United Nations information centre, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at
its thirty-eighth session on the feasibility of accepting such an offer in a cost-effective manner;
III
Strategic communications services
40. Reaffirms the role of the strategic communications services in devising and disseminating United
Nations messages by developing communications strategies, with the overall emphasis on multilingualism from the
planning stage, in close collaboration with the substantive departments, United Nations funds and programmes and
the specialized agencies, in full compliance with their legislative mandates;
Promotional campaigns
41. Notes with appreciation the work of the Department of Public Information in promoting, through its
campaigns, issues of importance to the international community, such as the United Nations Millennium
Declaration and the progress made in implementing the internationally agreed development goals, and discussions
on the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, United Nations reform, the eradication of poverty, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, sustainable development, culture and development, culture and
sustainable development, disarmament, decolonization, human rights, including the rights of women and children,
persons with disabilities and migrant workers, strategic coordination in humanitarian relief, especially in natural
disasters and other crises, HIV/AIDS, the Ebola outbreak, malaria, tuberculosis, non-communicable diseases and
other diseases, the needs of the African continent, the nature of the critical economic and social situation in Africa
and the priorities of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,150 the special needs of the least developed
countries, the permanent memorial to the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, dialogue among civilizations, the culture of peace and tolerance and the
consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, as well as prevention of genocide, and requests the Department, in
cooperation with the countries concerned and with the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, to continue to take appropriate measures to enhance world public awareness of all these issues;
42. Requests the Secretariat, especially the Department of Public Information, to contribute to the
observance of International Mother Language Day, on 21 February, as proclaimed by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, on 25 March, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 62/122 of 17 December 2007, Nelson Mandela International Day, on 18 July, in accordance with its
resolution 64/13 of 10 November 2009, the International Day of Nowruz, on 21 March, in accordance with its
resolution 64/253 of 23 February 2010, the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, on
26 September, in accordance with its resolution 68/32 of 5 December 2013, the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, on 29 November, in accordance with its resolutions 32/40 B of 2 December 1977 and
34/65 D of 12 December 1979, Human Rights Day, on 10 December, in accordance with its resolution 423 (V) of
4 December 1950, and World Press Freedom Day, on 3 May, in accordance with its decision 48/432 of
20 December 1993, and to play a role in raising awareness and promoting these events in a cost-neutral manner,
where appropriate;
43. Requests the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information centres to
raise awareness of all high-level meetings mandated by the General Assembly, to widely disseminate information on
_______________
150

A/57/304, annex.

371

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, held in Apia from 1 to 4 September 2014,
including the media coverage already provided for in its resolution 68/238 of 27 December 2013, on the second
United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, held in Vienna from 3 to 5 November 2014, on
the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Sendai, Japan, from 14 to
18 March 2015, in accordance with its resolution 67/209 of 21 December 2012, and on the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held in New York from
27 April to 22 May 2015, and to continue to promote the processes in follow-up to the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro from 20 to 22 June 2012, as well as `the high-level meeting of
the Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed
development goals for persons with disabilities, held on 23 September 2013, the high-level meeting of the Assembly
on nuclear disarmament, held on 26 September 2013, as well as its follow-up process, the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa from 13 to 16 July 2015, the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, held in New York from 25 to 27 September 2015,
the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol, to be held in Paris from 30 November to 11 December 2015, and the United Nations Conference on
Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016 in accordance
with its resolution 69/226 of 19 December 2014;
44. Recognizes the effort of the Department of Public Information in promoting the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, in particular the creation of
the relevant website in the six official languages of the Organization, and in this regard encourages the Department
to continue this practice in promoting high-level meetings, including through the use of traditional and new media
such as social media, as appropriate;
45. Notes the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the Group of 77 and China, and acknowledges the
support provided by the Department of Public Information in publicizing, within existing resources, the summit of
Heads of State and Government of the Group of 77 on a new world order for living well, held in Santa Cruz de la
Sierra, Plurinational State of Bolivia, on 14 and 15 June 2014;
46. Requests the Department of Public Information and its network of United Nations information centres to
raise awareness of and disseminate information, in a cost-neutral manner, on the Third International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism, declared by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/119 of 10 December 2010;
47. Notes that 2015 marks the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the end of
the Second World War, also notes the work already undertaken by the Secretariat on planning activities in that
regard, and requests the Department of Public Information to raise awareness of and disseminate information on this
anniversary and to ensure that multilingualism is mainstreamed into those activities, in a cost-neutral manner;
48. Recalls its resolutions 68/237 of 23 December 2013 and 69/16 of 18 November 2014 on the
International Decade for People of African Descent, and requests the Department of Public Information and its
network of United Nations information centres to raise awareness of and disseminate information on the
International Decade, in accordance with the programme for the implementation of the International Decade
adopted by the General Assembly, in a cost-neutral manner;
49. Encourages the Department of Public Information to develop partnerships with the private sector in a
cost-neutral manner and to report thereon to the Committee on Information at its thirty-eighth session, and in this
regard notes the partnership with airlines that provide to their customers in-flight programmes featuring United
Nations activities;
Role of the Department of Public Information in United Nations peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
50. Requests the Secretariat to continue to ensure the active involvement of the Department of Public
Information from the planning stage and in all stages of future peacekeeping operations through interdepartmental
consultations and coordination with other departments of the Secretariat, in particular with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support;
51. Requests the Department of Public Information, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support to continue their cooperation in raising awareness of the new realities, far-reaching
372

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

successes and challenges faced by peacekeeping operations, especially multidimensional and complex ones, and the
recent surge in United Nations peacekeeping activities, and continues to call upon the three Departments to develop
and implement a comprehensive communications strategy on current challenges facing United Nations
peacekeeping;
52. Stresses the importance of enhancing the public information capacity of the Department of Public
Information in the field of peacekeeping operations and its role, in close cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, in the process of selecting public information staff
for United Nations peacekeeping operations or missions, and in this regard invites the Department of Public
Information to second public information staff who have the skills necessary to fulfil the tasks of the operations or
missions, taking into account the principle of equitable geographical distribution in accordance with Chapter XV,
Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter, and to consider views expressed, especially by host countries, when
appropriate, in this regard;
53. Emphasizes the importance of the peacekeeping gateway on the United Nations website, and requests
the Department of Public Information to continue its efforts to support the peacekeeping missions in further
developing and maintaining their websites;
54. Requests the Department of Public Information and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
continue to cooperate in implementing an effective outreach programme to explain the zero-tolerance policy of the
Organization regarding sexual exploitation and abuse and to inform the public of the outcome of all such cases
involving peacekeeping personnel, including cases where allegations are ultimately found to be legally unproven,
and also to inform the public of the adoption by the General Assembly of the United Nations Comprehensive
Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations Staff and
Related Personnel;151
55. Notes the importance of communication and information activities relating to peacebuilding efforts, in
particular those of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office of the Secretariat and the
Peacebuilding Fund, and requests the Department of Public Information to cooperate with these entities in that
regard, with a view to widening outreach of their important work;
Role of the Department of Public Information in strengthening dialogue among civilizations and the culture
of peace as means of enhancing understanding among nations
56. Recalls its resolutions on dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace, and requests the
Department of Public Information, while ensuring the pertinence and relevance of subjects for promotional
campaigns on this issue, to continue to provide the support necessary for the dissemination of information pertaining
to dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace, as well as the initiative on the Alliance of Civilizations, and
to take due steps in fostering the culture of dialogue among civilizations, promoting the initiative on a world against
violence and violent extremism in accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/127 of 18 December 2013,
and promoting cultural understanding, tolerance, respect for and freedom of religion or belief and effective
enjoyment by all of all human rights and civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to
development;
57. Invites the United Nations system, especially the Department of Public Information, to continue to
encourage and facilitate dialogue among civilizations and to formulate ways and means to promote dialogue among
civilizations in the activities of the United Nations in various fields, taking into account the Programme of Action of
the Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations,152 and in this regard reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session the report requested by the Assembly in its
resolution 60/4 of 20 October 2005;
58. Recalls its resolution 64/14 of 10 November 2009, in which it acknowledged the achievements of the
Alliance of Civilizations and the efforts of the High Representative of the Secretary-General for the Alliance of
Civilizations, and welcomes the discussion, at the sixth Alliance of Civilizations Forum, held in Nusa Dua, Bali,
_______________
151
152

Resolution 62/214, annex.
Resolution 56/6, sect. B.

373

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Indonesia, on 29 and 30 August 2014, on strategic and practical measures that generate and sustain common values
and a shared sense of responsibility among all stakeholders, and the continuing support of the Department of Public
Information for the work of the Alliance of Civilizations, including its ongoing projects;
IV
News services
59. Stresses that the central objective of the news services implemented by the Department of Public
Information is the timely delivery of accurate, objective and balanced news and information emanating from the
United Nations system in all four mass media, namely, print, radio, television and the Internet, to the media and
other audiences worldwide, with the overall emphasis on multilingualism from the planning stage, and reiterates its
request to the Department to ensure that all breaking news stories and news alerts are accurate, impartial and free
of bias;
60. Recognizes the important role of television and video services provided by the Department of Public
Information, and notes the recent efforts in making available online broadcast-quality video that can be streamed or
downloaded by smaller broadcast outlets that do not have access to satellite feeds;
Traditional means of communication
61. Welcomes the sustained efforts of United Nations Radio, which remains one of the most effective and
far-reaching traditional media available to the Department of Public Information and an important instrument in
United Nations activities, to enhance the timeliness, presentation and thematic focus of its multilingual programmes
on United Nations activities and to ensure the widest possible dissemination of its programming to media outlets
using the most suitable platforms and formats, pre-recorded or live, requests the Secretary-General to continue to
make every effort to achieve parity in the six official languages in United Nations Radio productions, reiterates the
important role of the 15-minute daily programmes created pursuant to General Assembly resolution 54/82 B of
6 December 1999, and requests the Department to continue the production and dissemination of the programmes, in
accordance with client needs;
62. Also welcomes the ongoing efforts being made by the Department of Public Information to disseminate
programmes directly to broadcasting stations all over the world in the six official languages, with the addition of
Portuguese and Kiswahili as well as other languages where possible, and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to include in his upcoming report to the Committee on Information detailed information about such
partnerships with broadcasting stations as well as statistics about their multiplying impacts on potential audiences;
63. Requests the Department of Public Information to continue to build partnerships with local, national and
regional broadcasters to extend the United Nations message to all corners of the world in an accurate and impartial
way, and requests the News and Media Division of the Department to continue to take full advantage of the
technological infrastructure made available in recent years;
64. Welcomes the completion of an inventory of 67 years of United Nations audiovisual history, and,
recognizing the importance of the audiovisual archives of the United Nations, stresses the urgency of digitization in
order to prevent further deterioration of these unique historical archives and encourages the Department of Public
Information to prioritize the development of collaborative arrangements for the digitization of these archives while
preserving their multilingual character in a cost-neutral manner and to report thereon to the Committee on
Information at its thirty-eighth session;
65. Notes the efforts made by the Department of Public Information and other stakeholders to plan, procure,
implement, test and deploy a media assets management system solution for file-based production and for the
management of the United Nations multimedia digital archives, calls upon the Department to continue to explore
alternative and feasible solutions for the digitization, preservation, quality assurance and technical processing of the
audiovisual archive materials based on international standards and best practices, including in the context of the
construction work of the capital master plan within the overall budget for the plan, and encourages the Department
to seek the support of public and private institutions for its work in digitizing, storing and managing these
multilingual archives and to report thereon to the Committee on Information at its thirty-eighth session;
374

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

66. Also notes, in this regard, the proposed strategy for the digitization of the United Nations audiovisual
archive materials for long-term preservation, access and sustainable management,153 and requests the Department of
Public Information to submit for consideration by the relevant bodies both a detailed proposal for the mass
digitization of the audiovisual collections, within existing resources, and plans to solicit voluntary contributions to
fund the digitization and storage of the audiovisual archives;
United Nations website
67. Reaffirms that the United Nations website is an essential tool for the media, non-governmental
organizations, educational institutions, Member States and the general public, and in this regard reiterates the
continued need for strengthened efforts by the Department of Public Information to maintain and improve it;
68. Recognizes the efforts made by the Secretariat to implement the basic accessibility requirements for
persons with disabilities to gain access to and take part in the work of the United Nations in person or online,
including through the work of the Accessibility Centre at United Nations Headquarters, calls upon the Department
of Public Information to continue to work towards compliance with accessibility requirements on all new and
updated pages of the website, with the aim of ensuring its accessibility for persons with different kinds of
disabilities, and in this regard encourages the Department of Public Information and the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management to further cooperate and identify potential synergies;
69. Reaffirms the need to achieve full parity among the six official languages on all United Nations websites,
and urges the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts to develop, maintain and update multilingual United
Nations websites and the web page of the Secretary-General in all the official languages of the United Nations, from
within existing resources and on an equitable basis;
70. Notes with concern that the multilingual development and enrichment of the United Nations website in
certain official languages has improved at a much slower rate than expected, and in this regard urges the Department
of Public Information, in coordination with content-providing offices, to advance actions taken to achieve full parity
among the six official languages on the United Nations website;
71. Recalls paragraph 32 of its resolution 69/324, notes with concern the disparity between the English and
the non-English languages on the websites maintained by the Secretariat, urges the Secretary-General to lead the
efforts of all offices and departments of the Secretariat to take concrete action to address such uneven development,
and in this regard calls upon all stakeholders, including the Department of Public Information, content-providing
offices and departments, in particular the Office of Information and Communications Technology of the Secretariat,
to continue their collaboration, within their respective mandates, so as to achieve full parity among the six official
languages on all United Nations websites developed and maintained by all Secretariat entities, in full conformance
with the principles of multilingualism and in compliance with the relevant resolutions addressing multilingualism
and accessibility for persons with disabilities, by making every effort to translate materials currently available only
in English and by providing offices and departments with technological solutions that comply with the principle of
parity, from within existing resources;
72. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to ensure, while maintaining an up-to-date and accurate
website, the equitable distribution among all official languages of financial and human resources within the
Department of Public Information allocated to the United Nations website, with full respect for the needs and the
specificities of all six official languages;
73. Welcomes the cooperative arrangements undertaken by the Department of Public Information with
academic institutions to increase the number of web pages available in official and non-official languages, and
requests the Secretary-General, in coordination with content-providing offices, to extend such cooperative
arrangements, in a cost-effective manner, to all the official languages of the United Nations, bearing in mind the
necessity of adherence to United Nations standards and guidelines;
74. Also welcomes the fact that live webcasts of open, formal meetings of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council with interpretation services have been provided as from the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly,
_______________
153

A/AC.198/2014/3, annex.

375

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

and requests the Secretariat to make every effort to provide full access to archived videos in all official languages of
all past open formal United Nations meetings with interpretation services in strict observance of the principle of full
parity of the six official languages of the United Nations;
75. Acknowledges the importance of the Yearbook of the United Nations as an authoritative reference work,
welcomes the work of the Department of Public Information in expanding the content and the functions of the
website of the Yearbook, and requests the Department to assess the readership of the Yearbook in order to evaluate
its impact and to report thereon to the Committee on Information at its thirty-eighth session;
76. Reaffirms the need to enhance the technological infrastructure of the Department of Public Information
on a continuous basis in order to widen the outreach of the Department and to continue to improve the United
Nations website in a cost-neutral manner;
77. Recognizes that some official languages use non-Latin and bidirectional scripts and that technological
infrastructures and supportive applications in the United Nations are based on Latin script, which leads to difficulties
in processing non-Latin and bidirectional scripts, and urges the Office of Information and Communications
Technology to further collaborate with the Department of Public Information to continue its efforts to ensure that
technological infrastructures and supportive applications in the United Nations fully support Latin, non-Latin and
bidirectional scripts in order to enhance the equality of all official languages on the United Nations website;
78. Underlines the importance, in the implementation of new communication tools such as social networks,
of taking into account the linguistic dimension in order to ensure full parity among the official languages of the
Organization;
79. Recalls that, in paragraph 28 of its resolution 69/324, the General Assembly requested the SecretaryGeneral to include in his upcoming report on multilingualism a comprehensive review of the United Nations
websites, presenting the status of content in non-official languages, as well as identifying innovative ideas, potential
synergies and other cost-neutral measures to reinforce the broader multilingual development and enrichment of the
United Nations websites, as appropriate;
80. Notes the uneven development of social media among the official languages of the United Nations, and
requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-eighth session on the strategy
of the Department of Public Information to ensure, by a more balanced use of all six official languages, that social
media contribute to raising awareness of and support for the activities of the Organization;
V
Library services
81. Welcomes the efforts of the Department of Public Information to implement the recommendations of its
2011 working group on library improvement;
82. Commends the steps taken by the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and the other member libraries of the
Steering Committee for the Modernization and Integrated Management of United Nations Libraries to align their
activities, services and outputs more closely with the goals, objectives and operational priorities of the Organization,
and calls upon the Dag Hammarskjöld Library to work with the other member libraries to devise a new statement of
strategy for library services and to replace the former Steering Committee with the Steering Committee for Libraries
of the United Nations focused on practical cooperation among the library services;
83. Reiterates the need to maintain a multilingual collection of books, periodicals and other materials in both
hard copy and electronic formats, accessible to Member States and others, ensuring that the Dag Hammarskjöld
Library continues to be a broadly accessible resource for information about the United Nations and its activities,
including through a multilingual home page, from within existing resources;
84. Welcomes the initiatives taken by the Dag Hammarskjöld Library, in its capacity as the focal point, to
expand the scope of the regional training and knowledge-sharing workshops organized for the depository libraries in
developing countries to include outreach in their activities;
85. Acknowledges the role of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library in enhancing knowledge-sharing and
networking activities to ensure access to the vast store of United Nations knowledge for delegates, permanent
missions of Member States, the Secretariat, researchers and depository libraries worldwide;
376

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

86. Notes the efforts of the iSeek team, through the intranet, to raise awareness among staff members of new
initiatives and developments in different departments of the Secretariat, and reiterates its request to the Department
of Public Information to work out, as a matter of priority, a strategy for Member States to also benefit from these
new developments;
VI
Outreach services
87. Stresses that the central objective of the outreach and knowledge services implemented by the
Department of Public Information is to promote awareness of the role and work of the United Nations by fostering
dialogue with global constituencies, such as academia, civil society, educators, students and youth, with the overall
emphasis on multilingualism from the planning stage, in close collaboration with the substantive departments,
specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations;
88. Notes with serious concern that many outreach and knowledge services are not yet available in all
official languages, and in this regard urges the Department of Public Information, as a matter of priority, to
mainstream multilingualism into all outreach and knowledge services, bearing in mind the importance of making
use of all the official languages of the United Nations and ensuring their full and equitable treatment in all the
activities of the Department, with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the use of the
five other official languages;
89. Encourages the United Nations Academic Impact to take effective steps to facilitate exchanges between
the United Nations and institutions of higher education in all regions to support the common principles and goals of
the United Nations, while recognizing the role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and its constitution;
90. Notes the continued growth of the United Nations Academic Impact, calls upon the Department of
Public Information to promote global awareness of the Academic Impact in order to encourage balanced
participation among Member States and their continued support for the initiative, within existing resources, and
encourages Member States to promote, the initiative among their academic institutions, as appropriate, with a view
to their joining it, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 69/96 A and B;
91. Welcomes the educational outreach activities of the Department of Public Information, through the
Global Teaching and Learning Project, and requests the Department to continue to reach educators and young
people worldwide through a range of multilingual multimedia platforms;
92. Notes the importance of the continued implementation by the Department of Public Information of the
ongoing Reham Al-Farra Memorial Journalists’ Fellowship Programme for broadcasters and journalists from
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, as mandated by the General Assembly, and
requests the Department to consider how best to maximize the benefits derived from the Programme by extending,
inter alia, its duration and the number of its participants;
93. Encourages the Department of Public Information to make the UN Chronicle available in paperless
editions only, with a view to expanding the service to all six official languages within existing resources, and
requests the Department to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-eighth session on progress in
this matter;
94. Welcomes the movement towards educational outreach and the orientation of the UN Chronicle, and to
this end encourages the UN Chronicle to continue to develop partnerships and collaborative educational activities
and events with civil society organizations and institutions of higher learning;
95. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that, in view of their income-generating
nature, guided tours at United Nations Headquarters are consistently available in all six official languages of the
United Nations;
96. Welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General to also offer guided tours at United Nations
Headquarters in non-official languages;
97. Notes the ongoing efforts of the Department of Public Information to strengthen its role as a focal point
for two-way interaction with civil society relating to the priorities and concerns of the Organization identified by
377

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Member States, and also notes in this regard the increasing involvement of civil society in United Nations activities,
including the outreach activities directed at youth representatives and young journalists;
98. Recalls its resolution 41/68 D of 3 December 1986, commends the World Federation of United Nations
Associations and its more than 100 national United Nations associations for the valuable contributions that they
have made during the past 69 years through their global activities in the mobilization of popular support for the
United Nations, and calls for continued collaboration between the World Federation and the Department of Public
Information in support of their complementary objectives;
99. Commends, in a spirit of cooperation, the United Nations Correspondents Association for its ongoing
activities and for its Dag Hammarskjöld Memorial Scholarship Fund, which sponsors journalists from developing
countries to come to United Nations Headquarters and report on the activities during the sessions of the General
Assembly, and further encourages the international community to continue its financial support for the Fund;
100. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts and contribution of United Nations Messengers of Peace,
Goodwill Ambassadors and other advocates to promote the work of the United Nations and to enhance international
public awareness of its priorities and concerns, and calls upon the Department of Public Information to continue to
involve them in its global communications and media strategies and outreach activities;
VII
Final remarks
101. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its thirty-eighth session and
to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the activities of the Department of Public Information and on
the implementation of all recommendations and requests contained in the present resolution;
102. Also requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure that the level of services provided by
the Department of Public Information is maintained throughout the period of the implementation of the capital
master plan;
103. Notes the initiative taken by the Department of Public Information, in cooperation with the Department
of Safety and Security and the Protocol and Liaison Service of the Secretariat, during the annual general debate of
the General Assembly, to issue special identification stickers to press officers of Member States to enable them to
escort media covering the visits of high-level officials to restricted areas, and strongly urges the Secretary-General to
continue to improve this practice by acceding to the request by Member States to provide the needed number of
additional passes to press officers of Member States to allow their access to all areas that are deemed restricted, in
order to effectively and comprehensively report on high-level meetings that include officials of delegations of
Member States;
104. Requests the Committee on Information to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
105. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Questions
relating to information”.
RESOLUTION 70/94
A/RES/70/94

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/501,
para. 7),154 by a recorded vote of 175 to none, with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,

_______________
154

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

378

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: France, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

70/94.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with
regard to the implementation of the Declaration, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 69/97 of 5 December 2014, in which it requested the Special Committee to
continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Stressing the importance of the timely transmission by the administering Powers of adequate information
under Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers
on the Territories concerned,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General,155
1. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations,
the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with
respect to that Territory;
2. Requests the administering Powers concerned, in accordance with their Charter obligations, to transmit
or continue to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General for information purposes, subject to such limitation as
security and constitutional considerations may require, statistical and other information of a technical nature relating
to the economic, social and educational conditions in the Territories for which they are respectively responsible, as
well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
including the constitution, legislative act or executive order providing for the government of the Territory and the
constitutional relationship of the Territory to the administering Power, within a maximum period of six months
following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate information is drawn from all
available published sources in connection with the preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories
concerned;
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to discharge the functions entrusted
to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures.
_______________
155

A/70/67.

379

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 70/95
A/RES/70/95

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/502,
para. 7),156 by a recorded vote of 176 to 2, with 2 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

70/95.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories”,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2015
relating to the item,157
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well as all other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, including, in particular, resolutions 46/181 of 19 December 1991, 55/146 of 8 December 2000
and 65/119 of 10 December 2010,
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to
promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under their
administration and to protect the human and natural resources of those Territories against abuses,
Reaffirming also that any economic or other activity that has a negative impact on the interests of the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and on the exercise of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
Charter and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) is contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Reaffirming further that the natural resources are the heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, including the indigenous populations,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location, size and economic conditions of each
Territory, and bearing in mind the need to promote the stability, diversification and strengthening of the economy of
each Territory,
_______________
156

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
157
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23), chap. V.

380

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the small Territories to natural disasters and environmental
degradation,
Conscious also that foreign economic investment, when undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes, could make a valid contribution to the
socioeconomic development of the Territories and also to the exercise of their right to self-determination,
Concerned about any activities aimed at exploiting the natural and human resources of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community,
1. Reaffirms the right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to self-determination in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as well as their right to the
enjoyment of their natural resources and their right to dispose of those resources in their best interest;
2. Affirms the value of foreign economic investment undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes in order to make a valid contribution to the
socioeconomic development of the Territories, especially during times of economic and financial crisis;
3. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter to promote the political,
economic, social and educational advancement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and reaffirms the legitimate
rights of their peoples over their natural resources;
4. Reaffirms its concern about any activities aimed at the exploitation of the natural resources that are the
heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the indigenous populations, in the
Caribbean, the Pacific and other regions, and of their human resources, to the detriment of their interests, and in such
a way as to deprive them of their right to dispose of those resources;
5. Reaffirms the need to avoid any economic and other activities that adversely affect the interests of the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and in this regard reminds the administering Powers of their
responsibility and accountability vis-à-vis any detriment to the interests of the peoples of those Territories, in
accordance with relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
6. Calls once again upon all Governments that have not yet done so to take, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, legislative, administrative or
other measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate
enterprises in the Non-Self-Governing Territories that are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises;
7. Calls upon the administering Powers to ensure that the exploitation of the marine and other natural
resources in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration is not in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, and does not adversely affect the interests of the peoples of those Territories;
8. Invites all Governments and organizations of the United Nations system to take all possible measures to
ensure that the permanent sovereignty of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories over their natural
resources is fully respected and safeguarded in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on
decolonization;
9. Urges the administering Powers concerned to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the
inalienable right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources and to establish and
maintain control over the future development of those resources, and requests the administering Powers to take all
steps necessary to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
10. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned to ensure that no discriminatory working conditions
prevail in the Territories under their administration and to promote in each Territory a fair system of wages
applicable to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
381

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through all means at his disposal, to inform world public
opinion of any activity that affects the exercise of the right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to
self-determination in conformity with the Charter and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
12. Appeals to trade unions and non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals, to continue their
efforts to promote the economic well-being of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and also appeals
to the media to disseminate information about the developments in this regard;
13. Decides to follow the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories so as to ensure that all economic
activities in those Territories are aimed at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the interest of their
peoples, including the indigenous populations, and at promoting the economic and financial viability of those
Territories;
14. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this question and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session.
RESOLUTION 70/96
A/RES/70/96

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/503,
para. 7),158 by a recorded vote of 126 to none, with 53 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

70/96.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the
United Nations”,
Having also considered the report of the Secretary-General159 and the report of the Economic and Social
Council160 on the item,
_______________
158

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
159
A/70/64.
160
E/2015/65.

382

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2015
relating to the item,161
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and the
resolutions of the Special Committee, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions, including, in particular,
Economic and Social Council resolutions 2013/43 of 25 July 2013 and 2014/25 of 16 July 2014,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community,
Conscious of the need to facilitate the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting that the large majority of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories are small island Territories,
Welcoming the assistance extended to Non-Self-Governing Territories by certain specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme,
Welcoming also the participation in the capacity of observers of those Non-Self-Governing Territories that are
associate members of regional commissions in the world conferences in the economic and social spheres, subject to
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and in accordance with relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations, including resolutions and decisions of the Assembly and the Special Committee on specific
Territories,
Noting that only some specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system have been
involved in providing assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Stressing that, because the development options of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories are
limited, there are special challenges to planning for and implementing sustainable development and that those
Territories will be constrained in meeting those challenges without the continuing cooperation and assistance of the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system,
Stressing also the importance of securing the resources necessary for funding expanded programmes of
assistance for the peoples concerned and the need to enlist the support of all major funding institutions within the
United Nations system in that regard,
Reaffirming the mandates of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to
take all appropriate measures, within their respective responsibilities, to ensure the full implementation of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions,
Expressing its appreciation to the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Caribbean Community and
other regional organizations for the continued cooperation and assistance that they have extended to the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in this regard,
Expressing its conviction that closer contacts and consultations between and among the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system and regional organizations help to facilitate the effective
formulation of programmes of assistance to the peoples concerned,
Mindful of the imperative need to keep under continuous review the activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system in the implementation of the various resolutions and decisions of
the United Nations relating to decolonization,
Bearing in mind the extremely fragile economies of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories and their
vulnerability to natural disasters, such as hurricanes, cyclones and sea-level rise, and recalling the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/99 of 5 December 2014 on the implementation of the Declaration by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations,
_______________
161

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23), chap. VI.

383

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;159

2. Recommends that all States intensify their efforts through the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system of which they are members to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
3. Reaffirms that the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations
system should continue to be guided by the relevant resolutions of the United Nations in their efforts to contribute to
the implementation of the Declaration and all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Also reaffirms that the recognition by the General Assembly, the Security Council and other United
Nations organs of the legitimacy of the aspirations of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to exercise
their right to self-determination entails, as a corollary, the extension of all appropriate assistance to those peoples;
5. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system that have continued to cooperate with the United Nations and the regional and subregional organizations in
the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
and requests all the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to implement the
relevant provisions of those resolutions;
6. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to intensify their
engagement with the work of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples as an important element for the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), including possible participation at the regional
seminars on decolonization, upon the invitation of the Special Committee;
7. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and international
and regional organizations to examine and review conditions in each Territory so as to take appropriate measures to
accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of the Territories;
8. Urges those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system that have not yet
provided assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories to do so as soon as possible;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system
and regional organizations to strengthen existing measures of support and formulate appropriate programmes of
assistance to the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, within the framework of their respective mandates, in
order to accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of those Territories;
10. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system concerned to
provide information on:
(a)

Environmental problems facing the Non-Self-Governing Territories;

(b) The impact of natural disasters, such as hurricanes and volcanic eruptions, and other environmental
problems, such as beach and coastal erosion and droughts, on those Territories;
(c) Ways and means to assist the Territories to fight drug trafficking, money-laundering and other illegal and
criminal activities;
(d) Illegal exploitation of the marine and other natural resources of the Territories and the need to utilize
those resources for the benefit of the peoples of the Territories;
11. Recommends that the executive heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system formulate, with the active cooperation of the regional organizations concerned, concrete proposals
for the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and submit the proposals to their
governing and legislative organs;
12. Also recommends that the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
continue to review at the regular meetings of their governing bodies the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
384

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

13. Recalls the adoption by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean of its
resolution 574 (XXVII) of 16 May 1998,162 calling for the necessary mechanisms for its associate members,
including Non-Self-Governing Territories, to participate in the special sessions of the General Assembly, subject to
the rules of procedure of the Assembly, to review and assess the implementation of the plans of action of those
United Nations world conferences in which the Territories originally participated in the capacity of observer, and in
the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies;
14. Requests the Chair of the Special Committee to continue to maintain close contact on these matters with
the President of the Economic and Social Council;
15. Recalls the publication by the Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs
of the Secretariat, in consultation with the United Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and
the Special Committee, of an information leaflet on assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, which was updated for the United Nations website on decolonization, and requests its continued
updating and wide dissemination;
16. Welcomes the continuing efforts made by the United Nations Development Programme in maintaining
close liaison among the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, including the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific, and in providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
17. Encourages the Non-Self-Governing Territories to take steps to establish and/or strengthen disaster
preparedness and management institutions and policies, inter alia, with the assistance of the relevant specialized
agencies;
18. Requests the administering Powers concerned to facilitate, when appropriate, the participation of
appointed and elected representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the relevant meetings and conferences of
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with relevant
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations, including resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and
the Special Committee on specific Territories, so that the Territories may benefit from the related activities of those
agencies and organizations;
19. Recommends that all Governments intensify their efforts through the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system of which they are members to accord priority to the question of
providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies, with the assistance of those agencies and
organizations, a report on the action taken in implementation of the relevant resolutions, including the present
resolution, since the circulation of his previous report;
21. Commends the Economic and Social Council for its debate and resolution on this question, and requests
it to continue to consider, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for the coordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in
implementing the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
22. Requests the specialized agencies to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the present resolution;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the governing bodies of the
appropriate specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations so that those
bodies may take the measures necessary to implement it, and also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its seventieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
24. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session.
_______________
162

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 21 (E/1998/41), sect. III.G.

385

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 70/97
A/RES/70/97

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/504, para. 7)163

70/97.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/100 of 5 December 2014,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General,164 prepared pursuant to its resolution 845 (IX) of
22 November 1954,
Conscious of the importance of promoting the educational advancement of the inhabitants of Non-SelfGoverning Territories,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion of offers of scholarships is essential in order to meet
the increasing need of students from Non-Self-Governing Territories for educational and training assistance, and
considering that students in those Territories should be encouraged to avail themselves of such offers,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;164

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained self-government or independence and, wherever possible,
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective measures to ensure the widespread and continuous
dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training
facilities made by States and to provide all the facilities necessary to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/98
A/RES/70/98

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/505, para. 32)165

70/98.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western Sahara,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
_______________
163

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Argentina, China, Cuba, Egypt,
El Salvador, Malawi, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Thailand and United Republic of Tanzania.
164
A/70/66 and Add.1.
165
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee.

386

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people concerned and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and other
resolutions of the Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/101 of 5 December 2014,
Recalling also all resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council on the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling further Security Council resolutions 658 (1990) of 27 June 1990, 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991,
1359 (2001) of 29 June 2001, 1429 (2002) of 30 July 2002, 1495 (2003) of 31 July 2003, 1541 (2004) of 29 April
2004, 1570 (2004) of 28 October 2004, 1598 (2005) of 28 April 2005, 1634 (2005) of 28 October 2005,
1675 (2006) of 28 April 2006 and 1720 (2006) of 31 October 2006,
Underlining the adoption of Security Council resolutions 1754 (2007) on 30 April 2007, 1783 (2007) on
31 October 2007, 1813 (2008) on 30 April 2008, 1871 (2009) on 30 April 2009, 1920 (2010) on 30 April 2010,
1979 (2011) on 27 April 2011, 2044 (2012) on 24 April 2012, 2099 (2013) on 25 April 2013, 2152 (2014) on
29 April 2014 and 2218 (2015) on 28 April 2015,
Expressing its satisfaction that the parties met on 18 and 19 June 2007, on 10 and 11 August 2007, from 7 to
9 January 2008 and from 16 to 18 March 2008 under the auspices of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara and in the presence of the neighbouring countries and that they have agreed to continue the
negotiations,
Also expressing its satisfaction at the holding of nine informal meetings convened by the Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General on 9 and 10 August 2009 in Dürnstein, Austria, on 10 and 11 February 2010 in Westchester
County, New York, United States of America, from 7 to 10 November 2010, from 16 to 18 December 2010 and
from 21 to 23 January 2011, all on Long Island, New York, from 7 to 9 March 2011 in Mellieha, Malta, from 5 to
7 June 2011 and from 19 to 21 July 2011, both on Long Island, and from 11 to 13 March 2012 in Manhasset,
New York, to prepare for the fifth round of negotiations,
Calling upon all the parties and the States of the region to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General and his
Personal Envoy and with each other,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations towards the people of Western Sahara,
Welcoming, in this regard, the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy in search of a mutually
acceptable political solution to the dispute, which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
for 2015,166
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General,167
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;167

2. Supports the process of negotiations initiated by Security Council resolution 1754 (2007) and further
sustained by Council resolutions 1783 (2007), 1813 (2008), 1871 (2009), 1920 (2010), 1979 (2011), 2044 (2012),
2099 (2013), 2152 (2014) and 2218 (2015), with a view to achieving a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution, which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, and commends the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara in this respect;
3. Welcomes the commitment of the parties to continue to show political will and work in an atmosphere
propitious for dialogue, in order to enter into a more intensive phase of negotiations, in good faith and without
_______________
166
167

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23), chap. VIII.
A/70/201.

387

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

preconditions, noting efforts and developments since 2006, thus ensuring the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1754 (2007), 1783 (2007), 1813 (2008), 1871 (2009), 1920 (2010), 1979 (2011), 2044 (2012),
2099 (2013), 2152 (2014) and 2218 (2015) and the success of negotiations;
4. Also welcomes the ongoing negotiations between the parties held on 18 and 19 June 2007, on 10 and
11 August 2007, from 7 to 9 January 2008 and from 16 to 18 March 2008 in the presence of the neighbouring
countries and under the auspices of the United Nations;
5. Calls upon the parties to cooperate with the International Committee of the Red Cross, and calls upon
them to abide by their obligations under international humanitarian law;
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/99
A/RES/70/99

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/505, para. 32)168

70/99.

Question of New Caledonia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2015
relating to New Caledonia,169
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New Caledonia by the French authorities, in
cooperation with all sectors of the population, to promote equitable political, economic and social development in
the Territory, including measures in the area of environmental protection, in order to provide a framework for its
peaceful progress to self-determination,
Noting also, in this context, the importance of continued dialogue among the parties involved in New
Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination of New Caledonia,
Recalling the report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples on the situation of Kanak
people in New Caledonia, submitted to the Human Rights Council at its eighteenth session, held from 12 to
30 September and on 21 October 2011,170 following his visit to the Territory in February 2011,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia and neighbouring countries of
the South Pacific region, including through the hosting of New Caledonian delegates in the French diplomatic and
consular missions in the region,
Recalling the conclusions of the nineteenth Melanesian Spearhead Group Leaders Summit, under the historic
inaugural chairmanship of the Front de libération nationale kanak socialiste, held in Nouméa from 19 to 21 June 2013,
_______________
168

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
169
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23), chap. IX.
170
A/HRC/18/35/Add.6, annex.

388

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

including the Leaders Declaration of the Group reaffirming the strong commitment and support, including technical
assistance, for the self-determination of New Caledonia, in accordance with the Charter and the Nouméa Accord,171
Welcoming the exchange of letters between the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the
Melanesian Spearhead Group secretariat on the sharing of information on New Caledonia,
Mindful that New Caledonia has entered the most seminal phase of the Nouméa Accord process, a period that
requires continued close monitoring by the United Nations of the situation in the Territory in order to help the people
of New Caledonia to exercise their right to self-determination in accordance with the objectives set out in the
Charter and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Welcoming the Charter of the Kanak people, common base of the fundamental values and principles of the
Kanak civilization, which was proclaimed in April 2014 by the customary authorities, Great Chiefs, Chiefs,
Presidents of District Councils and Presidents of the Clan Chiefs Councils, as the sole traditional custodians of the
Kanak people of New Caledonia,
Welcoming also the dispatch of a United Nations visiting mission to New Caledonia in March 2014,
Recalling the statement by the Chair of the visiting mission,
Having examined the report of the visiting mission,172
Welcoming the cooperation of the administering Power with regard to the work of the Special Committee
relating to New Caledonia and its readiness for and concurrence with the dispatching of the 2014 visiting mission,
Taking note of the statement by the representative of the administering Power,
Acknowledging the successful conduct by New Caledonia of municipal and provincial elections in May 2014,
Taking note of the information presented to the Pacific and the Caribbean regional seminars on the
implementation of the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, held in Nadi, Fiji, from 21 to
23 May 2014, and in Managua, from 19 to 21 May 2015, on the situation in the Territory, including on the issues
related to the 2014 elections,
Aware of the challenges encountered in the 2014 provincial electoral process, particularly with regard to the
work of the special administrative committees in updating the special electoral roll, the non-existence of the
supplementary electoral roll from 1998 and the unavailability of the 1998 general electoral roll prior to 2014, and
their potential impact on the referendum on self-determination,
1. Reaffirms its approval of the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for
2015 relating to New Caledonia;169
2. Reiterates its endorsement of the report, observations, conclusions and recommendations of the United
Nations visiting mission to New Caledonia conducted in 2014;172
3. Expresses its appreciation to the administering Power and the Government of New Caledonia for the
close cooperation and assistance extended to the visiting mission;
4. Notes the concerns expressed regarding the challenges encountered in the provincial elections process
with respect to the persistent varying interpretations of the restricted electorate provisions and the voter registration
appeal process, and encourages the administering Power and the people of New Caledonia to address in an amicable
and peaceful manner the concerns of all stakeholders under the existing relevant laws in the Territory and in France,
while also respecting and upholding the spirit and letter of the Nouméa Accord;171
5. Expresses the view that adequate measures for conducting the upcoming consultations on access to full
sovereignty, including a just, fair, credible and transparent electoral roll, as provided in the Nouméa Accord, are
essential for the conduct of a free, fair and genuine act of self-determination consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations and United Nations principles and practices;
_______________
171
172

A/AC.109/2114, annex.
A/AC.109/2014/20/Rev.1.

389

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

6. Welcomes, in that respect, the continuous dialogue undertaken by the parties in the framework of the
Committee of Signatories to the Nouméa Accord to establish the parameters for the conduct of a conclusive act of
self-determination, including the setting of an electoral roll, as provided in the Accord;
7. Takes note of the outcome of the twelfth meeting of the Committee of Signatories, held on 3 October
2014, which, inter alia, stressed the commitment of the administering Power to enable the people of New Caledonia
to decide their future status in a fair, credible, democratic and transparent self-determination process consistent with
the Accord;
8. Notes with interest the convening of the extraordinary meeting of the Committee of Signatories, held in
Paris on 5 June 2015, regarding the New Caledonia self-determination process, including, in particular, the electoral
roll for the referendum and related issues;
9. Calls upon France, the administering Power, in the light of the observations, conclusions and
recommendations of the visiting mission, to consider developing an education programme to inform the people of
New Caledonia about the nature of self-determination so that they may be better prepared to face a future decision
on the matter, and requests the Special Committee to provide all available assistance in that regard;
10. Commends the observations, conclusions and recommendations of the visiting mission to the
Government of France, as the administering Power, and the Government of New Caledonia for appropriate action;
11. Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of the people of New Caledonia and within the framework
of the Nouméa Accord, to maintain their dialogue in a spirit of harmony and mutual respect in order to continue to
promote a framework for the peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all
options are open and which would safeguard the rights of all sectors of the population, based on the principle that it
is for the populations of New Caledonia to choose how to determine their destiny;
12. Reaffirms its resolutions 68/87 of 11 December 2013 and 69/97 of 5 December 2014, in which the
General Assembly, inter alia, reaffirmed that in the absence of a decision by the Assembly itself that a Non-SelfGoverning Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the
administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with
respect to that Territory;
13. Welcomes the actions taken by the administering Power to continue to transmit to the Secretary-General
information as required under Article 73 e of the Charter, particularly the submission on 8 January 2015 on the most
recent developments in New Caledonia;
14. Notes the continuing concerns expressed by the Kanak people regarding their underrepresentation in
governmental and social structures, incessant migratory flows and the impact of mining on the environment;
15. Commends the “Cadres for the future” programme, and encourages further enhancement of the training
and capacity-building of high-level executives in the public and private sectors in the Territory, particularly in view
of the ongoing transfer of powers from the Government of France to New Caledonia, while ensuring that the
transfer of powers is undertaken in a manner consistent with the Nouméa Accord;
16. Recalls the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on the rights of indigenous peoples on the situation of Kanak people in New Caledonia,170
made in the light of relevant international standards, to assist with ongoing efforts to advance the rights of the Kanak
people in the context of the implementation of the Nouméa Accord and the United Nations-supported
decolonization process;
17. Welcomes the strengthening of the economic and social rebalancing initiatives undertaken by the
administering Power, and urges its continuation in all areas and communities of the Territory, especially for the wellbeing of the Kanak indigenous people;
18. Encourages the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of New Caledonia, to
ensure and enhance safeguards for and guarantees of the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to own,
access, use and manage their natural resources, including proprietary rights for their future development;
19. Recalls the provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the effect that New Caledonia may become a member
or associate member of certain international organizations, and notes the continuing strengthening of ties between
New Caledonia and both the European Union and the European Development Fund;
390

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

20. Welcomes the accession of the Front de libération nationale kanak socialiste to the Chair of the
Melanesian Spearhead Group, the hosting, for the first time in New Caledonia, in June 2013, of the meetings of
officials and leaders of the Group, the successful completion of the chairmanship of the Group by the Front de
libération nationale kanak socialiste, in June 2015, and the opening, in February 2013, of the Front de libération
nationale kanak socialiste unit at the headquarters of the Group secretariat in Port Vila;
21. Acknowledges the contribution of the Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre to the protection of the
indigenous Kanak culture of New Caledonia;
22. Welcomes the cooperative attitude of other States and Territories in the region towards New Caledonia,
its economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international affairs;
23. Takes note of the information shared by participants from New Caledonia at the Pacific and the
Caribbean regional seminars on the implementation of the Third International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, held in Nadi, Fiji, from 21 to 23 May 2014 and in Managua from 19 to 21 May 2015, including on
measured progress made in the social, economic, political and environmental spheres and more focused efforts,
particularly on the rebalancing initiatives and electoral roll concerns, necessary for the long-term shared mutual
benefit of all New Caledonians, and urges the administering Power and the Government of New Caledonia to
devote appropriate attention to addressing these issues;
24. Welcomes the peaceful conduct of provincial elections in New Caledonia on 11 May 2014, the preceding
municipal elections and the subsequent efforts to form a new Government of New Caledonia, and encourages
constructive engagement by all stakeholders in further developing New Caledonia for all, including by respecting
and upholding the Nouméa Accord;
25. Stresses the importance of the agreement between the signatories to the Nouméa Accord that the
progress made in the emancipation process shall be brought to the attention of the United Nations;
26. Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New Caledonia as a result of the
signing of the Nouméa Accord;
27. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of the question of the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of New Caledonia and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session.
RESOLUTION 70/100
A/RES/70/100

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/505, para. 32)173

70/100.

Question of French Polynesia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of French Polynesia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2015
relating to French Polynesia,174
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in
accordance with all relevant resolutions, including General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
Recalling its resolution 67/265 of 17 May 2013, entitled “Self-determination of French Polynesia”, in which it
affirmed the inalienable right of the people of French Polynesia to self-determination and independence in
_______________
173

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
174
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23), chap. IX.

391

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

accordance with Chapter XI of the Charter and its resolution 1514 (XV), recognized that French Polynesia remains
a Non-Self-Governing Territory within the meaning of the Charter, and declared that an obligation exists under
Article 73 e of the Charter on the part of the Government of France, as the administering Power of the Territory, to
transmit information on French Polynesia,
Taking note of the section related to French Polynesia of the Final Document of the Seventeenth Ministerial
Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Algiers from 26 to 29 May 2014,175
Expressing concern that 55 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,176 there still remain a number of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned, on a case-by-case basis and in conformity
with the clearly defined principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV), 1541 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions of the Assembly,
Recognizing also that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the peoples of the Territories require
flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case basis,
Conscious of the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the
Declaration in respect of French Polynesia,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the
peoples of the Territories and to fulfil its mandate effectively, on a case-by-case basis, it is important for it to be
apprised by the administering Powers and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the
representatives of the Territories, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territories,
Recognizing the significant health and environmental impacts of nuclear testing conducted by the
administering Power in the Territory over a 30-year period, and recognizing also the concerns in the Territory related
to the consequences of those activities for the lives and health of the people, especially children and vulnerable
groups, as well as the environment of the region, and bearing in mind General Assembly resolution 69/84 of
5 December 2014, entitled “Effects of atomic radiation”,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on the environmental, ecological, health and other impacts of the
30-year period of nuclear testing in French Polynesia,177 prepared pursuant to paragraph 5 of General Assembly
resolution 68/93 of 11 December 2013,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the peoples of the Territories in gaining a better
understanding of the options for self-determination,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of French Polynesia to self-determination, in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of French Polynesia to determine freely their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the
territorial Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education
programmes for the Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of French Polynesia of their right to
self-determination in conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined
in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
_______________
175

See A/68/966-S/2014/573, annex I.
Resolution 1514 (XV).
177
A/69/189.
176

392

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

to Colonial Countries and Peoples in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the
Declaration and in order to advise the Special Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b
of the Charter on efforts to promote self-government in French Polynesia, and encourages the administering Power
to facilitate visiting and special missions to the Territory;
4. Regrets that the administering Power has not responded to the request to submit information on French
Polynesia under Article 73 e of the Charter;
5. Reaffirms that an obligation exists on the part of the administering Power to transmit information under
Chapter XI of the Charter, and requests the administering Power to transmit to the Secretary-General such
information on French Polynesia as called for under the Charter;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to intensify its dialogue with French Polynesia in order to facilitate
rapid progress towards a fair and effective self-determination process, under which the terms and timelines for an
act of self-determination would be agreed;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of French Polynesia and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session.
RESOLUTION 70/101
A/RES/70/101

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/505, para. 32)178

70/101.

Question of Tokelau

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Tokelau,
Taking note of the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2015
relating to Tokelau,179
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Non-Self-Governing Territories, in particular General Assembly resolution 69/104 of 5 December 2014,
Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand as the administering Power
with regard to the work of the Special Committee relating to Tokelau and its readiness to permit access by United
Nations visiting missions to the Territory,
Noting with appreciation also the collaborative contribution to the development of Tokelau by New Zealand
and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme,
Noting that, as a small island Territory, Tokelau exemplifies the situation of most remaining Non-SelfGoverning Territories and that, as a case study pointing to successful cooperation for decolonization, Tokelau has
wider significance for the United Nations as it seeks to complete its work in decolonization,
Recalling the status of Tokelau as an associate member of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations,
Cognizant that New Zealand and Tokelau signed, on 21 November 2003, a document entitled “Joint statement
of the principles of partnership”, which sets out the rights and responsibilities of the two partners,
_______________
178

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
179
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23), chap. XI.

393

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Bearing in mind the decision of the General Fono at its meeting in November 2003, following extensive
consultations undertaken in all three villages, to explore formally with New Zealand the option of self-government
in free association, its decision in August 2005 to hold in February 2006 a referendum on self-determination on the
basis of a draft constitution for Tokelau and a draft treaty of free association with New Zealand, and its subsequent
decision to hold a further referendum in October 2007, and bearing in mind also that the two referendums did not
produce the two-thirds majority of valid votes cast required by the General Fono to change the status of Tokelau
from that of a Non-Self-Governing Territory under the administration of New Zealand,
Recalling the holding of free and fair elections in the Territory in January 2014,
Noting the 2013 constitutional consultations, to be further considered by the Constitution Committee, which
were driven by the people of Tokelau and which aimed at developing a model of government structure that is
culturally appropriate and sensitive to their current situation, culminating in the approval and ratification of the
national symbol of the Territory, along with the constitution, national anthem and national flag,
Bearing in mind the statement made by the Ulu-o-Tokelau at the Pacific regional seminar on the
implementation of the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, held in Nadi, Fiji, from 21 to
23 May 2014, that the self-determination process of the Territory could not be addressed in isolation from the threat
of climate change and the rise in sea level, and bearing in mind also the intention of Tokelau to further review the
National Strategic Plan in order to determine development and other priorities beyond 2015, including consideration
of the issue of self-determination and how it would address a possible referendum on self-determination in
cooperation with the administering Power,
Recalling the statement made at the seminar by the representative of the Government of New Zealand, as the
administering Power, citing the close and cordial cooperation that has existed for nearly 90 years between the
Territory and the administering Power, with an emphasis on quality health care and education, telecommunications,
renewable energy, support for the fisheries sector and the establishment of transport infrastructure and services,
including the ongoing construction of a new purpose-built ferry vessel for the people of Tokelau, to be delivered
in 2015,
1. Acknowledges the decision of the General Fono in 2008 that consideration of any future act of selfdetermination by Tokelau will be deferred and that New Zealand and Tokelau will devote renewed effort and
attention to ensuring that essential services and infrastructure on the atolls of Tokelau are enhanced and
strengthened, thereby ensuring an enhanced quality of life and opportunities for the people of Tokelau;
2. Welcomes the progress made towards the devolution of power to the three taupulega (village councils)
since 2004, and notes that further discussion is planned on the recommendations in the report on the devolution
review, compiled in 2012;
3. Notes with appreciation that Tokelau and New Zealand remain firmly committed to the ongoing
development of Tokelau for the long-term benefit of the people of Tokelau, with particular emphasis on the further
development of facilities on each atoll that meet their current requirements;
4. Recalls the adoption by Tokelau of its National Strategic Plan for 2010-2015 and that the Joint
Commitment for Development between Tokelau and New Zealand 2011–2015 prioritizes four main development
pillars, including good governance, infrastructure development, human resources capacity development and
sustainable development;
5. Acknowledges the ongoing and consistent commitment of New Zealand to meeting the social and
economic requirements of the people of Tokelau, including with the completion of the Tokelau Renewable Energy
Project and a new shipping charter service, as well as the support and cooperation of the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Health Organization;
6. Commends the achievement by Tokelau in 2013 of 60 per cent of the objectives of its National Strategic
Plan, including the completion of the Tokelau Renewable Energy Project with the support of the administering
Power and receipt by the Government of the Renewable Energy Award granted by the New Zealand Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Authority;
7. Acknowledges the need of Tokelau for continued support from the international community and its
desire to become part of the discussions on the post-2015 development agenda, the impacts of climate change and
the protection of the environment and oceans;
394

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

8. Notes the intention of Tokelau to further review its National Strategic Plan in order to determine
development and other priorities beyond 2015 and to include consideration of the issue of self-determination and
how the Territory would address a possible referendum on self-determination in cooperation with the administering
Power;
9. Recalls with satisfaction the establishment and operation of the Tokelau International Trust Fund to
support the ongoing needs of Tokelau, and calls upon Member States and international and regional agencies to
contribute to the Fund and thereby lend practical support to Tokelau in overcoming the problems of smallness,
isolation and lack of resources;
10. Welcomes the cooperative attitude of the other States and territories in the region towards Tokelau and
their support for its economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international
affairs, and in this regard notes the successful chairmanship by Tokelau in 2014 of the tenth annual ministerial
meeting of the Forum Fisheries Committee of the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency, held in Tokelau on 1 and
2 July 2014, and the representation of the Agency by the Ulu-o-Tokelau at the third International Conference on
Small Island Developing States, held in Apia from 1 to 4 September 2014;
11. Calls upon the administering Power and United Nations agencies to continue to provide assistance to
Tokelau as it further develops;
12. Recognizes the positive actions taken by the administering Power to transmit to the Secretary-General
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations information regarding the political, economic and social
situation of Tokelau;
13. Commends the commitment of both Tokelau and New Zealand to continuing to work together in the
interests of Tokelau and its people;
14. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine the question of the NonSelf-Governing Territory of Tokelau and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session.
RESOLUTIONS 70/102 A and B
A/RES/70/102AandB

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/505, para. 32)180

70/102.

Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the
United States Virgin Islands
A
GENERAL

The General Assembly,
Having considered the questions of the Non-Self-Governing Territories of American Samoa, Anguilla,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands, hereinafter referred to as “the Territories”,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
for 2015,181

_______________
180

The draft resolutions recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee were submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
181
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23), chap. X.

395

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to those Territories, including, in
particular, the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the individual Territories
covered by the present resolutions,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1541 (XV), containing the principles that should guide Member States in determining
whether or not an obligation exists to transmit the information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Expressing concern that 55 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,182 there still remain a number of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into
account the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the
Second183 and the Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the peoples of the Territories require
flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to
territorial size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Noting the stated position of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the stated position of the Government of the United States of America on the Non-Self-Governing Territories
under their administration,
Noting also the constitutional developments in some Non-Self-Governing Territories affecting the internal
structure of governance about which the Special Committee has received information,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Convinced also that any negotiations to determine the status of a Territory must take place with the active
involvement and participation of the people of that Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-bycase basis, and that the views of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in respect of their right to selfdetermination should be ascertained,
Noting that a number of Non-Self-Governing Territories have expressed concern at the procedure followed by
some administering Powers, contrary to the wishes of the Territories themselves, of amending or enacting legislation
for application to the Territories, either through orders in council, in order to apply to the Territories the international
treaty obligations of the administering Power, or through the unilateral application of laws and regulations,
Aware of the importance of the international financial services and tourism sectors for the economies of some
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that United Nations visiting and special missions provide an effective means of ascertaining the
situation in the Territories, that some Territories have not received a United Nations visiting mission for a long time
and that no visiting missions have been sent to some of the Territories, and considering the possibility of sending
further visiting missions to the Territories at an appropriate time, in consultation with the relevant administering
Powers and in accordance with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations on decolonization,
_______________
182
183

396

Resolution 1514 (XV).
A/56/61, annex.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Mindful also that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the
peoples of the Territories and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the relevant
administering Powers and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the representatives of the
Territories, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories,
Acknowledging the regular transmission by the administering Powers to the Secretary-General of information
called for under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Aware of the importance both to the Territories and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected
and appointed representatives of the Territories in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the peoples of the Territories in gaining a better
understanding of the options for self-determination,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Noting the stated positions of the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories before the Special
Committee and at its regional seminars,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar held by the Special Committee in Managua and hosted by the
Government of Nicaragua from 19 to 21 May 2015 as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the
participants to assess the progress made in the decolonization process and to review the existing working methods
of the Committee and renew its momentum in implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee184 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including,
especially, the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General
Assembly of the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,185
Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the Territories to natural disasters and environmental degradation,
and in that connection bearing in mind the applicability to the Territories of the programmes of action or outcome
documents of all United Nations world conferences and special sessions of the General Assembly in the economic
and social spheres,
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Recalling the statement made by the representative of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean at the 2015 Caribbean regional seminar that all seven Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories were
active associate members of the Commission,
Aware that the Human Rights Committee, as part of its mandate under the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,186 reviews the status of the self-determination process, including in small island Territories under
examination by the Special Committee,
_______________
184

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23).
See resolution 65/119.
186
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
185

397

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the ongoing efforts of the Special Committee in carrying out a critical review of its work with the
aim of making appropriate and constructive recommendations and decisions to attain its objectives in accordance
with its mandate,
Recognizing that the annual working papers prepared by the Secretariat on developments in each of the small
Territories,187 as well as the substantive documentation and information furnished by experts, scholars, nongovernmental organizations and other sources, have provided important inputs to update the present resolutions,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on the Second International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism,188
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly resolution
65/119 on the Third Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,189
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to selfdetermination, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization, there is no alternative to the principle of selfdetermination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights
conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the peoples of the Territories themselves to determine freely
their future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and in that connection reiterates its long-standing call for the administering
Powers, in cooperation with the territorial Governments and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to
develop political education programmes for the Territories in order to foster an awareness among the people of their
right to self-determination in conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly
defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Stresses the importance of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples being apprised of the views and
wishes of the peoples of the Territories and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and
scope of the existing political and constitutional arrangements between the Non-Self-Governing Territories and their
respective administering Powers;
5. Requests the administering Powers to continue to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General
information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter;
6. Calls upon the administering Powers to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to
promote self-government in the Territories, and encourages the administering Powers to facilitate visiting and
special missions to the Territories;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territories, and, as a priority, to mitigate the effects of
the current global financial crisis where possible, in consultation with the territorial Governments concerned,
towards the strengthening and diversification of their respective economies;
8. Requests the Territories and the administering Powers to take all measures necessary to protect and
conserve the environment of the Territories against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized
agencies concerned to continue to monitor environmental conditions in the Territories and to provide assistance to
those Territories, consistent with their prevailing rules of procedure;
_______________
187

A/AC.109/2015/1, 4–12 and 14.
A/65/330 and Add.1.
189
A/70/73 and Add.1.
188

398

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

9. Welcomes the participation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in regional activities, including the
work of regional organizations;
10. Stresses the importance of implementing the plans of action for the Second183 and the Third International
Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism, in particular by expediting the implementation of the work programme
for the decolonization of each Non-Self-Governing Territory, on a case-by-case basis, as well as by ensuring that
periodic analyses are undertaken of the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration in each
Territory, and that the working papers prepared by the Secretariat on each Territory should fully reflect
developments in those Territories;
11. Urges Member States to contribute to the efforts of the United Nations to usher in a world free of
colonialism within the context of the International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism, and calls upon them
to continue to give their full support to the Special Committee in its endeavours towards that noble goal;
12. Stresses the importance of the various constitutional exercises in the respective Territories administered
by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, and led by the
territorial Governments, designed to address internal constitutional structures within the present territorial
arrangements, and decides to follow closely the developments concerning the future political status of those
Territories;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report to the General Assembly on a regular basis on the
implementation of decolonization resolutions adopted since the declaration of the Third International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism;
14. Reiterates its request that the Human Rights Committee collaborate with the Special Committee, within
the framework of its mandate on the right to self-determination as contained in the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights,186 with the aim of exchanging information, given that the Human Rights Committee is
mandated to review the situation, including political and constitutional developments, in many of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories that are within the purview of the Committee;
15. Requests the Special Committee to continue to collaborate with the Economic and Social Council and its
relevant subsidiary intergovernmental bodies, within the framework of their respective mandates, with the aim of
exchanging information on developments in those Non-Self-Governing Territories which are reviewed by those
bodies;
16. Also requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session and on the implementation of
the present resolutions.
B
INDIVIDUAL TERRITORIES
The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
I
American Samoa
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on American Samoa190 and other relevant
information,
Taking note also of the statement made by the representative of the Governor of American Samoa at the
Caribbean regional seminar held in Managua from 19 to 21 May 2015 that, while the Territory enjoyed a great deal
of self-government, its current legal status was seen as an anachronism that exposed the Territory to situations
beyond its control and needed to be remedied,
_______________
190

A/AC.109/2015/12.

399

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware that, under United States law, the Secretary of the Interior has administrative jurisdiction over American
Samoa,191
Recalling the position of the administering Power and the statements made by representatives of American
Samoa at regional seminars inviting the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to send a visiting mission to the
Territory,
Aware of the work of the Future Political Status Study Commission, completed in 2006, the release of its
report, with recommendations, in January 2007 and the creation of the American Samoa Constitutional Review
Committee, as well as the holding in June 2010 of the Territory’s fourth Constitutional Convention,
Noting the statement made by the representative of the Governor of American Samoa at the 2015 Caribbean
regional seminar, expressing concern that the Territory continued to get its authority from the President and the
Department of the Interior of the administering Power, that the Territory had no representation in the federal
Congress and that its Constitution needed to be approved by the Government of the administering Power,
Acknowledging the outcome of the referendum held on 4 November 2014, in which the proposal to give the
Fono, the Territory’s legislature, the authority to override the Governor’s veto was rejected, and welcoming the
discussion opened in the Territory as to the way forward,
Taking note of the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, issued
on 5 June 2015, affirming the judgement of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, which
dismissed a lawsuit seeking a declaratory judgement that would have asserted that the citizenship clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States extended to American Samoa,
Acknowledging the indication by the territorial Government, including at the 2015 Caribbean regional
seminar, that certain federal laws have had and continue to have a debilitating impact on the Territory’s ability to
achieve sustainable economic growth,
Aware that, in July 2012, the United States passed Public Law 112–149, which includes a provision to delay
the minimum wage increases in American Samoa, as provided by United States Public Law 110–28, until
September 2015,
Aware also that American Samoa continues to be the only United States Territory to receive financial
assistance from the administering Power for the operations of the territorial Government,
1. Welcomes the work of the territorial Government with respect to moving forward on political status,
local autonomy and self-governance issues with a view to making political and economic progress and in particular
the announcement of a dialogue among the people of American Samoa on the Territory’s future political status;
2. Acknowledges the indication by the territorial Government that American Samoa should remain on the
list of Non-Self-Governing Territories, under the purview of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, until
such time as its people have exercised their right to self-determination;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the invitation extended in 2015 by the Governor of American Samoa to
the Special Committee to send a visiting mission to the Territory, calls upon the administering Power to facilitate
such a mission if the territorial Government so desires, and requests the Chair of the Special Committee to take all
the steps necessary to that end;
4. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning a public
awareness programme, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter of the United Nations, and in that regard calls
upon the relevant United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to assist the territorial Government in the diversification and
sustainability of the economy of the Territory and to address employment and cost-of-living issues;
_______________
191

United States Congress, 1929 (48 U.S.C. Sec. 1661, 45 Stat. 1253), and Secretary’s Order 2657, Department of the Interior, United
States of America, 1951, as amended.

400

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

II
Anguilla
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Anguilla192 and other relevant information,
Recalling the holding of the 2003 Caribbean regional seminar in Anguilla, hosted by the territorial
Government and made possible by the administering Power, the first time that the seminar had been held in a NonSelf-Governing Territory,
Recalling also the statement made by the representative of Anguilla at the Pacific regional seminar held in
Quito from 30 May to 1 June 2012 that the people of the Territory were concerned that they were being denied the
full range of decolonization options under a drafting exercise that began in 2011,
Aware of the follow-up meeting, held after the 2012 Pacific regional seminar, between the Chair of the Special
Committee and the Chief Minister of Anguilla, who reiterated the urgent need for a visiting mission,
Noting the internal constitutional review process resumed by the territorial Government in 2006, the work of
the Constitutional and Electoral Reform Commission, which prepared its report in August 2006, the holding of
public and other consultative meetings in 2007 on proposed constitutional amendments to be presented to the
administering Power, the decisions taken in 2008 and 2011 to set up a drafting team to prepare a new constitution
and present it for public consultation in the Territory and the recent efforts undertaken in that regard,
Noting also the participation of the Territory as a member in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories
Council and an associate member in the Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean,
Taking note of the general elections which took place in April 2015,
1. Welcomes the preparations made for a new constitution, and urges that constitutional discussions with
the administering Power, including public consultations, be concluded as soon as possible;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory in its current efforts with regard to advancing the
internal constitutional review exercise, if requested;
3. Stresses the importance of the previously expressed desire of the territorial Government for a visiting
mission by the Special Committee, calls upon the administering Power to facilitate such a mission, if the territorial
Government so desires, and requests the Chair of the Special Committee to take all the necessary steps to that end;
4. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
consultative outreach efforts consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to assist the territorial Government in strengthening its
commitments in the economic domain, including budgetary matters, with regional support as needed and
appropriate;
6. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
III
Bermuda
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Bermuda193 and other relevant information,
Aware of the statement made by the representative of Bermuda at the Pacific regional seminar held in Quito
from 30 May to 1 June 2012,
_______________
192
193

A/AC.109/2015/14.
A/AC.109/2015/6.

401

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Conscious of the different viewpoints of the political parties on the future status of the Territory, and noting the
results of successive surveys by local media, according to which a majority of respondents did not wish to sever ties
with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the administering Power, and a minority was in
favour of independence,
Recalling the dispatch of the United Nations special mission to Bermuda in 2005, at the request of the
territorial Government and with the concurrence of the administering Power, which provided information to the
people of the Territory on the role of the United Nations in the process of self-determination, on the legitimate
political status options as clearly defined in General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and on
the experiences of other small States that have achieved a full measure of self-government,
Noting serious concerns regarding good governance, transparency and accountability in the Territory,
including with respect to external election campaign financing originating in a neighbouring country, which led the
Premier to resign in May 2014 with a view to maintaining integrity and confidence in the political landscape,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
1. Stresses the importance of the 2005 report of the Bermuda Independence Commission, which provides a
thorough examination of the facts surrounding independence, and continues to regret that the plans for public
meetings and the presentation of a Green Paper to the House of Assembly followed by a White Paper outlining the
policy proposals for an independent Bermuda have so far not materialized;
2. Underlines the need further to strengthen good governance, transparency and accountability in
government for the benefit of the Territory;
3. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
4. Welcomes the active participation of Bermuda in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
IV
British Virgin Islands
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the British Virgin Islands194 and other relevant
information,
Recalling the statement made by the representative of the British Virgin Islands at the Caribbean regional
seminar held in Quito from 28 to 30 May 2013 that, while the Territory’s relationship with the administering Power
was stable and not problematic, it could be enhanced,
Aware of the negative impact of the global economic slowdown on the growth of the financial and tourism
services sectors of the Territory,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory and of the
Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
Taking note of the general elections which took place in June 2015,
1. Recalls the 2007 Constitution of the British Virgin Islands, and stresses the importance of continued
discussions on constitutional matters, to accord greater responsibility to the territorial Government for the effective
implementation of the Constitution and increased levels of education relating to constitutional matters;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
_______________
194

402

A/AC.109/2015/7.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

3. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
4. Recalls the holding, in March 2014, of the meeting of the Inter-Virgin Islands Council between the
Territory and the United States Virgin Islands;
V
Cayman Islands
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the Cayman Islands195 and other relevant
information,
Conscious of the statement made by the representative of the territorial Government at the 2010 Pacific
regional seminar held in Nouméa,
Aware of the work, in accordance with the 2009 Constitution, of the Constitutional Commission, which serves
as an advisory body on constitutional matters,
Aware also that, in spite of the global economic downturn, the tourism sector continued to be one of the key
drivers for economic growth and that the financial services sector reportedly continued to bring about slight growth
in 2014,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory and of the
Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
1. Recalls the 2009 Constitution of the Cayman Islands, and stresses the importance of the work of the
Constitutional Commission, including its work on human rights education;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
awareness outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
4. Also welcomes the efforts made by the territorial Government to continue to implement financial sector
management policies, medical tourism initiatives and unemployment alleviation programmes in various economic
sectors;
VI
Guam
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Guam196 and other relevant information,
Noting the statement made by the representative of the Governor of Guam at the Caribbean regional seminar
held in Managua from 19 to 21 May 2015, in which he presented an update on the efforts of Guam towards
decolonization, including by securing funding for the public education programme on self-determination, and on the
engagement of the Guam Commission on Decolonization for the Implementation and Exercise of Chamorro SelfDetermination in reinforcing public awareness in order to address the limited and distorted understanding of
decolonization,
Noting also the concern expressed by the representative of the Governor about the reinstatement of a lawsuit
challenging the voting restrictions for the Territory’s plebiscite on self-determination,
Cognizant of the efforts made by the Guam Commission on Decolonization to promote in the Territory the
holding of a plebiscite on self-determination, to populate the decolonization registry, as required by public law, to
_______________
195
196

A/AC.109/2015/8.
A/AC.109/2015/4.

403

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

enhance the ability to expediently register those who have not yet been registered and to identify and secure
territorial and federal resources for a self-determination education programme,
Aware that, under United States law, the relations between the territorial Government and the federal
Government in all matters that are not the programme responsibility of another federal department or agency are
under the general administrative supervision of the Secretary of the Interior,197
Recalling that, in a referendum held in 1987, the registered and eligible voters of Guam endorsed a draft
Guam Commonwealth Act that would establish a new framework for relations between the Territory and the
administering Power, providing for a greater measure of internal self-government for Guam and recognition of the
right of the Chamorro people of Guam to self-determination for the Territory,
Aware that negotiations between the administering Power and the territorial Government on the draft Guam
Commonwealth Act ended in 1997 and that Guam has subsequently established a non-binding plebiscite process for
a self-determination vote by the eligible Chamorro voters,
Cognizant of the importance of the administering Power continuing to implement its programme of
transferring surplus federal land to the Government of Guam,
Noting that the people of the Territory have called for reform in the programme of the administering Power
with respect to the thorough, unconditional and expeditious transfer of land property to the people of Guam,
Aware of the deep concern expressed by civil society and other parties regarding the potential social, cultural,
economic and environmental impacts of the planned transfer of additional military personnel of the administering
Power to the Territory,
Conscious that immigration into Guam has resulted in the indigenous Chamorros becoming a minority in their
homeland,
1. Welcomes the convening of the Guam Commission on Decolonization for the Implementation and
Exercise of Chamorro Self-Determination and its ongoing work on a self-determination vote, as well as its public
education efforts;
2. Stresses that the decolonization process in Guam should be compatible with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples182 and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;198
3. Calls once again upon the administering Power to take into consideration the expressed will of the
Chamorro people as supported by Guam voters in the referendum of 1987 and as subsequently provided for in
Guam law regarding Chamorro self-determination efforts, encourages the administering Power and the territorial
Government to enter into negotiations on the matter, and stresses the need for continued close monitoring of the
overall situation in the Territory;
4. Requests the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to transfer
land to the original landowners of the Territory, to continue to recognize and to respect the political rights and the
cultural and ethnic identity of the Chamorro people of Guam and to take all measures necessary to address the
concerns of the territorial Government with regard to the question of immigration;
5. Also requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating public outreach efforts,
including through the funding of the public education campaign, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in
that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested,
and welcomes the recent outreach work by the territorial Government;
6. Further requests the administering Power to cooperate in establishing programmes for the sustainable
development of the economic activities and enterprises of the Territory, noting the special role of the Chamorro
people in the development of Guam;
_______________
197
198

404

United States Congress, Organic Act of Guam, 1950, as amended.
Resolution 217 A (III).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

VII
Montserrat
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Montserrat199 and other relevant information,
Noting with concern the continuing consequences of the 1995 volcanic eruption which led to the evacuation of
three quarters of the population of the Territory to safe areas of the island and to areas outside the Territory and
which continues to have enduring consequences for the economy of the island,
Acknowledging the continuing assistance provided to the Territory by States members of the Caribbean
Community, in particular Antigua and Barbuda, which has offered safe refuge and access to educational and health
facilities, as well as employment for thousands who have left the Territory,
Noting the continuing efforts of the administering Power and the territorial Government to deal with the
consequences of the volcanic eruption,
Aware that Montserrat continues to receive budgetary aid from the administering Power for the operation of
the territorial Government,
Taking note of the letter dated 2 June 2015 from the Premier of Montserrat addressed to the Chair of the
Special Committee, requesting to address the Special Committee in order to share the concerns of his Government
regarding some situations that affect the lives of Montserratians,
Noting the importance of improving the infrastructure and accessibility of Montserrat, as conveyed by the
Premier of Montserrat to the Chair of the Special Committee in their meeting on 11 May 2015,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory and of the
Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
1. Recalls the 2011 Constitution of Montserrat and the work of the territorial Government with respect to
moving forward to consolidate the gains provided for in the Constitution;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Welcomes the Territory’s participation in the work of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean;
4. Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as regional and other organizations, to continue to provide assistance to the Territory in
alleviating the consequences of the volcanic eruption;
VIII
Pitcairn
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Pitcairn200 and other relevant information,
Taking into account the unique character of Pitcairn in terms of population, area and access,
Aware that the administering Power and the territorial Government have implemented a governance structure
to strengthen administrative capacity in the Territory, based on consultations with the people of the Territory, and
that Pitcairn continues to receive budgetary aid from the administering Power for the operation of the territorial
Government,

_______________
199
200

A/AC.109/2015/9.
A/AC.109/2015/5.

405

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Cognizant that the administering Power and the territorial Government have developed a five-year strategic
development plan, covering the period from 2012 to 2016, that sets out the views and aspirations of the people of
the Territory for the socioeconomic development of the Territory,
Aware of the assessment made in 2013 that the population of the Territory needs to be boosted if the Territory
is to have a sustainable future and of the approval by the Pitcairn Island Council of an immigration policy and the
repopulation plan, covering the period from 2014 to 2019, designed to promote immigration and repopulation and
bring people with the necessary skills and commitment to Pitcairn,
Noting with concern the findings contained in the final report on the survey commissioned by the Pitcairn
Island Council to ascertain whether members of the diaspora had any interest in returning to the Territory and the
factors conditioning a decision,
1. Welcomes all efforts by the administering Power and the territorial Government that would further
devolve operational responsibilities to the Territory, with a view to gradually expanding self-government, including
through the training of local personnel;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Also requests the administering Power to continue its assistance for the improvement of the economic,
social, educational and other conditions of the population of the Territory and to continue its discussions with the
territorial Government on how best to support socioeconomic and environmental security in Pitcairn, including as
regards demographic matters;
4. Welcomes the work carried out on the preparation of the five-year strategic development plan for
the island;
IX
Saint Helena
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Saint Helena201 and other relevant
information,
Taking note also of the statement made by the representative of Saint Helena at the Caribbean regional
seminar held in Managua from 19 to 21 May 2015 that the Territory had no aspiration to independence and had
been able to have a formal form of government,
Noting the concerns expressed by the representative of Saint Helena about the potential negative impacts of
the construction of the airport, including the growing number of expatriate families settling in the Territory and the
lack of a specific plan to operate an air route or sea link between Saint Helena and neighbouring islands,
Noting also the information provided by the representative of Saint Helena that, although human rights
provisions are enshrined in the 2009 Constitution of Saint Helena, some international instruments, including the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women202 and the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities,203 have not yet been extended to the Territory,
Taking into account the unique character of Saint Helena in terms of its population, geography and natural
resources,
Recalling the fact that, in January 2013, following a resolution passed in September 2012 by the Legislative
Council to undertake minor adjustments to the 2009 Constitution, a public consultation process was launched,

_______________
201

A/AC.109/2015/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
203
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
202

406

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware that a consultative poll was held in March 2013, with the majority opting for no change to the
Constitution, and that, for the first time, a general election based on one constituency was held in July 2013,
Cognizant that Saint Helena continues to receive budgetary aid from the administering Power for the
operation of the territorial Government,
Aware of the efforts of the administering Power and the territorial Government to improve the socioeconomic
conditions of the population of Saint Helena, in particular in the areas of employment, transport and
communications infrastructure,
1. Stresses the importance of the 2009 Constitution of the Territory and the further development of
democratic and good governance;
2. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
3. Requests the administering Power and relevant international organizations to continue to support the
efforts of the territorial Government to address the socioeconomic development challenges of the Territory;
X
Turks and Caicos Islands
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the Turks and Caicos Islands204 and other
relevant information,
Taking note also of the statement made by the representative of the Turks and Caicos Islands at the Caribbean
regional seminar held in Managua from 19 to 21 May 2015,
Recalling the dispatch of the United Nations special mission to the Turks and Caicos Islands in 2006 at the
request of the territorial Government and with the concurrence of the administering Power,
Noting the decision of the administering Power to suspend parts of the 2006 Constitution, the subsequent
presentation of a draft constitution for public consultation in 2011 and the introduction of a new constitution for the
Territory, as well as the election of a new territorial Government in 2012,
Aware that the 2014 report of the Constitutional Review Committee, which was submitted to and considered
by the House of Assembly, is under consideration by the administering Power,
Recalling that, in March 2014, the Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community received an update on
the situation in the Turks and Caicos Islands, which they will continue to monitor, and that they expressed their
support for the full restoration of democracy in the Territory on terms driven by its people,
Acknowledging the impact that the global economic slowdown and other relevant developments have had on
tourism and related real estate development, which are the mainstays of the economy of the Territory,
1. Reiterates its support for the full restoration of democracy in the Territory and for the work of the
Constitutional Review Committee in that regard, and notes the efforts of the administering Power to restore good
governance, including through the introduction in 2011 of a new constitution and the holding of elections in
November 2012, and sound financial management in the Territory;
2. Notes the positions and repeated calls of the Caribbean Community and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries in support of a democratically elected territorial Government and of the full restoration of democracy in
the Territory as decided by its people;
3. Also notes the continuing debate on constitutional reform within the Territory, and stresses the
importance of participation by all groups and interested parties in the consultation process;
_______________
204

A/AC.109/2015/11.

407

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

4. Stresses the importance of having in place in the Territory a constitution that reflects the aspirations and
wishes of its people, based on the mechanisms for popular consultation;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United Nations
organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
6. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
7. Also welcomes the continuing efforts made by the territorial Government addressing the need for
attention to be paid to the enhancement of socioeconomic development across the Territory;
XI
United States Virgin Islands
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the United States Virgin Islands205 and other
relevant information,
Aware that, under United States law, the relations between the territorial Government and the federal
Government in all matters that are not the programme responsibility of another federal department or agency are
under the general administrative supervision of the Secretary of the Interior,206
Aware also of the fifth attempt of the Territory to review the existing Revised Organic Act, which organizes its
internal governance arrangements, as well as its requests to the administering Power and the United Nations system
for assistance to its public education programme,
Cognizant that a draft constitution was proposed in 2009 and subsequently forwarded to the administering
Power, which in 2010 requested the Territory to consider its objections to the draft constitution,
Cognizant also that the Fifth Revision Convention, established and convened in 2012, was mandated to ratify
and approve the final revised draft constitution,
Noting the holding of elections in the Territory in November 2014,
Aware of the closing of the Hovensa plant, and noting the continuing negative impact on manufacturing and
on the employment situation in the Territory,
Cognizant of the potential usefulness of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
1. Welcomes the proposal of a draft constitution emanating from the Territory in 2009, as a result of the
work of the United States Virgin Islands Fifth Constitutional Convention, for review by the administering Power,
and requests the administering Power to assist the territorial Government in achieving its political, economic and
social goals, in particular the successful conclusion of the internal Constitutional Convention exercise;
2. Requests the administering Power to facilitate the process for approval of the proposed territorial
constitution in the United States Congress and its implementation, once agreed upon in the Territory;
3. Also requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning a public
education programme, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant United
Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
4.

Expresses its concern regarding the continuing negative impact of the Hovensa plant closure;

5. Reiterates its call for the inclusion of the Territory in regional programmes of the United Nations
Development Programme, consistent with the participation of other Non-Self-Governing Territories;
_______________
205
206

408

A/AC.109/2015/10.
United States Congress, Revised Organic Act, 1954.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

6. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
7. Recalls the holding, in March 2014, of the meeting of the Inter-Virgin Islands Council between the
Territory and the British Virgin Islands.
RESOLUTION 70/103
A/RES/70/103

Adopted at the 70th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/505,
para. 32),207 by a recorded vote of 175 to 3, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Czech
Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: France

70/103.

Dissemination of information on decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2015
relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in
the field of decolonization,208
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 69/106 of
5 December 2014,
Recognizing the need for flexible, practical and innovative approaches towards reviewing the options of selfdetermination for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories with a view to implementing the plan of action for
the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Reiterating the importance of dissemination of information as an instrument for furthering the aims of the
Declaration, and mindful of the role of world public opinion in effectively assisting the peoples of Non-SelfGoverning Territories to achieve self-determination,
Recognizing the role played by the administering Powers in transmitting information to the Secretary-General,
in accordance with the terms of Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
_______________
207

The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
208
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23), chap. III.

409

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing also the role of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, through the United
Nations information centres, in the dissemination of information at the regional level on the activities of the United
Nations,
Recalling the issuance by the Department of Public Information, in consultation with the United Nations
Development Programme, the specialized agencies and the Special Committee, of an information leaflet on
assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Aware of the role of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization,
1. Approves the activities in the field of dissemination of information on decolonization undertaken by the
Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization, and encourages the continued updating and wide
dissemination of the information leaflet on what the United Nations can do to assist Non-Self-Governing Territories,
published in accordance with General Assembly resolution 61/129 of 14 December 2006, and updated for the
United Nations website on decolonization;
2. Considers it important to continue and expand its efforts to ensure the widest possible dissemination of
information on decolonization, with particular emphasis on the options for self-determination available for the
peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories, and to this end requests the Department of Public Information, through
the United Nations information centres in the relevant regions, to actively engage and seek new and innovative
ways to disseminate material to the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to further enhance the information provided on the United Nations
decolonization website and to continue to include the full series of reports of the regional seminars on
decolonization, the statements and scholarly papers presented at those seminars and links to the full series of reports
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Requests the Department of Public Information to continue its efforts to update web-based information
on the assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
5. Requests the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Public Information to implement the
recommendations of the Special Committee and to continue their efforts to take measures through all of the media
available, including publications, radio, television and the Internet, to give publicity to the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization and, inter alia:
(a) To develop procedures to collect, prepare and disseminate, particularly to the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, basic material on the issue of self-determination of the peoples of the Territories;
(b) To seek the full cooperation of the administering Powers in the discharge of the tasks referred
to above;
(c) To explore further the idea of a programme of collaboration with the decolonization focal points of
territorial Governments, particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean regions, to help to improve the exchange of
information;
(d) To encourage the involvement of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information
on decolonization;
(e) To encourage the involvement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the dissemination of
information on decolonization;
(f)

To report to the Special Committee on measures taken in the implementation of the present resolution;

6. Requests all States, including the administering Powers, to accelerate the dissemination of information
referred to in paragraph 2 above;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine this question and to report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
410

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 70/230
A/RES/70/230

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/495, para. 16)209

70/230.

Matters relating to activities under the United Nations Programme on Space Applications in 2016

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/85 of 5 December 2014, in particular the endorsement of the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications for 2015,
Acknowledging that the United Nations Programme on Space Applications, implemented by the Office for
Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat, is aimed at further promoting, through international cooperation, the use of
space technologies and data for sustainable economic and social development in developing countries by raising the
awareness of decision makers of the cost-effectiveness and additional benefits to be obtained, establishing or
strengthening capacity in developing countries to use space technology and strengthening outreach activities to
disseminate awareness of the benefits obtained,
Recognizing, in that regard, the unique benefits for Member States, in particular developing countries, of
participating in the capacity-building activities organized under the United Nations Programme on Space
Applications,
Reaffirming the importance of technical assistance and capacity-building in space science and technology
applications, in particular for the benefit of developing countries,
Noting that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its fifty-eighth session, held in Vienna from
10 to 19 June 2015, did not reach an agreement enabling the implementation of the United Nations Programme on
Space Applications for the remainder of 2015,
1. Agrees to reinstate the following activities under the United Nations Programme on Space Applications,
to be carried out in 2016:
(a)

United Nations/Costa Rica Workshop on Human Space Technology;

(b)

United Nations/South Africa Symposium on Basic Space Technology;

(c) United Nations/Kenya Workshop on Space Technology and Applications for Wildlife Management and
Protecting Biodiversity;
(d) United Nations/Islamic Republic of Iran Workshop on the Use of Space Technology for Dust Storm and
Drought Monitoring in the Middle East Region;
2. Decides that the activities listed in paragraph 1 above shall be carried out under the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications in 2016 with the budget that had been allocated to those activities for 2015;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take action to implement the present resolution so that the activities
listed in paragraph 1 above can be carried out successfully.
RESOLUTION 70/231
A/RES/70/231

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/505,
para. 32),210 by a recorded vote of 140 to 4 with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica,

_______________
209

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Costa Rica, Kenya and South Africa.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
210

411

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Israel, Morocco
Abstaining: Central African Republic, France, Liechtenstein, Mauritania

70/231.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2015,211
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all its subsequent resolutions concerning the implementation
of the Declaration, the most recent of which was resolution 69/107 of 5 December 2014, as well as the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council,
Bearing in mind its resolution 65/119 of 10 December 2010, by which it declared the period 2011–2020 the
Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and the need to examine ways and means to
ascertain the wishes of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories on the basis of resolution 1514 (XV) and
other relevant resolutions on decolonization,
Recognizing that the eradication of colonialism has been one of the priorities of the United Nations and
continues to be one of its priorities for the decade that began in 2011,
Regretting that measures to eliminate colonialism by 2010, as called for in its resolution 55/146 of
8 December 2000, have not been successful,
Reiterating its conviction of the need for the eradication of colonialism, as well as racial discrimination and
violations of basic human rights,
Noting with satisfaction the continued efforts of the Special Committee in contributing to the effective and
complete implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization,
Stressing the importance of the formal participation of the administering Powers in the work of the Special
Committee,
Noting with satisfaction the cooperation and active participation of certain administering Powers in the work
of the Special Committee, and encouraging the others also to do so,
Noting that the Caribbean regional seminar was held in Managua from 19 to 21 May 2015,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 1514 (XV) and all other resolutions and decisions on decolonization, including
its resolution 65/119, by which it declared the period 2011–2020 the Third International Decade for the Eradication
of Colonialism, and calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with those resolutions, to take all steps
necessary to enable the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to exercise fully as soon as possible their right
to self-determination, including independence, on a case-by-case basis;
_______________
211

412

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/70/23).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

2. Reaffirms once again that the existence of colonialism in any form or manifestation, including economic
exploitation, is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;212
3. Reaffirms its determination to continue to take all steps necessary to bring about the complete and
speedy eradication of colonialism and the faithful observance by all States of the relevant provisions of the Charter,
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights;
4. Affirms its support once again for the aspirations of the peoples under colonial rule to exercise their right
to self-determination, including independence, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on
decolonization;
5. Calls upon all the administering Powers to cooperate fully in the work of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and to participate formally in its future sessions and seminars;
6. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee to develop and
finalize, as soon as possible, a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing
Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on
decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
7. Recalls with satisfaction the professional, open and transparent conduct of both the February 2006 and
the October 2007 referendums to determine the future status of Tokelau, monitored by the United Nations;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to seek suitable means for the immediate and full
implementation of the Declaration and to carry out the actions approved by the General Assembly regarding the
Second and Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism in all Territories that have not yet
exercised their right to self-determination, including independence, and in particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals to bring about an end to colonialism and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session;
(b) To continue to examine the implementation by Member States of resolution 1514 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions on decolonization;
(c) To continue to examine the political, economic and social situation in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, and to recommend to the General Assembly, as appropriate, the most suitable steps to be taken to enable
the populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination, including independence, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(d) To develop and finalize, as soon as possible and in cooperation with the administering Power and the
Territory in question, a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on
decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(e) To continue to dispatch visiting and special missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories in
accordance with the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(f) To conduct seminars, as appropriate, for the purpose of receiving and disseminating information on the
work of the Special Committee, and to facilitate participation by the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
in those seminars;
(g) To take all steps necessary to enlist worldwide support among Governments, as well as national and
international organizations, for the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration and the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
(h)

To observe annually the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;

_______________
212

Resolution 217 A (III).

413

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

9. Calls upon the administering Powers to continue to cooperate with the Special Committee in the
discharge of its mandate and, inter alia, to facilitate visiting missions of the Committee to the Territories on a caseby-case basis and in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions on specific Territories;
10. Reaffirms that the United Nations visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories, where
applicable, are an effective means of ascertaining the situation of the peoples of the Territories, in accordance with
relevant United Nations resolutions on specific Territories, and therefore requests the Special Committee to
undertake at least one visiting mission a year;
11. Recalls that the plan of action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,213
updated as necessary, represents an important legislative authority for the attainment of self-government by the NonSelf-Governing Territories, and that the case-by-case assessment of the attainment of self-government in each
Territory can make an important contribution to this process;
12. Calls upon all States, in particular the administering Powers, as well as the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system, to give effect within their respective spheres of competence to the
recommendations of the Special Committee for the implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions
of the United Nations;
13. Calls upon the administering Powers to ensure that economic and other activities in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under their administration do not adversely affect the interests of the peoples but instead
promote development, and to assist them in the exercise of their right to self-determination;
14. Urges the administering Powers to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable
rights of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources and to establish and maintain
control over the future development of those resources, and requests the relevant administering Powers to take all
steps necessary to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories;
15. Urges all States, directly and through their action in the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system, to provide moral and material assistance, as needed, to the peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories, and requests the administering Powers to take steps to enlist and make effective use of all
possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the strengthening of the economies of those
Territories;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to provide economic, social and other assistance to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to continue to do
so, as appropriate, after they exercise their right to self-determination, including independence;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, President pro tempore of the Special Committee, to meet informally at
least once a year with the Chair and the Bureau of the Committee during the intersessional period, in order to
explore innovative ways of using his good offices to help to advance the decolonization agenda on a case-by-case
basis;
18. Approves the report of the Special Committee covering its work during 2015,211 in which the programme
of work for 2016 is outlined, in particular the Pacific regional seminar and a visiting mission to one of the Territories
on its agenda, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions on specific Territories;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to review and augment the resources at the disposal of the Special
Committee in order to ensure that the Committee has the funding, facilities and services commensurate with its
envisioned yearly programmes, as mandated in relevant General Assembly resolutions, including, especially, in
paragraph 7 of its resolution 69/107.

_______________
213

414

A/56/61, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/184.

Information and communications technologies for development .............................................................................. 417

70/185.

Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries ............... 420

70/186.

Consumer protection............................................................................................................................................. 421

70/187.

International trade and development....................................................................................................................... 434

70/188.

International financial system and development ...................................................................................................... 435

70/189.

Financial inclusion for sustainable development ..................................................................................................... 442

70/190.

External debt sustainability and development ......................................................................................................... 443

70/191.

Commodities........................................................................................................................................................ 444

70/192.

Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development ............................................................... 450

70/193.

International Year of Sustainable Tourism for Development, 2017 .......................................................................... 452

70/194.

Oil slick on Lebanese shores.................................................................................................................................. 454

70/195.

Combating sand and dust storms............................................................................................................................ 456

70/196.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central America ...................................................................... 458

70/197.

Towards comprehensive cooperation among all modes of transport for promoting sustainable multimodal
transit corridors..................................................................................................................................................... 461

70/198.

Agricultural technology for sustainable development .............................................................................................. 464

70/199.

United Nations forest instrument ........................................................................................................................... 468

70/200.

Global Code of Ethics for Tourism ........................................................................................................................ 469

70/201.

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development ................................................................................................................................. 471

70/202.

Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States..................................................................................................... 475

70/203.

World Tsunami Awareness Day ............................................................................................................................ 479

70/204.

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction .......................................................................................................... 480

70/205.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind ........................................................... 484

70/206.

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa.................................................................................. 487

70/207.

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable development ............... 490

70/208.

Harmony with Nature ........................................................................................................................................... 494

70/209.

United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (2005–2014) ..................................................... 497

70/210.

Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and
strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) .................................................... 500

70/211.

Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence ................ 517
415

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/212.

International Day of Women and Girls in Science................................................................................................... 518

70/213.

Science, technology and innovation for development .............................................................................................. 519

70/214.

Culture and sustainable development ..................................................................................................................... 523

70/215.

Development cooperation with middle-income countries ........................................................................................ 527

70/216.

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries ............................................ 531

70/217.

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries ...................................... 534

70/218.

Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017)............................................................. 539

70/219.

Women in development ........................................................................................................................................ 547

70/220.

Human resources development .............................................................................................................................. 558

70/221.

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system ....................................................................... 562

70/222.

South-South cooperation ....................................................................................................................................... 570

70/223.

Agriculture development, food security and nutrition .............................................................................................. 574

70/224.

Towards global partnerships: a principle-based approach to enhanced cooperation between the United Nations
and all relevant partners......................................................................................................................................... 580

70/225.

Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources ............................... 585

70/226.

United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development .................................................... 588

416

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/184
A/RE S/70 /184

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/469, para. 11)1

70/184.

Information and communications technologies for development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/183 of 21 December 2001, 57/238 of 20 December 2002, 57/270 B of 23 June
2003, 59/220 of 22 December 2004, 60/252 of 27 March 2006, 62/182 of 19 December 2007, 63/202 of
19 December 2008, 64/187 of 21 December 2009, 65/141 of 20 December 2010, 66/184 of 22 December 2011,
67/195 of 21 December 2012, 68/198 of 20 December 2013 and 69/204 of 19 December 2014,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/46 of 28 July 2006, 2008/3 of 18 July 2008,
2009/7 of 24 July 2009, 2010/2 of 19 July 2010, 2011/16 of 26 July 2011, 2012/5 of 24 July 2012, 2013/9 of 22 July
2013 and 2014/27 of 16 July 2014, and taking note of Council resolution 2015/26 of 22 July 2015 on the assessment
of the progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the
Information Society,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling further its resolution 68/302 of 31 July 2014 on the modalities for the overall review by the General
Assembly of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society, and welcoming
the high-level meeting of the Assembly for the overall review held in December 2015,
Recalling the Declaration of Principles and the Plan of Action adopted by the World Summit on the
Information Society at its first phase, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003,2 and endorsed by the General
Assembly,3 and the Tunis Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society adopted by the Summit at
its second phase, held in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005,4 and endorsed by the Assembly,5
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to
the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and international levels,6
Noting the holding of the World Summit on the Information Society Forum, jointly organized annually by the
International Telecommunication Union, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
See A/C.2/59/3, annex.
3
See resolution 59/220.
4
See A/60/687.
5
See resolution 60/252.
6
A/70/63-E/2015/10.
2

417

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations Development Programme, the
first 10-year review event of the World Summit on the Information Society, coordinated by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in Paris from 25 to 27 February 2013, and the high-level event on
the 10-year review of the World Summit, coordinated by the International Telecommunication Union in Geneva
from 10 to 13 June 2014,
Noting also the establishment of the Broadband Commission for Digital Development, at the invitation of the
Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union and the Director General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, taking note of the “Broadband targets for 2015”, which set targets
for making broadband policy universal and for increasing affordability and uptake in support of internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, taking note also of the report of the
Broadband Commission entitled The State of Broadband 2015: Broadband as a Foundation for Sustainable
Development, which provides a country-by-country evaluation of those targets and the state of broadband
deployment worldwide,
Noting further the holding of the eighteenth session of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development in Geneva from 4 to 8 May 2015,
Taking note of the report of the Commission at its eighteenth session,7 including a summary of the substantive
discussion on the 10-year review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit8 along with a link to
the interventions made in that regard,9 and the report prepared by the secretariat of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, entitled “Implementing World Summit on the Information Society outcomes: a 10-year
review”, which was the basis for the substantive discussion, which have been forwarded to the preparatory process
for the high-level meeting of the General Assembly as input for its deliberations,
Noting the references to information and communications technologies contained in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
Recognizing the fact that information and communications technologies are critical enablers of economic
development and investment, with consequential benefits for employment and social welfare, and that the
increasing pervasiveness of information and communications technologies within society has had profound impacts
on the ways in which Governments deliver services, businesses relate to consumers and citizens participate in public
and private life,
Welcoming the efforts undertaken by the host countries in organizing the meetings of the Internet Governance
Forum, held in Athens in 2006, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 2007, in Hyderabad, India, in 2008, in Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt, in 2009, in Vilnius in 2010, in Nairobi in 2011, in Baku in 2012, in Bali, Indonesia, in 2013, in Istanbul,
Turkey, in 2014, and in João Pessoa, Brazil, from 10 to 13 November 2015,
1. Recognizes that information and communications technologies have the potential to provide new
solutions to development challenges, particularly in the context of globalization, and can foster sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth and sustainable development, competitiveness, access to information and
knowledge, poverty eradication and social inclusion that will help to expedite the integration of all countries,
especially developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, into the global economy;
2. Encourages strengthened and continuing cooperation between and among stakeholders to ensure the
effective implementation of the outcomes of the Geneva2 and Tunis4 phases of the World Summit on the
Information Society through, inter alia, the promotion of national, regional and international multi-stakeholder
partnerships, including public-private partnerships, and the promotion of national and regional multi-stakeholder
thematic platforms in a joint effort and dialogue with developing countries, including the least developed countries,
development partners and actors in the information and communications technologies sector;

_______________
7

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No.11 (E/2015/31).
Ibid., annex II.
9
Ibid., footnote a.
8

418

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Notes the progress that has been made by United Nations entities in cooperation with national
Governments, regional commissions and other stakeholders, including non-governmental organizations and the
private sector, in the implementation of the action lines contained in the outcome documents of the World Summit
on the Information Society, and encourages the use of those action lines for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;10
4. Stresses the important role played by the private sector, civil society and technical communities in
information and communications technologies;
5. Recognizes the rapid growth in broadband access networks, especially in developed countries, and
expresses concern about the growing digital divide in the availability, affordability, quality of access and use of
broadband between high-income countries and other regions, with the least developed countries and Africa, as a
continent, lagging behind the rest of the world;
6. Expresses concern regarding the digital divide between countries at different levels of development in
access to information and communications technologies and broadband connectivity, which affects many
economically and socially relevant applications in such areas as government, business, health and education, and
also expresses concern with regard to the special challenges faced in the area of broadband connectivity by
developing countries, including the least developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked
developing countries;
7. Notes the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the
regional level, facilitated by the regional commissions, as observed in the report of the Secretary-General on
progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit at the regional and
international levels;6
8. Encourages the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, within their
respective mandates and strategic plans, to contribute to the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit
on the Information Society, and emphasizes the importance of allocating adequate resources in this regard;
9. Welcomes with appreciation the offer made by Mexico to host the meeting of the Internet Governance
Forum in 2016, and recommends that the extension of the mandate of the Forum be considered in the context of the
overall review in 2015;
10. Stresses the need for the enhanced participation of all developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, in all meetings of the Internet Governance Forum, and in this regard invites Member States, as
well as other stakeholders, to support the participation of Governments and all other stakeholders from developing
countries in the Forum itself, as well as in the preparatory meetings;
11. Recognizes the need to harness the potential of information and communications technologies as critical
enablers of sustainable development and to overcome the digital divide, and stresses that capacity-building for the
productive use of such technologies should be given due consideration in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development;11
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, through
the Commission on Science and Technology for Development and the Economic and Social Council, a report on the
status of the implementation of and follow-up to the present resolution, taking into account the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the review process of the World Summit on the
Information Society and other relevant processes, as part of his annual reporting on the progress made in the
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit at the regional and international levels, and
decides to include the item entitled “Information and communications technologies for development” in the
provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the
Second Committee.
_______________
10
11

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313.

419

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/185
A/RE S/70 /185

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/470/Add.1,
para. 19),12 by a recorded vote of 131 to 2, with 49 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

70/185.

Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,13 which states, inter alia, that no
State may use or encourage the use of unilateral economic, political or any other type of measures to coerce another
State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights,
Bearing in mind the general principles governing the international trading system and trade policies for
development contained in relevant resolutions, rules and provisions of the United Nations and the World Trade
Organization,
Recalling its resolutions 44/215 of 22 December 1989, 46/210 of 20 December 1991, 48/168 of 21 December
1993, 50/96 of 20 December 1995, 52/181 of 18 December 1997, 54/200 of 22 December 1999, 56/179 of
21 December 2001, 58/198 of 23 December 2003, 60/185 of 22 December 2005, 62/183 of 19 December 2007,
64/189 of 21 December 2009, 66/186 of 22 December 2011 and 68/200 of 20 December 2013,
Gravely concerned that the use of unilateral coercive economic measures adversely affects the economies and
the development efforts of developing countries in particular and has a general negative impact on international
economic cooperation and on worldwide efforts to move towards a non-discriminatory and open multilateral trading
system,
Recognizing that such measures constitute a flagrant violation of the principles of international law as set forth
in the Charter, as well as the basic principles of the multilateral trading system,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;14

_______________
12

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the Russian Federation, and South Africa (on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
13
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
14
A/70/152.

420

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Urges the international community to adopt urgent and effective measures to eliminate the use of
unilateral coercive economic measures against developing countries that are not authorized by relevant organs of the
United Nations or are inconsistent with the principles of international law as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and that contravene the basic principles of the multilateral trading system;
3. Calls upon the international community to condemn and reject the imposition of the use of such
measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the imposition of unilateral economic measures as a means of
political and economic coercion and to study the impact of such measures on the affected countries, including the
impact on trade and development;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/186
A/RE S/70 /186

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/470/Add.1, para. 19)15

70/186.

Consumer protection

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/62 of 23 July 1981, in which the Council requested
the Secretary-General to continue consultations on consumer protection with a view to elaborating a set of general
guidelines for consumer protection, taking into particular account the needs of the developing countries,
Recalling also its resolution 38/147 of 19 December 1983 on consumer protection,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/63 of 26 July 1984 and 1999/7 of 26 July 1999 and
General Assembly resolution 39/248 of 9 April 1985,
Recalling its resolution 65/142 of 20 December 2010 on international trade and development,
Taking note of the mandate entrusted to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
thirteenth session, held in Doha from 21 to 26 April 2012, to conduct analysis and research and help all Member
States, in particular developing countries and countries with economies in transition, to formulate and implement
competition and consumer protection policies, promote the sharing of best practices and carry out peer reviews with
regard to the implementation of such policies,16
Recalling the objectives formulated in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,17 notably the Millennium
Development Goals and the reaffirmation they received in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,18 the outcome
document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals in
2010,19 in particular in the pursuit of development and the eradication of poverty, and the Sustainable Development
Goals,20
Noting that 2015 marks the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations guidelines for consumer
protection as a thematic issue, and acknowledging the enduring need for Member States to further strengthen the
protection of consumers, the General Assembly remains committed to addressing the impact of development on
markets and of technology on consumers,
_______________
15

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
See TD/500/Add.1.
17
Resolution 55/2.
18
Resolution 60/1.
19
Resolution 65/1.
20
See resolution 70/1.
16

421

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Acknowledging that, although significant progress has been achieved with respect to the protection of
consumers at the normative level since the adoption of the guidelines in 1985, such progress has not been
consistently translated into more effective and better-coordinated protection efforts in all countries and across all
areas of commerce,
Reaffirming the guidelines as a valuable set of principles for setting out the main characteristics of effective
consumer protection legislation, enforcement institutions and redress systems and for assisting interested Member
States in formulating and enforcing domestic and regional laws, rules and regulations that are suitable to their own
economic and social and environmental circumstances, as well as promoting international enforcement cooperation
among Member States and encouraging the sharing of experiences in consumer protection,
Recognizing that, despite the diversity of mechanisms and legal cultures that exist across Member States,
consensus exists on the need for common principles that establish the main characteristics of effective consumer
protection legislation, enforcement institutions and redress systems,
Believing that a robust legal and regulatory framework for consumer protection, including effective dispute
resolution and redress mechanisms and the ability of consumer protection enforcement authorities to cooperate in
obtaining redress, where available, across borders for consumers harmed by fraudulent and deceptive commercial
practices, serves an important public interest, contributing to economic dynamism and consumer welfare,
Recognizing that Member States have a common interest in promoting and protecting consumer privacy and
the free flow of information worldwide,
Considering that electronic commerce, which should be understood to include mobile commerce, has become
increasingly relevant to consumers worldwide and that the opportunities it offers should be harnessed to help
facilitate economic development and growth based on emerging network technologies, with computers, mobile
phones and connected devices that promote consumer welfare,
Considering also that Member States, businesses, consumers and their representatives should devote special
attention to the development of effective consumer protection in electronic commerce and that certain consumer
protection issues, such as applicable law and jurisdiction, may be addressed most effectively through international
consultation and cooperation,
Recognizing that consumer confidence and trust in a well-functioning market for financial services promotes
financial stability, growth, efficiency and innovation over the long term and that the recent financial crisis places a
renewed focus on consumer protection, calling for effective regulatory, supervisory and enforcement frameworks in
the financial sector to contribute to the welfare of consumers,
Recognizing also the importance of combating substandard, falsely labelled and counterfeit products which
pose threats to the health and safety of consumers and to the environment and which also decrease consumer
confidence in the marketplace,
Recognizing further the value of coordination and partnership with established multilateral organizations that
focus on consumer protection in order to maximize the benefits to consumers and avoid duplicating efforts,
Recalling the proposal of the Seventh United Nations Conference to Review All Aspects of the Set of
Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices,21
1. Decides to adopt the revised United Nations guidelines for consumer protection annexed to the present
resolution, of which they form an integral part;
2.
parties;

Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the guidelines to Member States and other interested

3. Requests all organizations of the United Nations system that elaborate guidelines and related documents
on specific areas relevant to consumer protection to distribute them to the appropriate bodies of individual States;
4. Recommends that Member States implement the present resolution and the guidelines contained in
its annex;
_______________
21

422

See TD/RBP/CONF.8/11.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Requests the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to exchange
information on progress and experiences regarding the implementation of the present resolution, review that
information and report to the General Assembly on this subject on the occasion of the Eighth United Nations
Conference to Review All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control
of Restrictive Business Practices;
6. Requests the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to promote the guidelines and to
encourage interested Member States to create awareness of the many ways in which Member States, businesses and
civil society can promote consumer protection in the provision of public and private goods and services;
7. Decides to establish an intergovernmental group of experts on consumer protection law and policy
within the framework of an existing commission of the Trade and Development Board of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, which will operate until the holding of the Ninth United Nations
Conference to Review All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control
of Restrictive Business Practices, at which its work will be reviewed and the renewal of its mandate considered;
8. Also decides that the necessary resources should be made available within the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to carry out the tasks embodied in the revised guidelines through the
reallocation of existing resources and/or the use of extrabudgetary resources from voluntary contributions;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote effective implementation of the guidelines by
Member States, businesses and civil society.
Annex
United Nations guidelines for consumer protection
I.

Objectives

1. Taking into account the interests and needs of consumers in all Member States, particularly in developing
ones, recognizing that consumers often face imbalances in economic terms, educational levels and bargaining power
and bearing in mind that consumers should have the right of access to non-hazardous products, as well as the right
to promote just, equitable and sustainable economic and social development and environmental protection, these
guidelines for consumer protection have the following objectives:
(a)

To assist countries in achieving or maintaining adequate protection for their population as consumers;

(b)

To facilitate production and distribution patterns responsive to the needs and desires of consumers;

(c) To encourage high levels of ethical conduct for those engaged in the production and distribution of
goods and services to consumers;
(d) To assist countries in curbing abusive business practices by all enterprises at the national and
international levels which adversely affect consumers;
(e)

To facilitate the development of independent consumer groups;

(f)

To further international cooperation in the field of consumer protection;

(g) To encourage the development of market conditions which provide consumers with greater choice at
lower prices;
(h)
II.

To promote sustainable consumption.

Scope of application

2. These guidelines apply to business-to-consumer transactions, including the provision of goods and services by
State-owned enterprises to consumers. For the purpose of these guidelines, consumer protection policies include the
laws, regulations, rules, frameworks, procedures, decisions, mechanisms and programmes of Member States, as
well as private sector standards and recommendations that protect consumer rights and interests and promote
consumer welfare.
423

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. For the purpose of these guidelines, the term “consumer” generally refers to a natural person, regardless of
nationality, acting primarily for personal, family or household purposes, while recognizing that Member States may
adopt differing definitions to address specific domestic needs.
III. General principles
4. Member States should develop, strengthen or maintain a strong consumer protection policy, taking into
account the guidelines set out below and relevant international agreements. In so doing, each Member State must set
its own priorities for the protection of consumers in accordance with the economic, social and environmental
circumstances of the country and the needs of its population, and bearing in mind the costs and benefits of proposed
measures.
5.

The legitimate needs which the guidelines are intended to meet are the following:
(a)

Access by consumers to essential goods and services;

(b)

The protection of vulnerable and disadvantaged consumers;

(c)

The protection of consumers from hazards to their health and safety;

(d)

The promotion and protection of the economic interests of consumers;

(e) Access by consumers to adequate information to enable them to make informed choices according to
individual wishes and needs;
(f) Consumer education, including education on the environmental, social and economic consequences of
consumer choice;
(g)

Availability of effective consumer dispute resolution and redress;

(h) Freedom to form consumer and other relevant groups or organizations and the opportunity of such
organizations to present their views in decision-making processes affecting them;
(i)

The promotion of sustainable consumption patterns;

(j) A level of protection for consumers using electronic commerce that is not less than that afforded in other
forms of commerce;
(k)

The protection of consumer privacy and the global free flow of information.

6. Unsustainable patterns of production and consumption, particularly in industrialized countries, are the major
cause of the continued deterioration of the global environment. All Member States should strive to promote
sustainable consumption patterns; developed countries should take the lead in achieving sustainable consumption
patterns; developing countries should seek to achieve sustainable consumption patterns in their development
process, having due regard for the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. The special situation and
needs of developing countries in this regard should be fully taken into account.
7. Policies for promoting sustainable consumption should take into account the goals of eradicating poverty,
satisfying the basic human needs of all members of society and reducing inequality within and between countries.
8. Member States should provide or maintain adequate infrastructure to develop, implement and monitor
consumer protection policies. Special care should be taken to ensure that measures for consumer protection are
implemented for the benefit of all sectors of the population, particularly the rural population and people living in
poverty.
9. All enterprises should obey the relevant laws and regulations of the countries in which they do business. They
should also conform to the appropriate provisions of international standards for consumer protection to which the
competent authorities of the country in question have agreed. (Hereinafter, references to international standards in
the guidelines should be viewed in the context of this paragraph.)
10. The potential positive role of universities and public and private enterprises in research should be considered
when developing consumer protection policies.
424

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

IV.

Principles for good business practices

11. The principles that establish benchmarks for good business practices for conducting online and offline
commercial activities with consumers are as follows:
(a) Fair and equitable treatment. Businesses should deal fairly and honestly with consumers at all stages
of their relationship, so that it is an integral part of the business culture. Businesses should avoid practices that harm
consumers, particularly with respect to vulnerable and disadvantaged consumers;
(b) Commercial behaviour. Businesses should not subject consumers to illegal, unethical, discriminatory
or deceptive practices, such as abusive marketing tactics, abusive debt collection or other improper behaviour that
may pose unnecessary risks or harm consumers. Businesses and their authorized agents should have due regard for
the interests of consumers and responsibility for upholding consumer protection as an objective;
(c) Disclosure and transparency. Businesses should provide complete, accurate and not misleading
information regarding the goods and services, terms, conditions, applicable fees and final costs to enable consumers
to take informed decisions. Businesses should ensure easy access to this information, especially to the key terms and
conditions, regardless of the means of technology used;
(d) Education and awareness-raising. Businesses should, as appropriate, develop programmes and
mechanisms to assist consumers to develop the knowledge and skills necessary to understand risks, including
financial risks, to take informed decisions and to access competent and professional advice and assistance,
preferably from an independent third party, when needed;
(e) Protection of privacy. Businesses should protect consumers’ privacy through a combination of
appropriate control, security, transparency and consent mechanisms relating to the collection and use of their
personal data;
(f) Consumer complaints and disputes. Businesses should make available complaints-handling
mechanisms that provide consumers with expeditious, fair, transparent, inexpensive, accessible, speedy and
effective dispute resolution without unnecessary cost or burden. Businesses should consider subscribing to domestic
and international standards pertaining to internal complaints handling, alternative dispute resolution services and
customer satisfaction codes.
V.

Guidelines

12. The following guidelines should apply both to home-produced goods and services and to imports.
13. In applying any procedures or regulations for consumer protection, due regard should be given to ensuring
that they do not become barriers to international trade and that they are consistent with international trade
obligations.
A.

National policies for consumer protection

14. Member States should establish consumer protection policies that encourage:
(a)

Good business practices;

(b) Clear and timely information to enable consumers to contact businesses easily, and to enable regulatory
and law enforcement authorities to identify and locate them. This may include information such as the identity of
the business, its legal name and the name under which it trades, its principal geographic address, website and e-mail
address or other means of contact, its telephone number and its government registration or licence numbers;
(c) Clear and timely information regarding the goods or services offered by businesses and the terms and
conditions of the relevant transaction;
(d)

Clear, concise and easy to understand contract terms that are not unfair;

(e)

A transparent process for the confirmation, cancellation, return and refund of transactions;

(f)

Secure payment mechanisms;

(g)

Fair, affordable and speedy dispute resolution and redress;
425

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(h)

Consumer privacy and data security;

(i)

Consumer and business education.

15. Member States should work towards ensuring that consumer protection enforcement agencies have the
necessary human and financial resources to promote effective compliance and to obtain or facilitate redress for
consumers in appropriate cases.
B.

Physical safety

16. Member States should adopt or encourage the adoption of appropriate measures, including legal systems,
safety regulations, national or international standards, voluntary standards and the maintenance of safety records to
ensure that products are safe for either intended or normally foreseeable use.
17. Appropriate policies should ensure that goods produced by manufacturers are safe for either intended or
normally foreseeable use. Those responsible for bringing goods to the market, in particular suppliers, exporters,
importers, retailers and the like (hereinafter referred to as “distributors”), should ensure that while in their care these
goods are not rendered unsafe through improper handling or storage and that while in their care they do not become
hazardous through improper handling or storage. Consumers should be instructed in the proper use of goods and
should be informed of the risks involved in intended or normally foreseeable use. Vital safety information should be
conveyed to consumers by internationally understandable symbols wherever possible.
18. Appropriate policies should ensure that if manufacturers or distributors become aware of unforeseen hazards
after products are placed on the market, they should notify the relevant authorities and, as appropriate, the public
without delay. Member States should also consider ways of ensuring that consumers are properly informed of such
hazards.
19. Member States should, where appropriate, adopt policies under which, if a product is found to be seriously
defective and/or to constitute a substantial and severe hazard even when properly used, manufacturers and/or
distributors should recall it and replace or modify it, or substitute another product for it. If it is not possible to do this
within a reasonable period of time, the consumer should be adequately compensated.
C.

Promotion and protection of the economic interests of consumers

20. Member States should seek to enable consumers to obtain optimum benefit from their economic resources.
They should also seek to achieve the goals of satisfactory production and performance standards, adequate
distribution methods, fair business practices, informative marketing and effective protection against practices which
could adversely affect the economic interests of consumers and the exercise of choice in the marketplace.
21. Member States should intensify their efforts to prevent practices which are damaging to the economic interests
of consumers through ensuring that manufacturers, distributors and others involved in the provision of goods and
services adhere to established laws and mandatory standards. Consumer organizations should be encouraged to
monitor adverse practices, such as the adulteration of foods, false or misleading claims in marketing and service
frauds.
22. Member States should develop, strengthen or maintain, as the case may be, measures relating to the control of
restrictive and other abusive business practices which may be harmful to consumers, including means for the
enforcement of such measures. In this connection, Member States should be guided by their commitment to the Set
of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices adopted by
the General Assembly in resolution 35/63 of 5 December 1980.
23. Member States should adopt or maintain policies that make clear the responsibility of the producer to ensure
that goods meet reasonable demands of durability, utility and reliability, and are suited to the purpose for which they
are intended, and that the seller should see that these requirements are met. Similar policies should apply to the
provision of services.
24. Member States should encourage fair and effective competition in order to provide consumers with the
greatest range of choice among products and services at the lowest cost. Member States should ensure that their
consumer protection policies are not used to protect domestic businesses from competition or applied unfairly.
426

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

25. Member States should, where appropriate, see to it that manufacturers and/or retailers ensure adequate
availability of reliable after-sales service and spare parts.
26. Consumers should be protected from such contractual abuses as one-sided standard contracts, exclusion of
essential rights in contracts and unconscionable conditions of credit by sellers.
27. Promotional marketing and sales practices should be guided by the principle of fair treatment of consumers
and should meet legal requirements. This requires the provision of the information necessary to enable consumers to
take informed and independent decisions, as well as measures to ensure that the information provided is accurate.
28. Member States should encourage all concerned to participate in the free flow of accurate information on all
aspects of consumer products.
29. Consumer access to accurate information about the environmental impact of products and services should be
encouraged through such means as product profiles, environmental reports by industry, information centres for
consumers, voluntary and transparent eco-labelling programmes and product information hotlines.
30. Member States, in close collaboration with manufacturers, distributors and consumer organizations, should
take measures regarding misleading environmental claims or information in advertising and other marketing
activities. The development of appropriate advertising codes and standards for the regulation and verification of
environmental claims should be encouraged.
31. Member States should, within their own national context, encourage the formulation and implementation by
businesses, in cooperation with consumer organizations, of codes of marketing and other business practices to
ensure adequate consumer protection. Voluntary agreements may also be established jointly by businesses,
consumer organizations and other interested parties. These codes should receive adequate publicity.
32. Member States should regularly review legislation pertaining to weights and measures and assess the
adequacy of the machinery for its enforcement.
D.

Standards for the safety and quality of consumer goods and services

33. Member States should, as appropriate, formulate or promote the elaboration and implementation of standards,
voluntary and other, at the national and international levels for the safety and quality of goods and services and give
them appropriate publicity. National standards and regulations for product safety and quality should be reviewed
from time to time in order to ensure that they conform, where possible, to generally accepted international standards.
34. Where a standard lower than the generally accepted international standard is being applied because of local
economic conditions, every effort should be made to raise that standard as soon as possible.
35. Member States should encourage and ensure the availability of facilities to test and certify the safety, quality
and performance of essential consumer goods and services.
E.

Distribution facilities for essential consumer goods and services

36. Member States should, where appropriate, consider:
(a) Adopting or maintaining policies to ensure the efficient distribution of goods and services to consumers;
where appropriate, specific policies should be considered to ensure the distribution of essential goods and services
where this distribution is endangered, as could be the case particularly in rural areas. Such policies could include
assistance for the creation of adequate storage and retail facilities in rural centres, incentives for consumer self-help
and better control of the conditions under which essential goods and services are provided in rural areas;
(b) Encouraging the establishment of consumer cooperatives and related trading activities, as well as
providing information about them, especially in rural areas.
F.

Dispute resolution and redress

37. Member States should encourage the development of fair, effective, transparent and impartial mechanisms to
address consumer complaints through administrative, judicial and alternative dispute resolution, including for crossborder cases. Member States should establish or maintain legal and/or administrative measures to enable consumers
or, as appropriate, relevant organizations to obtain redress through formal or informal procedures that are
427

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

expeditious, fair, transparent, inexpensive and accessible. Such procedures should take particular account of the
needs of vulnerable and disadvantaged consumers. Member States should provide consumers with access to
remedies that do not impose a cost, delay or undue burden on the economic value at stake and at the same time do
not impose excessive or undue burdens on society and businesses.
38. Member States should encourage all businesses to resolve consumer disputes in an expeditious, fair,
transparent, inexpensive, accessible and informal manner, and to establish voluntary mechanisms, including
advisory services and informal complaints procedures, which can provide assistance to consumers.
39. Information on available redress and other dispute-resolving procedures should be made available to
consumers. Access to dispute resolution and redress mechanisms, including alternative dispute resolution, should be
enhanced, particularly in cross-border disputes.
40. Member States should ensure that collective resolution procedures are expeditious, transparent, fair,
inexpensive and accessible to both consumers and businesses, including those pertaining to overindebtedness and
bankruptcy cases.
41. Member States should cooperate with businesses and consumer groups in furthering consumer and business
understanding of how to avoid disputes, of dispute resolution and redress mechanisms available to consumers and
of where consumers can file complaints.
G.

Education and information programmes

42. Member States should develop or encourage the development of general consumer education and information
programmes, including information on the environmental impacts of consumer choices and behaviour and the
possible implications, including benefits and costs, of changes in consumption, bearing in mind the cultural
traditions of the people concerned. The aim of such programmes should be to enable people to act as discriminating
consumers, capable of making an informed choice of goods and services, and conscious of their rights and
responsibilities. In developing such programmes, special attention should be given to the needs of vulnerable and
disadvantaged consumers, in both rural and urban areas, including low-income consumers and those with low or
non-existent literacy levels. Consumer groups, business and other relevant organizations of civil society should be
involved in these educational efforts.
43. Consumer education should, where appropriate, become an integral part of the basic curriculum of the
educational system, preferably as a component of existing subjects.
44. Consumer education and information programmes should cover such important aspects of consumer
protection as the following:
(a)

Health, nutrition, prevention of food-borne diseases and food adulteration;

(b)

Product hazards;

(c)

Product labelling;

(d) Relevant legislation, how to access dispute resolution mechanisms and obtain redress and agencies and
organizations for consumer protection;
(e) Information on weights and measures, prices, quality, credit conditions and availability of basic
necessities;
(f)

Environmental protection;

(g)

Electronic commerce;

(h)

Financial services;

(i)

Efficient use of materials, energy and water.

45. Member States should encourage consumer organizations and other interested groups, including the media, to
undertake education and information programmes, including on the environmental impacts of consumption patterns
and on the possible implications, including benefits and costs, of changes in consumption, particularly for the
benefit of low-income consumer groups in rural and urban areas.
428

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

46. Businesses should, where appropriate, undertake or participate in factual and relevant consumer education and
information programmes.
47. Bearing in mind the need to reach rural consumers and illiterate consumers, Member States should, as
appropriate, develop or encourage the development of consumer information programmes in the mass media or
through other delivery channels that reach such consumers.
48. Member States should organize or encourage training programmes for educators, mass media professionals
and consumer advisers to enable them to participate in carrying out consumer information and education
programmes.
H.

Promotion of sustainable consumption

49. Sustainable consumption includes meeting the needs of present and future generations for goods and services
in ways that are economically, socially and environmentally sustainable.
50. Responsibility for sustainable consumption is shared by all members and organizations of society, with
informed consumers, Member States, businesses, labour organizations and consumer and environmental
organizations playing particularly important roles. Informed consumers have an essential role in promoting
consumption that is environmentally, economically and socially sustainable, including through the effects of their
choices on producers. Member States should promote the development and implementation of policies for
sustainable consumption and the integration of those policies with other public policies. Policymaking by Member
States should be conducted in consultation with business, consumer and environmental organizations and other
concerned groups. Business has a responsibility for promoting sustainable consumption through the design,
production and distribution of goods and services. Consumer and environmental organizations have a responsibility
for promoting public participation and debate on sustainable consumption, for informing consumers and for
working with Member States and businesses towards sustainable consumption.
51. Member States, in partnership with business and relevant organizations of civil society, should develop and
implement strategies that promote sustainable consumption through a mix of policies that could include regulations;
economic and social instruments; sectoral policies in such areas as land use, transport, energy and housing;
information programmes to raise awareness of the impact of consumption patterns; removal of subsidies that
promote unsustainable patterns of consumption and production; and promotion of sector-specific best practices in
environmental management.
52. Member States should encourage the design, development and use of products and services that are safe and
energy- and resource-efficient, considering their full life cycle impacts. Member States should encourage recycling
programmes that encourage consumers to both recycle wastes and purchase recycled products.
53. Member States should promote the development and use of national and international environmental health
and safety standards for products and services; such standards should not result in disguised barriers to trade.
54. Member States should encourage impartial environmental testing of products.
55. Member States should safely manage environmentally harmful uses of substances and encourage the
development of environmentally sound alternatives for such uses. New potentially hazardous substances should be
evaluated on a scientific basis for their long-term environmental impact prior to distribution.
56. Member States should promote awareness of the health-related benefits of sustainable consumption and
production patterns, bearing in mind both direct effects on individual health and collective effects through
environmental protection.
57. Member States, in partnership with the private sector and other relevant organizations, should encourage the
transformation of unsustainable consumption patterns through the development and use of new environmentally
sound products and services and new technologies, including information and communication technologies that can
meet consumer needs, while reducing pollution and depletion of natural resources.
58. Member States are encouraged to create or strengthen effective regulatory mechanisms for the protection of
consumers, including aspects of sustainable consumption.
59. Member States should consider a range of economic instruments, such as fiscal instruments and
internalization of environmental costs, to promote sustainable consumption, taking into account social needs, the
429

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

need for disincentives for unsustainable practices and incentives for more sustainable practices, while avoiding
potential negative effects for market access, in particular for developing countries.
60. Member States, in cooperation with business and other relevant groups, should develop indicators,
methodologies and databases for measuring progress towards sustainable consumption at all levels. That
information should be publicly available.
61. Member States and international agencies should take the lead in introducing sustainable practices in their
own operations, in particular through their procurement policies. Member State procurement, as appropriate, should
encourage the development and use of environmentally sound products and services.
62. Member States and other relevant organizations should promote research on consumer behaviour related to
environmental damage in order to identify ways to make consumption patterns more sustainable.
I.

Electronic commerce

63. Member States should work towards enhancing consumer confidence in electronic commerce by the
continued development of transparent and effective consumer protection policies, ensuring a level of protection that
is not less than that afforded in other forms of commerce.
64. Member States should, where appropriate, review existing consumer protection policies to accommodate the
special features of electronic commerce and ensure that consumers and businesses are informed and aware of their
rights and obligations in the digital marketplace.
65. Member States may wish to consider the relevant international guidelines and standards on electronic
commerce and the revisions thereof, and, where appropriate, adapt those guidelines and standards to their economic,
social and environmental circumstances so that they can adhere to them, as well as collaborate with other Member
States in their implementation across borders. In so doing, Member States may wish to study the Guidelines for
Consumer Protection in the Context of Electronic Commerce of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
J.

Financial services

66. Member States should establish or encourage, as appropriate:
(a)

Financial consumer protection regulatory and enforcement policies;

(b)

Oversight bodies with the necessary authority and resources to carry out their mission;

(c)

Appropriate controls and insurance mechanisms to protect consumer assets, including deposits;

(d)

Improved financial education strategies that promote financial literacy;

(e) Fair treatment and proper disclosure, ensuring that financial institutions are also responsible and
accountable for the actions of their authorized agents. Financial services providers should have a written policy on
conflict of interest to help detect potential conflicts of interest. When the possibility of a conflict of interest arises
between the provider and a third party, that should be disclosed to the consumer to ensure that potential consumer
detriment generated by conflict of interest be avoided;
(f) Responsible business conduct by financial services providers and authorized agents, including
responsible lending and the sale of products that are suitable to the consumer’s needs and means;
(g)

Appropriate controls to protect consumer financial data, including from fraud and abuse;

(h) A regulatory framework that promotes cost efficiency and transparency for remittances, such that
consumers are provided with clear information on the price and delivery of the funds to be transferred, exchange
rates, all fees and any other costs associated with the money transfers offered, as well as remedies if transfers fail.
67. Member States should adopt measures to reinforce and integrate consumer policies concerning financial
inclusion, financial education and the protection of consumers in accessing and using financial services.
68. Member States may wish to consider relevant international guidelines and standards on financial services and
the revisions thereof, and, where appropriate, adapt those guidelines and standards to their economic, social and
430

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

environmental circumstances so that they can adhere to them, as well as collaborate with other Member States in
their implementation across borders. In so doing, Member States may wish to study the High-level Principles on
Financial Consumer Protection of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Group of
20, as well as the Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion of the Group of 20 and the Good Practices for
Financial Consumer Protection of the World Bank.
K.

Measures relating to specific areas

69. In advancing consumer interests, particularly in developing countries, Member States should, where
appropriate, give priority to areas of essential concern for the health of the consumer, such as food, water,
pharmaceuticals, energy and public utilities, and also address the specificities of tourism. Policies should be adopted
or maintained for product quality control, adequate and secure distribution facilities, standardized international
labelling and information, and education and research programmes in these areas. Member State guidelines in
regard to specific areas should be developed in the context of the provisions of the present document.
70. Food. When formulating national policies and plans with regard to food, Member States should take into
account the need of all consumers for food security and should support and, as far as possible, adopt standards from
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization Codex
Alimentarius or, in their absence, other generally accepted international food standards. Member States should
maintain, develop or improve food safety measures, including, inter alia, safety criteria, food standards and dietary
requirements and effective monitoring, inspection and evaluation mechanisms.
71. Member States should promote sustainable agricultural policies and practices, conservation of biodiversity and
protection of soil and water, taking into account traditional knowledge.
72. Water. Member States should, within the goals and targets set for the International Drinking Water Supply
and Sanitation Decade, formulate, maintain or strengthen national policies to improve the supply, distribution and
quality of water for drinking. Due regard should be paid to the choice of appropriate levels of service, quality and
technology, the need for education programmes and the importance of community participation.
73. Member States should assign high priority to the formulation and implementation of policies and programmes
concerning the multiple uses of water, taking into account the importance of water for sustainable development in
general and its finite character as a resource.
74. Pharmaceuticals. Member States should develop or maintain adequate standards, provisions and appropriate
regulatory systems for ensuring the quality and appropriate use of pharmaceuticals through integrated national drug
policies which could address, inter alia, procurement, distribution, production, licensing arrangements, registration
systems and the availability of reliable information on pharmaceuticals. In so doing, Member States should take
special account of the work and recommendations of the World Health Organization on pharmaceuticals. For
relevant products, the use of that organization’s Certification Scheme on the Quality of Pharmaceutical Products
Moving in International Commerce and other international information systems on pharmaceuticals should be
encouraged. Measures should also be taken, as appropriate, to promote the use of international non-proprietary
names for drugs, drawing on the work done by the World Health Organization.
75. In addition to the priority areas indicated above, Member States should adopt appropriate measures in other
areas, such as pesticides and chemicals in regard, where relevant, to their use, production and storage, taking into
account such relevant health and environmental information as Member States may require producers to provide
and include in the labelling of products.
76. Energy. Member States should promote universal access to clean energy and formulate, maintain or
strengthen national policies to improve the supply, distribution and quality of affordable energy to consumers
according to their economic circumstances. Consideration should be given to the choice of appropriate levels of
service, quality and technology, regulatory oversight, the need for awareness-raising programmes and the
importance of community participation.
77. Public utilities. Member States should promote universal access to public utilities and formulate, maintain or
strengthen national policies to improve rules and statutes dealing with provision of service, consumer information,
security deposits and advance payment for service, late payment fees, termination and restoration of service,
establishment of payment plans and dispute resolution between consumers and utility service providers, taking into
account the needs of vulnerable and disadvantaged consumers.
431

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

78. Tourism. Member States should ensure that their consumer protection policies are adequate to address the
marketing and provision of goods and services related to tourism, including, but not limited to, travel, traveller
accommodation and timeshares. Member States should, in particular, address the cross-border challenges raised by
such activity, including enforcement cooperation and information-sharing with other Member States, and should
also cooperate with the relevant stakeholders in the tourism-travel sector.
VI. International cooperation
79. Member States should, especially in a regional or subregional context:
(a) Develop, review, maintain or strengthen, as appropriate, mechanisms for the exchange of information on
national policies and measures in the field of consumer protection;
(b) Cooperate or encourage cooperation in the implementation of consumer protection policies to achieve
greater results within existing resources. Examples of such cooperation could be collaboration in the setting up or
joint use of testing facilities, common testing procedures, exchange of consumer information and education
programmes, joint training programmes and joint elaboration of regulations;
(c) Cooperate to improve the conditions under which essential goods are offered to consumers, giving due
regard to both price and quality. Such cooperation could include joint procurement of essential goods, exchange of
information on different procurement possibilities and agreements on regional product specification.
80. Member States should develop or strengthen information links regarding products which have been banned,
withdrawn or severely restricted in order to enable other importing countries to protect themselves adequately
against the harmful effects of such products.
81. Member States should work to ensure that the quality of products and the information relating to such
products does not vary from country to country in a way that would have detrimental effects on consumers.
82. Member States should improve their ability to cooperate in combating fraudulent and deceptive cross-border
commercial practices, as that serves an important public interest, recognizing that cooperation on particular
investigations or cases under these guidelines remains within the discretion of the consumer protection enforcement
agency that is asked to cooperate.
83. The consumer protection enforcement agencies of Member States should coordinate investigations and
enforcement activities to avoid interference with the investigations and enforcement activities of consumer
protection enforcement agencies taking place in other jurisdictions.
84. The consumer protection enforcement agencies of Member States should make every effort to resolve
disagreements that may arise regarding cooperation.
85. Member States and their consumer protection enforcement agencies should make use of existing international
networks and enter into appropriate bilateral and multilateral arrangements and other initiatives to implement these
guidelines.
86. Member States should enable their consumer protection policy agencies, in consultation with consumer
protection enforcement agencies, to take a leading role in developing the framework for combating fraudulent and
deceptive commercial practices, as set out in these guidelines.
87. Member States are invited to designate a consumer protection enforcement agency or a consumer protection
policy agency to act as a contact point to facilitate cooperation under these guidelines. Those designations are
intended to complement and not replace other means of cooperation. Such designations should be notified to the
Secretary-General.
88. Member States should provide their consumer protection enforcement agencies with the authority to
investigate, pursue, obtain and, where appropriate, share relevant information and evidence, particularly on matters
relating to cross-border fraudulent and deceptive commercial practices affecting consumers. That authority should
extend to cooperation with foreign consumer protection enforcement agencies and other appropriate foreign
counterparts.
432

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

89. Member States should consider participating in multilateral and bilateral arrangements to improve
international judicial and inter-agency cooperation in the recovery of foreign assets and the enforcement of decisions
in cross-border cases.
90. Member States may wish to consider relevant international guidelines and standards on protecting consumers
from fraudulent and deceptive cross-border commercial practices, in considering the legal authority to provide to
their consumer protection enforcement agencies, and, where appropriate, adapt those guidelines and standards to
their circumstances. In so doing, Member States may wish to study the Guidelines for Protecting Consumers from
Fraudulent and Deceptive Commercial Practices across Borders of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
91. To promote sustainable consumption, Member States, international bodies and business should work together
to develop, transfer and disseminate environmentally sound technologies, including through appropriate financial
support from developed countries, and to devise new and innovative mechanisms for financing their transfer among
all countries, in particular to and among developing countries and countries with economies in transition.
92. Member States and international organizations, as appropriate, should promote and facilitate capacity-building
in the area of sustainable consumption, particularly in developing countries and countries with economies in
transition. In particular, Member States should also facilitate cooperation among consumer groups and other
relevant organizations of civil society, with the aim of strengthening capacity in this area.
93. Member States and international bodies, as appropriate, should promote programmes relating to consumer
education and information.
94. Member States should work to ensure that policies and measures for consumer protection are implemented
with due regard to their not becoming barriers to international trade and that they are consistent with international
trade obligations.
VII. International institutional machinery
A.

Institutional arrangements

95. An intergovernmental group of experts on consumer protection law and policy, operating within the
framework of an existing commission of the Trade and Development Board of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, will provide the institutional machinery.
96. Member States should take appropriate steps at the national or regional levels to implement these guidelines.
B.

Functions of the intergovernmental group of experts on consumer protection law and policy

97. The intergovernmental group of experts on consumer protection law and policy shall have the following
functions:
(a) To provide an annual forum and modalities for multilateral consultations, discussion and exchange of
views between Member States on matters related to the guidelines, in particular their implementation and the
experience arising therefrom;
(b) To undertake studies and research periodically on consumer protection issues related to the guidelines
based on a consensus and the interests of Member States and disseminate them with a view to increasing the
exchange of experience and giving greater effectiveness to the guidelines;
(c) To conduct voluntary peer reviews of national consumer protection policies of Member States, as
implemented by consumer protection authorities;
(d) To collect and disseminate information on matters relating to the overall attainment of the goals of the
guidelines and to the appropriate steps Member States have taken at the national or regional levels to promote
effective implementation of their objectives and principles;
(e) To provide capacity-building and technical assistance to developing countries and economies in
transition in formulating and enforcing consumer protection laws and policies;
433

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(f) To consider relevant studies, documentation and reports from relevant organizations of the United
Nations system and other international organizations and networks, to exchange information on work programmes
and topics for consultations and to identify work-sharing projects and cooperation in the provision of technical
assistance;
(g) To make appropriate reports and recommendations on the consumer protection policies of Member
States, including the application and implementation of these guidelines;
(h) To operate between and report to the United Nations Conference to Review All Aspects of the Set of
Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices;
(i) To conduct a periodic review of the guidelines, when mandated by the United Nations Conference to
Review All Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive
Business Practices;
(j)

To establish such procedures and methods of work as may be necessary to carry out its mandate.

98. In the performance of its functions, neither the intergovernmental group nor its subsidiary organs shall pass
judgement on the activities or conduct of individual Member States or of individual enterprises in connection with a
specific business transaction. The intergovernmental group or its subsidiary organs should avoid becoming involved
when enterprises to a specific business transaction are in dispute.
99. The intergovernmental group shall establish such procedures as may be necessary to deal with issues related to
confidentiality.
RESOLUTION 70/187
A/RE S/70 /187

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/470/Add.1, para. 19)22

70/187.

International trade and development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/178 of 21 December 2001, 57/235 of 20 December 2002, 58/197 of 23 December
2003, 63/203 of 19 December 2008, 66/185 of 22 December 2011, 67/196 of 21 December 2012, 68/199 of
20 December 2013 and 69/205 of 19 December 2014,
Taking note of its resolutions 59/221 of 22 December 2004, 60/184 of 22 December 2005, 61/186 of
20 December 2006, 62/184 of 19 December 2007, 64/188 of 21 December 2009 and 65/142 of 20 December 2010,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
_______________
22

434

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development23 and the report of the Secretary-General;24
2. Reaffirms the commitments made through the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development25 in, inter alia, international trade, as an important action
area for sustainable development;
3. Welcomes the convening of the Tenth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization in
Nairobi from 15 to 19 December 2015, and expresses its appreciation to the Government of Kenya for hosting the
meeting;
4. Also welcomes the convening of the fourteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, to be held in Kenya from 17 to 22 July 2016;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy
questions”, the sub-item entitled “International trade and development” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first
session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/188
A/RE S/70 /188

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/470/Add.2, para. 13)26

70/188.

International financial system and development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/186 of 20 December 2000 and 56/181 of 21 December 2001, both entitled
“Towards a strengthened and stable international financial architecture responsive to the priorities of growth and
development, especially in developing countries, and to the promotion of economic and social equity”, as well as its
resolutions 57/241 of 20 December 2002, 58/202 of 23 December 2003, 59/222 of 22 December 2004, 60/186 of
22 December 2005, 61/187 of 20 December 2006, 62/185 of 19 December 2007, 63/205 of 19 December 2008,
64/190 of 21 December 2009, 65/143 of 20 December 2010, 66/187 of 22 December 2011, 67/197 of 21 December
2012, 68/201 of 20 December 2013 and 69/206 of 19 December 2014,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
_______________
23

A/70/15 (Parts I–IV).
A/70/277.
25
Resolution 69/313.
26
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
24

435

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,27 its resolution 56/210 B of 9 July 2002, in which it
endorsed the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,28 the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development,29 Agenda 21,30 the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 2131 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation),32
Recalling also the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008,33
Recalling further the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development
and its outcome document,34
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals and
the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, convened by the
President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013, and their respective outcome documents,35
Recalling also the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,36
Recognizing the work undertaken by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly to
follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis
and Its Impact on Development, and taking note of its progress report,37
Recalling the high-level thematic debate on the state of the world economy and finance and its impact on
development, convened by the President of the General Assembly on 17 and 18 May 2012,
Recalling also the meeting of the Second Committee, held pursuant to resolution 67/197, on 13 November
2013, to discuss actions in response to the world financial and economic crisis and its impact on development and
prospects for restoring confidence and economic growth,
Noting the Sixth Astana Economic Forum and the World Anti-Crisis Conference, held in Astana from 22 to
24 May 2013, and the Second World Anti-Crisis Conference, held in Astana from 21 to 23 May 2014,
Noting also the Saint Petersburg International Economic Forum, held in Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation,
from 20 to 22 June 2013,
Noting further the Summit of the Group of 20 held in Brisbane, Australia, on 15 and 16 November 2014,
Noting the Summit of the Group of 20 held in Saint Petersburg on 5 and 6 September 2013,
Expressing concern about the adverse impact of the consequences of the world financial and economic crisis,
including on development, and evidence of an uneven, fragile and slow recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and stability and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility
_______________
27

Resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
29
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
30
Ibid., annex II.
31
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
32
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
33
Resolution 63/239, annex.
34
Resolution 63/303, annex.
35
Resolutions 65/1 and 68/6.
36
Resolution 66/288, annex.
37
A/64/884.
28

436

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

in global markets, excessive volatility of commodity prices, high unemployment, particularly among young people,
unsustainable debt in some countries and widespread fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic
recovery and reflect the need for additional progress towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and
stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen
the international financial system while implementing the reforms agreed upon to date,
Noting that, while some developing countries have made major contributions to recent global economic
growth, the economic crisis has reduced their capacity to withstand further shocks, recalling the commitments made
to support development and strong, sustained, balanced and inclusive economic growth, and reaffirming the need to
work cooperatively to meet development commitments to ensure the meaningful and effective implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Acknowledging that effective global economic governance in an increasingly interconnected world is of
critical importance for the success of national efforts to achieve sustainable development in all countries and that,
while significant efforts have been made over the years, there remains the need to continue to improve global
economic governance and to strengthen the role of the United Nations in this regard,
Recalling the commitment to work in solidarity on a coordinated and comprehensive global response to the
ongoing impacts of the consequences of the world financial and economic crisis on development and to take actions
aimed at, inter alia, restoring confidence, sustaining economic growth and creating full and productive employment
and decent work for all women and men, including young people and people with disabilities, and equal pay for
equal work or for work of equal value,
Reaffirming the purposes of the United Nations, as set forth in its Charter, including to achieve international
cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and to be a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of common ends, and reiterating the need to
strengthen the leadership role of the United Nations in promoting development,
Emphasizing that the international financial system should bolster sustained, inclusive and equitable economic
growth, sustainable development and job creation and promote financial inclusion and support efforts to eradicate
poverty and hunger in developing countries, while allowing for the coherent mobilization of all sources of financing
for development,
Reaffirming the importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as its 10-year plan of
action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next
50 years, and its continental programme, embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, and regional initiatives, and in this regard inviting the international financial
institutions to be supportive in accordance with their respective mandates,
Recognizing the importance of addressing the diverse needs and challenges faced by countries in special
situations, in particular African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States, as well as the specific challenges facing middle-income countries,
Recalling the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,38 and recognizing in this context that the
international financial institutions should be supportive, in accordance with their mandates, of the challenges and
special needs and priorities of the least developed countries, countries in conflict and post-conflict situations and
countries in special situations,
Stressing the importance of commitment to ensuring and supporting sound domestic financial sectors, which
make a vital contribution to national development efforts, as an important component of an international financial
architecture that is supportive of development,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;39

_______________
38

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
39
A/70/311.

437

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Recognizes the need to continue and intensify efforts to enhance the coherence and consistency of the
international monetary, financial and trading systems, and reiterates the importance of ensuring their openness,
fairness and inclusiveness in order to complement national efforts to ensure sustainable development, including
strong, sustained, balanced, inclusive and equitable economic growth and the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;40
3. Reiterates the need to act decisively to tackle the challenges confronting the global economy in order to
ensure balanced, sustained, inclusive and equitable global growth with full and productive employment and quality
jobs, and also reiterates the need for mobilization of resources from a variety of sources and the effective use of
financing in order to promote full and productive employment and decent work for all;
4. Notes the important efforts undertaken nationally, regionally and internationally to respond to the
challenges posed by the financial and economic crisis, and recognizes that more needs to be done in order to
promote the economic recovery, address turbulence in global financial and commodity markets, tackle high
unemployment and unsustainable debt in several countries, as well as widespread fiscal strains, reinforce the
banking sector, including by increasing its transparency and accountability, address systemic fragilities and
imbalances, reform and strengthen the international financial system and continue and enhance the coordination of
financial and economic policies at the international level;
5. Also notes that the United Nations, on the basis of its universal membership and legitimacy, provides a
unique and key forum for discussing international economic issues and their impact on development, and reaffirms
that the United Nations is well positioned to participate in various reform processes aimed at improving and
strengthening the effective functioning of the international financial system and architecture, while recognizing that
the United Nations and the international financial institutions have complementary mandates that make the
coordination of their actions crucial;
6. Resolves to strengthen the coherence and consistency of multilateral financial, investment, trade and
development policy and environment institutions and platforms and to increase cooperation between major
international institutions, while respecting mandates and governance structures, and commits itself to taking better
advantage of relevant United Nations forums for promoting universal and holistic coherence and international
commitments to sustainable development, building on the vision of the Monterrey Consensus;28
7. Recalls that countries must have the flexibility necessary to implement countercyclical measures and
pursue tailored and targeted responses to the various types of shocks, including economic and financial crises, and
calls for conditionalities to be streamlined to ensure that they are timely, tailored and targeted and that they support
developing countries in the face of financial, economic and development challenges;
8. Notes, in this regard, the increase in resources and the improvement of the lending framework of the
International Monetary Fund through, inter alia, streamlined conditions and flexible instruments, such as the
precautionary and liquidity line, the flexible credit line and the rapid financing instrument, and the refinement of the
lending framework for low-income countries, while also noting that new and ongoing programmes should not
contain unwarranted procyclical conditionalities;
9. Urges, in this regard, the multilateral development banks to continue to move forward on flexible,
concessional, fast-disbursing and front-loaded assistance that will substantially and quickly assist developing
countries facing financing gaps in their efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, taking into
consideration the individual absorptive capacities and debt sustainability of those countries;
10. Invites the multilateral development banks and other international development banks to continue
providing both concessional and non-concessional stable, long-term development finance by leveraging
contributions and capital and by mobilizing resources from capital markets, and stresses that development banks
should make optimal use of their resources and balance sheets, consistent with maintaining their financial integrity,
and should update and develop their policies in support of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
the Sustainable Development Goals;
11. Recognizes the role of private capital flows in mobilizing financing for development, stresses the
challenges posed by excessive volatility of short-term capital flows to many developing countries, notes that the
_______________
40

438

Resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

design and implementation of capital flow management measures to address those challenges, such as
macroeconomic policies, macroprudential measures and various forms of capital account management, need to take
into account the specific circumstances of individual countries, while also remaining fully cognizant of the potential
risks involved in capital flow management;
12. Notes that regulatory gaps and misaligned incentives continue to pose risks to financial stability,
including risks of spillover effects of financial crises to developing countries, which suggests a need to pursue
further reforms of the international financial and monetary system and continued strengthening of international
coordination and policy coherence to enhance global financial and macroeconomic stability, emphasizes the need to
work to prevent and reduce the risk and impact of financial crises, acknowledging that national policy decisions can
have systemic and far-ranging effects well beyond national borders, including on developing countries, highlights
the importance of pursuing sound macroeconomic policies that contribute to global stability, equitable and
sustainable growth and sustainable development, while strengthening financial systems and economic institutions,
and notes that, when dealing with risks from large and volatile capital flows, necessary macroeconomic policy
adjustment could be supported by macroprudential and, as appropriate, capital flow management measures;
13. Recognizes the need for the international financial institutions to promote, within their respective
mandates, including by providing the right incentives for medium-term and long-term investment and the sharing of
best practices, the mobilization of capital flows in order to better channel national and international investment for
sustainable development based on its three dimensions;
14. Emphasizes the relevance of inclusion in the international financial system at all levels and the
importance of considering financial inclusion as a policy objective in financial regulation, in accordance with
national priorities and legislation;
15. Recommits to the broadening and strengthening of the voice and participation of developing countries in
international economic decision-making and norm-setting and in global economic governance, recognizes the
importance of overcoming obstacles to planned resource increases and governance reforms at the International
Monetary Fund, notes that the implementation of the 2010 reforms of the Fund remains the highest priority, strongly
urges the earliest ratification of those reforms, and reiterates its commitment to further governance reform at both
the Fund and the World Bank to adapt to changes in the global economy;
16. Acknowledges the importance of the international financial institutions supporting, in line with their
mandates, the policy space of each country, in particular developing countries, and recommits to the broadening and
strengthening of the voice and participation of developing countries, including African countries, least developed
countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and middle-income countries, in
international economic decision-making, norm-setting and global economic governance;
17. Notes the 2015 Shareholding Review of the World Bank, including the agreed principles that guide
shareholding reviews and the road map for its implementation, and looks forward to the implementation of the road
map, including the agreement on a dynamic formula;
18. Recommits to a redoubling of its efforts to substantially reduce illicit financial flows by 2030, with a
view to eventually eliminating them, including by combating tax evasion and corruption through strengthened
national regulation and increased international cooperation, to reducing opportunities for tax avoidance and
considering inserting anti-abuse clauses in all tax treaties, to enhancing disclosure practices and transparency in both
source and destination countries, including by seeking to ensure transparency in all financial transactions between
Governments and companies to relevant tax authorities, and to making sure that all companies, including
multinationals, pay taxes to the Governments of the countries where economic activity occurs and value is created,
in accordance with national and international laws and policies;
19. Takes note of the report of the High-level Panel on Illicit Financial Flows from Africa, invites other
regions to carry out similar exercises, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the United Nations to
assist both source and destination countries to help to combat illicit flows and appropriate international institutions
and regional organizations to publish estimates of the volume and composition of illicit financial flows, calls upon
States to identify, assess and act on money-laundering risks, including through effective implementation of the
Financial Action Task Force standards on anti-money-laundering/counter-terrorism financing, and encourages
information-sharing among financial institutions to mitigate the potential impact of the anti-money-laundering and
counter-terrorism financing standards on access to financial services;
439

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

20. Urges all countries that have not yet done so to ratify and accede to the United Nations Convention
against Corruption,41 and encourages parties to review its implementation, commits to making the Convention an
effective instrument to deter, detect, prevent and counter corruption and bribery, prosecute those involved in corrupt
activities and recover and return stolen assets to their country of origin, while encouraging the international
community to develop good practices on asset return and supporting the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative of the
United Nations and the World Bank and other international initiatives that support the recovery of stolen assets,
urges that regional conventions against corruption be updated and ratified, and reiterates the need to strive to
eliminate safe havens that create incentives for transfer abroad of stolen assets and illicit financial flows and to work
to strengthen regulatory frameworks at all levels to further increase transparency and accountability of financial
institutions and the corporate sector, as well as public administrations, while strengthening international cooperation
and national institutions to combat money-laundering and financing of terrorism;
21. Calls for the swift implementation of the 2010 quota and governance reform of the International
Monetary Fund, notes the progress made by the Fund on the review of the quota formula in January 2013, and
emphasizes the importance of reaching agreement on the quota formula, in parallel to the fifteenth general review of
the quotas and as part of ongoing reform processes, in order to ensure the Fund’s capability to address the challenges
encountered by today’s international monetary and financial system;
22. Reaffirms its commitment to an open and transparent, gender-balanced and merit-based process for
selecting the heads of the international financial institutions, including the Bretton Woods institutions, and to
enhance diversity of staff;
23. Emphasizes the need for more effective government involvement in order to ensure an appropriate
regulation of the market which promotes the public interest, and recognizes in this regard the need to better regulate
financial markets to promote economic stability and sustained, equitable and inclusive economic growth;
24. Also emphasizes that the 2008 world financial and economic crisis underscored the need for sound
regulation of financial markets to strengthen financial and economic stability, as well as the imperative of a global
financial safety net, welcomes the important steps taken since the International Conference on Financing for
Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, in 2002, particularly following the crisis in 2008, to build resilience,
reduce vulnerability to international financial disruption and reduce spillover effects of global financial crises,
including to developing countries, in a reform agenda whose completion remains a high priority, and notes that the
membership of the International Monetary Fund bolstered the Fund’s lending capacity, that multilateral and national
development banks played important countercyclical roles during the crisis and that the world’s principal financial
centres worked together to reduce systemic risks and financial volatility through stronger national financial
regulation, including Basel III and the broader financial reform agenda;
25. Takes note of the work by the Financial Stability Board on financial market reform, commits to
sustaining or strengthening frameworks for macroprudential regulation and countercyclical buffers, reiterates the
need to hasten the completion of the reform agenda on financial market regulation, including assessing and if
necessary reducing the systemic risks associated with shadow banking, markets for derivatives, securities lending
and repurchase agreements, and recommits to addressing the risk created by “too-big-to-fail” financial institutions
and to addressing cross-border elements in effective resolution of troubled, systemically important financial
institutions;
26. Reiterates the need to resolve to reduce mechanistic reliance on credit-rating agency assessments,
including in regulations, while promoting competition as well as measures to avoid conflict of interest in the
provision of credit ratings, so as to improve the quality of ratings, acknowledges the efforts of the Financial Stability
Board and others in this area, supports the building of greater transparency requirements for evaluation standards of
credit-rating agencies, and requests that ongoing work on these issues be continued, including at the United Nations;
27. Recognizes the role of special drawing rights as an international reserve asset, acknowledges that special
drawing rights allocations helped to supplement international reserves in response to the world financial and
economic crisis, thus contributing to the stability of the international financial system and global economic
_______________
41

440

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

resilience, and also recognizes the need to continue regular reviews of the role of special drawing rights, including
with reference to their potential role in the international reserve system;
28. Reiterates that effective, inclusive multilateral surveillance should be at the centre of crisis prevention
efforts, stresses the need to continue to strengthen surveillance of the financial policies of countries, and in this
regard takes note of the new surveillance approach of the International Monetary Fund to better integrate bilateral
and multilateral surveillance, along with cross-border and cross-sectoral linkages with macroeconomic and
macroprudential policies, while paying closer attention to the spillover effects from national economic and financial
policies onto the global economy;
29. Stresses, in this regard, the need to strengthen intergovernmental and independent surveillance of
national financial policies and their impact on international interest rates, exchange rates and capital flows;
30. Invites the international financial and banking institutions to continue to enhance the transparency of
risk-rating mechanisms, noting that sovereign risk assessments made by the private sector should maximize the use
of strict, objective and transparent parameters, which can be facilitated by high-quality data and analysis, and
encourages relevant institutions, including the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to continue
their work on the issue, including its potential impact on the development prospects of developing countries;
31. Calls upon the multilateral, regional and subregional development banks and development funds to
continue to play a vital role in serving the development needs of developing countries and countries with economies
in transition, including through coordinated action, as appropriate, stresses that strengthened regional
development banks and subregional financial institutions can add flexible financial support to national and
regional development efforts, thus enhancing their ownership and overall efficiency, and can promote regional
integration, increasing resilience to economic shocks, welcomes in this regard recent capital increases at multilateral
and regional development banks, and encourages efforts to ensure that subregional development banks are
adequately funded;
32. Welcomes efforts by new development banks to develop safeguard systems in open consultation with
stakeholders on the basis of established international standards, and encourages all development banks to establish
or maintain social and environmental safeguard systems, including on human rights, gender equality and women’s
empowerment, that are transparent, effective, efficient and time-sensitive;
33. Encourages enhanced regional and subregional cooperation, including through regional and subregional
development banks, commercial and reserve currency arrangements and other regional and subregional initiatives;
34. Stresses the need to continuously improve standards of corporate and public sector governance,
including those related to accounting, auditing and measures to ensure transparency, noting the disruptive effects of
inadequate policies;
35. Recognizes the need for the international financial institutions, as appropriate, to promote gender
mainstreaming in their policies and programmes, including macroeconomic, job creation and structural reform
policies and programmes, in accordance with relevant national priorities and strategies;
36. Urges multilateral donors, and invites international financial institutions, within their respective
mandates, and regional development banks to review and implement policies that support national efforts to ensure
that a higher proportion of resources reaches women and girls, in particular in rural and remote areas;
37. Recommits itself to enabling women’s full and equal participation in the economy and their equal access
to decision-making processes and leadership;
38. Reiterates that States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, to be prepared in cooperation with the Bretton Woods institutions and
other relevant stakeholders, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, the
sub-item entitled “International financial system and development” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first
session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
441

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/189
A/RE S/70 /189

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/470/Add.2, para. 13)42

70/189.

Financial inclusion for sustainable development

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, inter alia, sets out policies, the adoption and
implementation of which seek to increase financial inclusion, and that the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, inter alia,
seeks to ensure a policy and regulatory environment for the promotion of financial inclusion in a balanced manner
and with appropriate consumer protection, working towards full and equal access to formal financial services for all,
Emphasizing the relevance of inclusion in the international financial system at all levels and the importance of
considering financial inclusion as a policy objective in financial regulation, in accordance with national priorities
and legislation,
Acknowledging that the promotion of formal financial systems and services with robust risk-based regulatory
frameworks for all financial intermediation, as appropriate, contributes to effectively and comprehensively
combating corruption and curbing illicit financial flows,
Taking note of the summary by the President of the Economic and Social Council of the special high-level
meeting of the Council with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization and
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (New York, 20 and 21 April 2015),43 of the report of the
Secretary-General on the international financial system and development44 and of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the outcome of the third International Conference on Financing for Development,45
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1. Welcomes the inclusion in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development46 of, inter alia, several targets
related to the promotion of financial inclusion, recalls that the Sustainable Development Goals and associated
targets are integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development, and in this regard
looks forward to their achievement;
_______________
42

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
A/70/85-E/2015/77.
44
A/70/311.
45
A/70/320.
46
Resolution 70/1.
43

442

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Also welcomes the inclusion in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development47 of, inter alia, several policies and actions intended to ensure a policy and regulatory
environment for the promotion of financial inclusion, and in this regard looks forward to their implementation;
3. Decides to give consideration, as appropriate, to financial inclusion in the follow-up and review
framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in the follow-up process of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda;
4. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Decides to include, under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, a sub-item entitled
“Financial inclusion for sustainable development”, in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, unless
otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/190
A/RE S/70 /190

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/470/Add.3, para. 8)48

70/190.

External debt sustainability and development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/203 of 23 December 2003, 59/223 of 22 December 2004, 60/187 of 22 December
2005, 61/188 of 20 December 2006, 62/186 of 19 December 2007, 63/206 of 19 December 2008, 64/191 of
21 December 2009, 65/144 of 20 December 2010, 66/189 of 22 December 2011, 67/198 of 21 December 2012 and
68/202 of 20 December 2013,
Taking note of its resolution 69/207 of 19 December 2014,
Taking note also of the work of the United Nations in this area,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;49

2. Decides to devote a special event of the Second Committee during the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly to lessons learned from legislative steps taken by certain countries and other appropriate action to
_______________
47

Resolution 69/313.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
49
A/70/278.
48

443

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

reduce the vulnerability of sovereigns to holdout creditors, with the participation of all relevant stakeholders,
building on the report to be prepared by the Secretary-General pursuant to the present resolution and resulting in a
summary of the event;
3. Encourages the Economic and Social Council, at its annual forum on financing for development followup, to consider how to improve sovereign debt restructuring, taking into account the roles of the international
financial institutions, including the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and other relevant forums, in accordance with their respective mandates, pursuant to the relevant
resolutions on this matter, including its resolution 69/313 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development and the mandate of the annual forum on financing for
development follow-up set out therein;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and to include in the report a comprehensive and substantive analysis
of the external debt situation of developing countries and options for enhanced approaches to debt restructuring and
resolution mechanisms that take into account the multiple dimensions of debt sustainability, and decides to include,
under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled “External debt sustainability and
development” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the
revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/191
A/RE S/70 /191

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/470/Add.4, para. 8)50

70/191.

Commodities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/224 of 22 December 2004, 61/190 of 20 December 2006, 63/207 of 19 December
2008, 64/192 of 21 December 2009, 66/190 of 22 December 2011 and 68/203 of 20 December 2013 on
commodities,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by Heads of State and Government on
8 September 2000,51 the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted on 16 September 200552 and its resolution 60/265
of 30 June 2006 on the follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the
Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development goals,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling implementation target 2.c under Goal 2 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the aim
of which is to adopt measures to ensure the proper functioning of food commodity markets and their derivatives and
to facilitate timely access to market information, including on food reserves, in order to help to limit extreme food
price volatility, and implementation target 9.b under Goal 9 of the 2030 Agenda, the aim of which is to support
domestic technology development, research and innovation in developing countries, including by ensuring a
conducive policy environment for, inter alia, industrial diversification and value addition to commodities,
_______________
50

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 55/2.
52
Resolution 60/1.
51

444

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the ongoing efforts to implement the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020,53 adopted in May 2011 at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,54 adopted in September 2014 at the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing States, and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024,55 adopted in November 2014 at the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, and recognizing the need to establish a plan of action for
cooperation with middle-income countries,
Recalling the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as its first 10-year implementation plan, as a strategic
framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next 50 years, its continental
programme embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, and regional initiatives,
Taking note of the targets set out in the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security, held in Rome
from 16 to 18 November 2009, which reaffirms the pledge to end hunger and poverty,56
Noting the High-level Task Force on Global Food and Nutrition Security, supporting the Secretary-General’s
Zero Hunger Challenge initiative, initiated in 2012, and the twin-track approach enunciated in the updated
comprehensive framework for action produced by the United Nations system High-level Task Force on the Global
Food Security Crisis in September 2010,
Recalling the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development and its
outcome document,57
Recalling also the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico,
from 18 to 22 March 2002, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review
the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda Heads of State and Government expressed concern about
the excessive volatility of commodity prices, including for food and agriculture and its consequences for global food
security and improved nutrition outcomes, called for the adoption of measures to ensure the proper functioning of
food commodity markets and their derivatives and for the adoption by relevant regulatory bodies of measures to
facilitate timely, accurate and transparent access to market information in an effort to ensure that commodity
markets appropriately reflect underlying demand and supply changes and to help limit the excessive volatility of
commodity prices, noted the Agricultural Market Information System hosted by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and called for the provision of access for small-scale artisanal fishers to marine
resources and markets, consistent with sustainable management practices as well as initiatives that add value to
outputs from small-scale fishers,
Taking note of the outcome of the thirteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development58 and of further decisions and agreed conclusions on commodities adopted by the Trade and
Development Board and its subsidiary bodies in 2014 and 2015,
_______________
53

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
54
Resolution 69/15, annex.
55
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
56
See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
57
Resolution 63/303, annex.
58
See TD/500/Add.1.

445

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note also of the Arusha Declaration and Plan of Action on African Commodities, adopted at the
African Union Conference of Ministers of Trade on Commodities, held in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania,
from 21 to 23 November 2005, and endorsed by the Executive Council of the African Union at its eighth ordinary
session, held in Khartoum from 16 to 21 January 2006,59
Recalling the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation)60 and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,61
Taking note of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development “Commodities and development
reports” of 2013 and of 2015, and noting the role that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
has been playing as an institution in looking at the interaction between commodity markets and economic
development and in the elaboration of the concept of commodity-dependent developing countries,
Deeply concerned by the fact that many commodity-dependent developing countries continue to be highly
vulnerable to price fluctuations, and recognizing the need to continue efforts to diversify economies, as well as to
improve the regulation, where appropriate, and the efficiency, responsiveness, functioning and transparency of
financial and commodity markets nationally, regionally and internationally in order to address excessive commodity
price volatility,
Expressing concern about the adverse impact of the consequences of the world financial and economic crisis,
including on development, and evidence of an uneven, fragile and slow recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and stability and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility
in global markets, excessive volatility of commodity prices, high unemployment, particularly among young people,
unsustainable debt in some countries and widespread fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic
recovery and reflect the need for additional progress towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and
stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen
the international financial system while implementing the reforms agreed upon to date,
Recognizing the adverse impact of excessive price volatility of commodities, especially on women and girls,
Recognizing also that the structural constraints that women face as economic agents, including segmentation
in low-value-added or subsistence-oriented work, unequal access to productive resources, limited access to training
and skill-building due to gender segmentation in education and labour markets and a lack of resources, as well as the
heavy burden of unpaid work, make women and girls especially vulnerable to the adverse impact of excessive price
volatility of commodities,
Recognizing further that many developing countries continue to be highly dependent on primary commodities
as their principal source of export revenues, employment, income generation and domestic savings and require
additional sources of growth to become the driving force of investment, economic growth and social development,
including poverty eradication,
Recognizing, in this context, that many developing countries continue to be highly dependent on primary
commodities, and recognizing also the challenges and special needs of those countries,
Stressing the critical importance of sustainable and inclusive industrial development for developing countries
as a critical source of economic growth, economic diversification and value addition,
Recognizing that uncertainty in global commodity markets reinforces the need to comprehensively deal with the
commodity problematique, inter alia, the demand for commodities, supply capacities, commodity revenues and
investments in commodity-dependent economies, while taking due account of the diversity of each country’s

_______________
59

See A/60/693, annex II, decision EX.CL/Dec.253 (VIII).
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
61
Resolution 66/288, annex.
60

446

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

individual situation and needs and the promotion of their sustainable development, and to strengthen the nexus
between, inter alia, trade, finance, investment in sustainable agriculture and food systems, energy and industrialization,
Noting the work on consensus-building on commodity-related issues achieved through meetings of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, including the multi-year expert meetings on commodities and
development, the Global Commodities Forum and the African Oil, Gas and Mines Trade and Finance Conference
and Exhibition,
Recognizing the adverse impact of excessive price volatility of commodities on both producer and consumer
countries, particularly commodity-dependent developing countries,
Noting the recent and marked reversal in commodity prices and that commodity net export economies may
need to adjust to a possibly protracted period of lower export and fiscal revenues,
Noting also the volatility and unpredictability of commodity prices, which have threatened, inter alia, the food
security of net importers in the recent past, and noting further that the continuation of this long-term uncertainty and
volatility, intensified by recent trends in commodity prices, can have an impact on the capacities of many
developing countries, particularly commodity-dependent countries, to continue to implement policies for achieving
sustainable development and poverty eradication,
Stressing the importance of policies to address longer-term structural issues, including structural constraints
faced by women as economic agents, to diversify commodity economies and to integrate commodity policies into
wider development and poverty eradication strategies at all levels,
Noting all relevant voluntary initiatives aimed at improving transparency in commodity markets and
mitigating the impact of excessive price volatility,
Underlining the importance of timely, accurate and transparent information in helping to address excessive
food price volatility, noting global and regional initiatives, including the Agricultural Market Information System
and its Rapid Response Forum, the joint organization data initiative and other regional data platforms and
programmes, and urging the participating international organizations, private sector actors and Governments to
ensure the public dissemination of timely and quality food market information products,
Expressing deep concern at the adverse impact of climate change and extreme weather patterns on access to,
and the utilization and prices of, agricultural commodities,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on world commodity trends and prospects; 62

2. Recognizes the interlinkage between the adequate and transparent functioning of commodity markets
and the capacity of some commodity-dependent developing countries to collect appropriate fiscal revenues from
commodity exports and mobilize domestic sources to support their sustainable development, mainly through
sustainable and inclusive economic growth, industrialization, decent work and market diversification;
3. Encourages support for developing countries, according to their national plans and policies, through
technical assistance, to increase their capacity in detecting and averting trade mispricing in their commodities
sectors in order to enhance their benefits from those sectors to support sustainable growth and development;
4. Reiterates the need for further efforts to address excessive commodity price volatility, in particular by
assisting producers, especially small-scale producers, including women, in accordance with national plans and
policies, in managing risk;
5. Calls upon the international community to support the efforts of commodity-dependent developing
countries to address the factors that create structural barriers to international trade and impede, inter alia,
diversification, including tariff and non-tariff barriers, limited access to financial services resulting in scarce
resources for investing in the commodity sector, weak infrastructure, particularly regarding both the cost and
availability of transportation and storage, and lack of skills in producing and marketing alternative products;
_______________
62

A/70/184.

447

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Welcomes the convening of the Tenth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization in
Nairobi from 15 to 19 December 2015;
7. Calls for a coherent set of policy actions at the national, regional and international levels to address
excessive price volatility and support commodity-dependent developing countries in mitigating negative impacts, in
particular by facilitating value addition and enhancing their participation in commodity and related product value
chains, by supporting large-scale diversification of these economies and by encouraging the use and further
development of market-oriented risk management tools, instruments and strategies;
8. Stresses the importance of developing and strengthening agricultural policies and strategies that
recognize and address women’s critical role in food security and improved nutrition outcomes as an integral part of
both short- and long-term responses to food insecurity and malnutrition, excessive price volatility and food crises in
developing countries;
9. Recognizes the potential for innovation, productivity improvements and the promotion of non-traditional
exports in most commodity-dependent developing countries, particularly in Africa, and calls for enhanced support
by the international community as well as exchanges of experience in these areas within the framework of SouthSouth economic cooperation;
10. Underscores the importance of increased investments in infrastructure as a means of promoting
agricultural development and enhancing commodity diversification, including value-added production, and trade,
and urges the international community to assist commodity-dependent developing countries to mainstream trade as
well as sound investment and financial policies as key elements of development strategies, based on national
circumstances and development priorities, and to invest in and support research and development of agriculture
productivity;
11. Recognizes the endorsement of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security63 by the Committee on World Food Security
in 2012;
12. Also recognizes the endorsement of the Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food
Systems64 by the Committee on World Food Security in 2014;
13. Stresses that technical assistance and capacity-building aimed at improving the commodity export
competitiveness of producers are particularly important for developing countries, especially in Africa, and invites
the donor community to provide the necessary resources for commodity-specific financial and technical assistance,
in particular for human and institutional capacity-building, including gender-responsive measures, as well as
infrastructure development of developing countries, with a view to reducing their institutional bottlenecks and
transaction costs and enhancing their commodity trade and development in accordance with national development
plans;
14. Also stresses that the Aid for Trade initiative should aim to help developing countries, particularly the
least developed countries, to build the supply-side capacity and trade-related infrastructure that they need to assist
them to implement and benefit from World Trade Organization agreements and, more broadly, to expand their trade;
15. Recalls the agreement to keep under regular review, by the Ministerial Conference and appropriate
organs of the World Trade Organization, the impact of the results of the Uruguay Round on the least developed
countries as well as on the net food-importing developing countries, with a view to fostering positive measures to
enable them to achieve their development objectives, and in this regard calls for the implementation of the
Marrakesh Ministerial Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme
on Least Developed and Net Food-Importing Developing Countries;
16. Encourages developed countries that have not already done so and developing countries declaring
themselves in a position to do so to take steps towards the goal of realizing timely implementation of duty-free and
_______________
63
64

448

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.
Ibid., C 2015/20, appendix D.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all least developed countries, consistent with the Hong Kong
Ministerial Declaration adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005;
17. Strongly encourages international financial institutions and development banks to assist developing
countries, in particular commodity-dependent developing countries, in managing the effects of excessive price
volatility;
18. Reaffirms that every State has and shall freely exercise full permanent sovereignty over all its wealth,
natural resources and economic activities;
19. Recognizes the importance of increasing efficiency, effectiveness and transparency in the management
of public and private sector revenues in developed and developing countries derived from all commodities and
commodities-related industries, including final processed goods, in support of development;
20. Notes the important contributions of the Common Fund for Commodities and other international
commodities organizations, and encourages them, in cooperation with the International Trade Centre, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and other
relevant bodies, to strengthen their coordination and to identify and implement innovative measures to enable the
sustainable contribution of the commodity sector to economic development, including ways to reduce vulnerability
to volatility in commodities, as well as to enhance activities in developing countries to improve access to markets
and the reliability of supply, enhance diversification and the addition of value, improve the competitiveness of
commodities, strengthen the market chain, improve market structures, broaden the export base and ensure the
effective participation of all stakeholders, on the basis of a shared understanding of the contribution of commodities
to sustainable development;
21. Stresses that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and its partners, in the spirit of
inter-agency cooperation and multi-stakeholder partnerships, within their respective mandates, should continue to
engage actively in collaborative research and analysis of the commodity problematique and related capacity- and
consensus-building activities, with a view to providing regular analysis and policy advice relevant to the sustainable
development of commodity-dependent developing countries, particularly low-income countries;
22. Emphasizes the importance of facilitating accession to the World Trade Organization, particularly for
commodity-dependent developing countries, in full compliance with its rules;
23. Underlines the urgent need for the provision of and access to trade finance to commodity-dependent
developing countries, given the tightened access to all types of credit and noting debt sustainability;
24. Welcomes the commitment to redouble efforts to substantially reduce illicit financial flows by 2030, with
a view to eventually eliminating them;
25. Decides to hold a one-off one-day informal interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on commodity
markets during the first half of 2016 to review world commodity trends and prospects, particularly in commoditydependent countries, on a date and in a format to be decided by the President of the General Assembly;
26. Calls upon all relevant bodies, agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other
relevant intergovernmental, global, regional and subregional organizations, in particular the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and all relevant international financial and economic institutions, within
their respective mandates, to continue to address the issue of the low industrialization and diversification of the
economies of some commodity-dependent developing countries in relation to the capacity of Member States to
achieve all the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030;65
27. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session, in
collaboration with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, a report on the
implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy
questions”, the sub-item entitled “Commodities” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, unless
otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
_______________
65

See resolution 70/1.

449

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/192
A/RE S/70 /192

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/471, para. 11)66

70/192.

Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,67 supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation
targets with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from 18
to 22 March 2002, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008, and its
resolutions 68/204 of 20 December 2013, 68/279 of 30 June 2014 and 69/208 of 19 December 2014, as well as
Economic and Social Council resolution 2014/11 of 13 June 2014 and Council decision 2015/257 of
23 July 2015,
Recalling also its resolution 69/108 of 8 December 2014 on the report of the Intergovernmental Committee of
Experts on Sustainable Development Financing established pursuant to its resolution 66/288 of 11 September 2012,
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration68 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome,69
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,
held from 20 to 22 September 2010, and its outcome document,70 and the special event to follow up efforts made
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, convened by the President of the General Assembly on
25 September 2013, and its outcome document,71
Recalling also the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,72
Noting that the Second Committee and the Economic and Social Council held joint events on the theme
“Illicit financial flows and development financing in Africa” on 23 October 2015 and on the theme “Domestic
resource mobilization: where to go after Addis?” on 11 November 2015,
_______________
66

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 70/1.
68
Resolution 55/2.
69
Resolution 60/1.
70
Resolution 65/1.
71
Resolution 68/6.
72
Resolution 66/288, annex.
67

450

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the sixth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development, held in New York on 7 and
8 October 2013,
Reiterating the affirmation in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda that achieving gender equality, empowering all
women and girls and attaining the full realization of their human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth and sustainable development,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the outcome of the third International Conference
on Financing for Development;73
2. Emphasizes the need to work towards the full and timely implementation of all the commitments
included in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development;74
3. Welcomes the voluntary commitments and announcements made in conjunction with the third
International Conference on Financing for Development, and looks forward to their publication and full and
effective implementation;
4. Looks forward to the launch of the annual Economic and Social Council forum on financing for
development follow-up in its current cycle, in accordance with the provisions in paragraphs 130, 131 and 132 of the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda;
5.

Reaffirms that the Economic and Social Council annual forum on financing for development follow-up:

(a) Will hold its annual meetings at Headquarters in New York in the spring; its inaugural meeting will be
held in 2016;
(b) Will be chaired by the President of the Economic and Social Council, who will take the steps necessary
to prepare the work of the forum in accordance with the modalities set out in paragraph 132 of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda;
6. Encourages the President of the Economic and Social Council, in collaboration with the SecretaryGeneral, to produce an information note regarding arrangements for the meeting of the annual forum in 2016;
7. Invites the President of the Economic and Social Council to consider appointing two co-facilitators, as
appropriate, who will prepare the draft conclusions and recommendations of the annual forum and facilitate
consultations among Member States with a view to reaching its intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and
recommendations;
8. Urges international, bilateral and other potential donors to consider contributing generously to the Trust
Fund for the Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development, in particular to support the
travel to and participation of representatives from developing countries, in particular the least developed countries,
in the annual forum;
9. Looks forward to the annual report of the inter-agency task force to be convened by the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with paragraph 133 of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include the item entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcomes of the International Conferences on Financing for Development” in the provisional
agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second
Committee, and taking into account that the inter-agency task force to be convened by the Secretary-General will
report on progress in implementing the financing for development outcomes and the means of implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.67

_______________
73
74

A/70/320.
Resolution 69/313.

451

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/193
A/RE S/70 /193

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472, para. 42)75

70/193.

International Year of Sustainable Tourism for Development, 2017

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for
the proclamation of international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, which state that an international year
should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements necessary for its organization and financing have
been made,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”, as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, which
recognizes, inter alia, that well-designed and well-managed tourism can make a significant contribution to the three
dimensions of sustainable development, has close linkages to other sectors and can create decent jobs and generate
trade opportunities,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,76
adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, as endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 65/280 of 17 June 2011, supports the efforts of the least developed countries to develop a
sustainable tourism sector, in particular through infrastructure and human capital development, increased access to
finance and enhanced access to global tourism networks and distribution channels,
_______________
75

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
76
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.

452

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling also that the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, adopted at the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing States, as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution
69/15 of 14 November 2014, recognizes that sustainable tourism represents an important driver of sustainable
economic growth and decent job creation,
Recalling further that the Vienna Declaration and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024, adopted at the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries, as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 69/137 of 12 December 2014,
recognizes that tourism can play an important role in building the economic sector, providing employment and
generating foreign exchange,
Reaffirming the importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as its 10-year plan of
action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next
50 years, and its continental programme, embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, which promotes sustainable tourism,
Recalling its resolutions 2148 (XXI) of 4 November 1966, entitled “International Tourist Year”, 53/200 of
15 December 1998, entitled “Proclamation of 2002 as the International Year of Ecotourism”, 65/148 of
20 December 2010, entitled “Global Code of Ethics for Tourism”, 68/207 of 20 December 2013, entitled
“Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central America”, and 69/233 of 19 December 2014, entitled
“Promotion of sustainable tourism, including ecotourism, for poverty eradication and environment protection”,
Taking note of the resolution adopted by the General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization at its
twenty-first session, held in Medellin, Colombia, from 12 to 17 September 2015, on the International Year of
Sustainable Tourism for Development, 2017,
Welcoming the efforts of the World Tourism Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity and others to promote ecotourism and
sustainable tourism worldwide,
Welcoming also the adoption of the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and
production patterns by the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012 and the launching of
the sustainable tourism programme of the framework, and encouraging further implementation through capacitybuilding projects and initiatives to support sustainable tourism,
Recognizing the importance of international tourism, and particularly of the designation of an international
year of sustainable tourism for development, in fostering better understanding among peoples everywhere, leading
to a greater awareness of the rich heritage of various civilizations and bringing about a better appreciation of the
inherent values of different cultures, thereby contributing to the strengthening of peace in the world,
Recognizing also the important role of sustainable tourism as a positive instrument towards the eradication of
poverty, the protection of the environment, the improvement of quality of life and the economic empowerment of
women and youth and its contribution to the three dimensions of sustainable development, especially in developing
countries,
1.

Decides to proclaim 2017 the International Year of Sustainable Tourism for Development;

2. Invites the World Tourism Organization, mindful of the provisions contained in the annex to Economic
and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to facilitate the organization and implementation of the International Year, in
collaboration with Governments, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, international and regional
organizations and other relevant stakeholders;
3. Stresses that the costs of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
that are above and beyond the activities currently within the mandate of the lead agency should be met from
voluntary contributions;
4. Encourages all States, the United Nations system and all other actors to take advantage of the
International Year to promote actions at all levels, including through international cooperation, and to support
sustainable tourism as a means of promoting and accelerating sustainable development, especially poverty
eradication;
453

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Requests the World Tourism Organization, mindful of the provisions of paragraphs 23 to 27 of the annex
to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to inform the General Assembly at its seventy-third session on
the implementation of the present resolution, elaborating on the evaluation of the International Year.
RESOLUTION 70/194
A/RE S/70 /194

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/472,
para. 42),77 by a recorded vote of 171 to 6, with 3 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Papua New Guinea, Tonga

70/194.
A/RES/70/194.

Oil slick on Lebanese shores

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 61/194 of 20 December 2006, 62/188 of 19 December 2007, 63/211 of 19 December
2008, 64/195 of 21 December 2009, 65/147 of 20 December 2010, 66/192 of 22 December 2011, 67/201 of
21 December 2012, 68/206 of 20 December 2013 and 69/212 of 19 December 2014 on the oil slick on Lebanese
shores,
Reaffirming the outcome of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, especially principle 7
of the Declaration of the Conference,78 in which States were requested to take all possible steps to prevent pollution
of the seas,
Emphasizing the need to protect and preserve the marine environment in accordance with international law,
Taking into account the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,79 especially principle 16, in
which it was stipulated that the polluter should, in principle, bear the cost of pollution, and taking into account also
chapter 17 of Agenda 21,80
Noting with great concern the environmental disaster caused by the destruction by the Israeli Air Force on
15 July 2006 of the oil storage tanks in the direct vicinity of El-Jiyeh electric power plant in Lebanon, resulting in an
oil slick that covered the entirety of the Lebanese coastline, extended to the Syrian coastline and hindered efforts to
_______________
77

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by South Africa (on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
78
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972 (A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1),
part one, chap. I.
79
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
80
Ibid., annex II.

454

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

achieve sustainable development, as already highlighted by the General Assembly in its resolutions 61/194, 62/188,
63/211, 64/195, 65/147, 66/192, 67/201, 68/206 and 69/212,
Noting that the Secretary-General expressed grave concern at the lack of any acknowledgement on the part of
the Government of Israel of its responsibilities vis-à-vis reparations and compensation to the Government and
people of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic affected by the oil spill,
Recalling that, in paragraph 5 of its resolution 69/212, it reiterated its request to the Government of Israel to
assume responsibility for prompt and adequate compensation to the Government of Lebanon and other countries
directly affected by the oil slick, such as the Syrian Arab Republic, whose shores have been partially polluted, and
recognizing the conclusion of the Secretary-General that this request of the General Assembly has yet to be
implemented,
Acknowledging that the Secretary-General concluded that this oil spill is not covered by any of the
international oil spill compensation funds and thus merits special consideration, and recognizing that further
consideration needs to be given to the option of securing the relevant compensation from the Government of Israel,
Acknowledging also the conclusions on measuring and quantifying the environmental damage set out in the
report of the Secretary-General,81
Noting again with appreciation the assistance offered by donor countries and international organizations for
the clean-up operations and the early recovery and reconstruction of Lebanon through bilateral and multilateral
channels, including the Athens Coordination Meeting on the response to the marine pollution incident in the Eastern
Mediterranean, held on 17 August 2006, as well as the Stockholm Conference for Lebanon’s Early Recovery, held
on 31 August 2006,
Acknowledging that the Secretary-General has welcomed the agreement of the Lebanon Recovery Fund to
host the Eastern Mediterranean Oil Spill Restoration Trust Fund, under its existing mechanism, and expressing
concern that to date no contributions have been made to the Trust Fund,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;81

2. Reiterates, for the tenth consecutive year, its deep concern about the adverse implications of the
destruction by the Israeli Air Force of the oil storage tanks in the direct vicinity of the Lebanese El-Jiyeh electric
power plant for the achievement of sustainable development in Lebanon;
3. Considers that the oil slick has heavily polluted the shores of Lebanon and partially polluted Syrian
shores and consequently has had serious implications for livelihoods and the economy of Lebanon, owing to the
adverse implications for natural resources, biodiversity, fisheries and tourism, and for human health in the country;
4. Acknowledges the conclusions in the report of the Secretary-General, in which he stated that studies
show that the value of the damage to Lebanon amounted to 856.4 million United States dollars in 2014, and requests
the Secretary-General to urge United Nations bodies and agencies and other relevant organizations involved in the
initial assessment of the relevant environmental damage to undertake, within existing resources, a further study,
building on, inter alia, the initial work of the World Bank presented in the report of the Secretary-General submitted
to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session,82 with a view to measuring and quantifying the environmental
damage sustained by neighbouring countries;
5. Reiterates its request in this regard to the Government of Israel to assume responsibility for prompt and
adequate compensation to the Government of Lebanon for the aforementioned damage and to other countries
directly affected by the oil slick, such as the Syrian Arab Republic, whose shores have been partially polluted, for
the costs of repairing the environmental damage caused by the destruction, including the restoration of the marine
environment, in particular in the light of the conclusion contained in the report of the Secretary-General that there
remains grave concern at the lack of implementation of the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General
Assembly on the subject vis-à-vis reparations and compensation to the Government and people of Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic affected by the oil spill;
_______________
81
82

A/70/291.
A/62/343.

455

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Reiterates its appreciation for the efforts of the Government of Lebanon and those of Member States,
regional and international organizations, regional and international financial institutions, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector in the initiation of clean-up and rehabilitation operations on the polluted shores,
and encourages Member States and the above-mentioned entities to continue their financial and technical support to
the Government of Lebanon towards achieving the completion of clean-up and rehabilitation operations, with the
aim of preserving the ecosystem of Lebanon and that of the Eastern Mediterranean Basin;
7. Welcomes the agreement of the Lebanon Recovery Fund to host the Eastern Mediterranean Oil Spill
Restoration Trust Fund, based on voluntary contributions, to provide assistance and support to the States directly
and adversely affected in their integrated environmentally sound management, from clean-up to safe disposal of oily
waste, of this environmental disaster resulting from the destruction of the oil storage tanks at El-Jiyeh electric
power plant;
8. Notes that in his report the Secretary-General urged Member States, international organizations,
international and regional financial institutions, non-governmental organizations and the private sector to intensify
their support for Lebanon in this matter, in particular for recovery and rehabilitation activities on the Lebanese coast,
reiterates its invitation to States and the international donor community to make voluntary financial contributions to
the Trust Fund, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to mobilize international technical and financial
assistance in order to ensure that the Trust Fund has sufficient and adequate resources;
9. Recognizes the multidimensionality of the adverse impact of the oil slick, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution under the item entitled “Sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 70/195
A/RE S/70 /195

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472, para. 42)83

70/195.

Combating sand and dust storms

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, which endorsed the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,
Recalling also its resolution 69/221 of 19 December 2014 on the implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa,
_______________
83

456

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note of the Regional Programme to Combat Sand and Dust Storms of the United Nations Environment
Programme, and also taking note of other initiatives, including the ministerial meeting on sand and dust storms held
in Nairobi on 21 February 2013 on the margins of the twenty-seventh session of the Governing Council/Global
Ministerial Environment Forum of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, adopted
at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction and endorsed by the General Assembly
in its resolution 69/283 of 3 June 2015, and recognizing that one of the priorities for action of the Framework is an
understanding of disaster risk for prevention and mitigation and for the development and implementation of
appropriate preparedness and effective response to disasters, which continue to undermine efforts to achieve
sustainable development,
Acknowledging that, based on the notion of hazards as defined in the Hyogo Framework for Action
2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters,84 addressing multidimensional
hazards, including those posed by dust and sandstorms, contributes towards the achievement of the goals, targets
and priorities for action set out in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,
Emphasizing the relevance of the efforts and cooperation of Member States at the regional and international
levels to control and reduce the negative impacts of dust and sandstorms on human settlements in vulnerable
regions, taking note of the initiative of the Islamic Republic of Iran in hosting a regional meeting of environment
ministers in Tehran on 29 September 2010, and welcoming the holding of other meetings with the active
participation of all countries,
Stressing the need for cooperation at the global and regional levels with a view to preventing and managing
dust and sandstorms through the development of early warning systems and the sharing of climate and weather
information to forecast dust storms and sandstorms, and affirming that resilient action to combat sand and dust
storms requires a better understanding of the severe multidimensional impacts of dust and sandstorms, including the
deterioration of the health, well-being and livelihood of people, increased desertification and land degradation,
deforestation, loss of biodiversity and land productivity, and their impact on sustainable economic growth,
1. Recognizes that dust and sandstorms, and the unsustainable land-management practices, among other
factors, that can cause or exacerbate these phenomena, pose a great challenge to the sustainable development of
affected countries and regions, also recognizes that, in the past few years, dust and sandstorms have inflicted
substantial socioeconomic damage on the inhabitants of the world’s arid, semi-arid and dry subhumid areas,
especially in Africa and Asia, and underscores the need to treat them and to promptly undertake measures to address
these challenges;
2. Acknowledges the role of the United Nations development system in promoting international
cooperation to combat sand and dust storms, and invites all relevant bodies, agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations development system, including the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Meteorological Organization, the World Health Organization, the secretariat of
the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa, and all other related organizations to address this problem and contribute to
the enhancement of capacity-building, the implementation of regional and subregional projects, the sharing of
information, best practices and experiences and the boosting of technical cooperation in the affected countries and
countries of origin, to improve the implementation of sustainable land management practices and the development
of early warning systems as tools to combat sand and dust storms in accordance with their strategic plans;
3. Encourages regional, subregional and interregional organizations and processes to continue to share best
practices, experiences and technical expertise in combating dust and sandstorms, including through improved
implementation of sustainable land-management practices, and to promote regional cooperation on this matter;
4. Invites all affected Member States as well as relevant entities of the United Nations development system,
regional organizations and other relevant stakeholders to endeavour to meet the objectives set out in the present
resolution;

_______________
84

A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2.

457

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session the report
entitled “Global assessment of sand and dust storms”, which is being prepared by the United Nations Environment
Programme in collaboration with other relevant United Nations entities, in the language in which it has been issued
by the Programme.
RESOLUTION 70/196
A/RE S/70 /196

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472, para. 42)85

70/196.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central America

The General Assembly,
Recalling all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on this matter, in particular its resolutions 66/196 of
22 December 2011 and 68/207 of 20 December 2013,
Recalling also the Manila Declaration on World Tourism,86 the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development87 and Agenda 21,88 the Amman Declaration on Peace through Tourism,89 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development90 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),91 the Declaration of Barbados92 and the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,93 the Mauritius Declaration94 and the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States,95 the Istanbul Declaration,96 the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011–202097 and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”,98
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
_______________
85

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Georgia, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Panama,
Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Ukraine and Uruguay.
86
A/36/236, annex, appendix I.
87
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
88
Ibid., annex II.
89
A/55/640, annex.
90
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
91
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
92
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
93
Ibid., annex II.
94
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
95
Ibid., annex II.
96
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. I.
97
Ibid., chap. II.
98
Resolution 66/288, annex.

458

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Welcoming the resolution adopted by the General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization at its twentyfirst session, held in Medellin, Colombia, from 12 to 17 September 2015, on the International Year of Sustainable
Tourism for Development, 2017,
Recognizing the important role of sustainable tourism as a positive instrument towards the eradication of
poverty, the protection of the environment and the improvement of quality of life and the empowerment of women
in all aspects, and its contribution to the three dimensions of sustainable development, especially in developing
countries,
Stressing the need for responsible tourism and for its beneficial socioeconomic impact on local communities,
the economic empowerment of women through tourism, fair tourism, the protection of children against all forms of
exploitation in tourism, the prevention of trafficking in human beings and in cultural artefacts, respect for intangible
cultural heritage, the protection of tourists as consumers and the provision of unbiased information to tourists,
Emphasizing that all sustainable tourism in Central America is a cross-cutting issue with close linkages to
other sectors, that it generates trade opportunities and is a fundamental pillar of regional integration and an engine of
social and economic development, income, investment and hard currency, and that it can therefore contribute to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Noting in this regard the role of the Central American Integration System, which includes Belize, Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama, in the promotion of
sustainable tourism in the region,
Stressing that poverty eradication through tourism, with a focus on ecotourism, community-based tourism and
micro- and small businesses in the tourism supply chain, is a key objective in the strategic planning of the Central
American countries,
Noting the outcomes of the Forum on Tourism, Sustainability and Climate Change in Central America, held
from 11 to 13 April 2013 in La Ceiba, Honduras, the outcomes adopted at the 96th meeting of the Central American
Tourism Council, held in San Salvador on 14 July 2015, and the declaration of the 15th forum on the development
of tourism and on the harmonization of efforts to promote tourism in Central America and the Dominican Republic,
held in Guatemala City on 27 August 2014,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;99

2. Notes the ongoing efforts of the Governments of the Central American countries, in coordination with
the Central American Commission for Environment and Development, in the implementation of existing and new
programmes designed to launch and promote sustainable tourism throughout the region;
3. Welcomes the adoption of the principles of sustainable tourism by the Central American Tourism
Integration Secretariat, conceptualized by the Global Sustainable Tourism Council of the World Tourism
Organization through its Global Sustainable Tourism Criteria, to serve as the framework for tourism development,
which are expressed in the strategic plan for sustainable development, 2014–2018, developed by the Central
American Tourism Integration Secretariat, capturing the region’s vision of itself as an integrated, sustainable, multilocation destination of high quality and emphasizing its action plan for tourism and climate change as a component
of the regional strategy on climate change;
_______________
99

A/70/215 and Add.1.

459

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Notes the valuable role of international cooperation with relevant partners in the implementation of
various projects aimed at promoting sustainable tourism in the region, including by strengthening ecotourism, rural
tourism and colonial cities tourism;
5. Also notes the existing joint initiatives designed and implemented to stimulate regional tourism
integration, such as the Mayan World regional brand;
6. Welcomes the progress made by the Central American countries in converging on a regional tourism
strategy based on conserving the region’s biodiversity and natural and cultural attractions, reducing poverty through
employment and entrepreneurial tourism development that emphasizes the micro- and medium-sized enterprises
that dominate the industry, addressing climate change and using tourism as a tool to improve the quality of life of
the region’s inhabitants;
7. Also welcomes the actions taken with the aim of establishing the Global Observatory of Sustainable
Tourism network in the Americas, which may well serve
as a model for the rest of the region and the Americas in using data on sustainable tourism for improving policies
and offering capacity-building to enhance the sustainability of destinations;
8. Recognizes the need to support sustainable tourism activities and relevant capacity-building efforts that
promote environmental awareness, conserve and protect the environment, respect wildlife, flora, biodiversity,
ecosystems and cultural diversity and improve the welfare and livelihoods of local communities by supporting their
local economies and the human and natural environment as a whole;
9. Also recognizes the opportunities for promoting sustainable tourism activities through the programme on
sustainable tourism and its component on ecotourism under the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable
consumption and production patterns adopted by the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in
2012 and the launch of the sustainable tourism programme of the framework, and encourages further
implementation through capacity-building projects and initiatives to support sustainable tourism;
10. Stresses the need to promote the further development of sustainable tourism, in particular through the
consumption of sustainable tourism products and services, and to strengthen the development of ecotourism,
maintaining, in particular, the culture and environmental integrity of indigenous and local communities and
enhancing the protection of ecologically sensitive areas and the natural heritage;
11. Welcomes the efforts of the World Tourism Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity to promote sustainable
tourism worldwide;
12. Invites States Members of the United Nations and other stakeholders and the World Tourism
Organization to continue to support the activities undertaken by the Central American countries for the promotion of
responsible and sustainable tourism in the region, in the context of emergency preparedness and mitigation of and
response to natural disasters, as well as for capacity-building, in order to create jobs and promote local culture and
products, including by empowering women and youth and extending the benefits of tourism to all sectors of society,
including the most vulnerable and marginalized groups of the population, while minimizing its negative impact, and
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals;
13. Encourages the Central American countries, through the Central American Tourism Council and the
Central American Tourism Integration Secretariat, to continue to support sustainable tourism through policies that
foster responsive and inclusive tourism, strengthen regional identity and protect the natural and cultural heritage,
especially their ecosystems and biodiversity, and notes that existing initiatives, such as the Global Partnership for
Sustainable Tourism, among other international initiatives, can deliver direct and focused support to Governments to
this end;
14. Also encourages the Central American countries to share their experiences on sustainable tourism aimed
at contributing to poverty alleviation for the benefit of all countries;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventysecond session the item entitled “Sustainable development”, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the
revitalization of the Second Committee.
460

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/197
A/RE S/70 /197

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472, para. 42)100

70/197.

Towards comprehensive cooperation among all modes of transport for promoting sustainable
multimodal transit corridors

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,101 Agenda 21,102 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,103 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development,104 the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)105 and
the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we
want”,106
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling its resolution 69/213 of 19 December 2014 on the role of transport and transit corridors in ensuring
international cooperation for sustainable development,
Taking note of the Ashgabat Declaration, adopted at the High-level International Conference on the Role of
Transit Transport Corridors in Ensuring International Cooperation, Stability and Sustainable Development held in
Ashgabat on 3 and 4 September 2014,107 in cooperation with the Economic Commission for Europe, the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the International Road Transport Union,

_______________
100

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
101
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
102
Ibid., annex II.
103
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
104
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
105
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
106
Resolution 66/288, annex.
107
A/68/991, annex.

461

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling its resolutions 55/215 of 21 December 2000, 56/76 of 11 December 2001, 58/129 of 19 December
2003, 60/215 of 22 December 2005, 62/211 of 19 December 2007, 64/223 of 21 December 2009, 66/223 of
22 December 2011 and 68/234 of 20 December 2013 on enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and all
relevant partners, in particular the private sector,
Recalling also its resolutions 57/309 of 22 May 2003, 58/9 of 5 November 2003, 58/289 of 14 April 2004,
60/5 of 26 October 2005, 62/244 of 31 March 2008, 64/255 of 2 March 2010, 66/260 of 19 April 2012 and 68/269
of 10 April 2014 on improving global road safety and the need to develop plans to improve road safety along
international road transit corridors in line with the Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020,
Welcoming the Second Global High-level Conference on Road Safety, held in Brasilia on 18 and
19 November 2015, to review progress in implementing the Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety
2011–2020 and meeting the goal of the Decade of Action,
Welcoming also, in this regard, the appointment of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Road Safety,
Welcoming further the work of the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Group on Sustainable Transport,
and looking forward to the launch of a global transport outlook report,
Recognizing the important role of environmentally sound, safe, efficient, reliable and affordable multimodal
transport and transit corridors for the efficient movement of goods and people in supporting sustainable economic
growth, improving the social welfare of people and enhancing international cooperation and trade among countries,
Emphasizing the need to harmonize and improve transport and border-crossing infrastructure and facilities and
services along the international transport and transit corridors,
Noting the importance of the United Nations Development Account projects focused on developing broader
transport corridors that are being implemented by the five United Nations regional commissions, and of identifying
the physical and institutional infrastructure requirements that would be needed to make them operational,
Recognizing the importance of addressing the special needs of landlocked developing countries, inter alia, by
establishing and promoting efficient transit transport systems that link them to international markets, and in this
regard reaffirming that the Almaty Declaration,108 the Vienna Declaration and the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024109 constitute a fundamental framework for genuine
partnerships between landlocked and transit developing countries and their development partners at the national,
bilateral, subregional, regional and global levels,
Recognizing also the need to connect the economies of small island developing States to the network of global
supply chains by integrating them into existing and emerging multimodal transport and transit corridors, and in this
regard reaffirming that the SIDS Accelerated Modalities for Action (SAMOA) Pathway110 outlines the sustainable
development priorities for small island developing States,
Stressing the importance of actively supporting private sector investment, including through public-private
partnerships and grant/loans blending, for infrastructure development and maintenance in communications and in
multimodal transport such as railways, roads, waterways, warehouses and port facilities in the least developed
countries, and in this regard recalling that the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020111 highlights the need to build the infrastructure of least developed
countries as a priority area for action,

_______________
108

Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003
(A/CONF.202/3), annex II.
109
Resolution 69/137, annexes I and II.
110
Resolution 69/15, annex.
111
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. I and II.

462

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the launch on 26 September 2015 of the Global Partnership for Sustainable Transport, developed by
the International Road Transport Union and the United Nations Global Compact, and recognizing in this regard the
mission and objectives that the Global Partnership pursues as a business- and industry-led, action-oriented, multistakeholder initiative involving all modes of transport,
Recognizing the need for continued cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and existing
partnerships on sustainable transport issues, such as the Global Partnership for Sustainable Transport, the
Partnership on Sustainable Low Carbon Transport and the Group of Friends on Sustainable Transport,
Highlighting the role of international roads and railways, intermodal logistics centres and dry ports, global
logistics and supply chains, integrated transport modes, appropriate technologies and the maintenance and
upgrading of infrastructure in promoting seamless international transit transport,
Underlining the importance of cooperation among all modes of transport to create and maintain sustainable
supply chains, especially in developing countries, in order to improve access to markets and the reliability of supply,
enhance diversification and value addition, improve the competitiveness of commodities, strengthen the market
chain, improve market structures, broaden the export base and ensure the effective participation of all stakeholders,
Recognizing the importance of transport and transit corridors in facilitating transport linkages on domestic
routes and promoting urban-rural connectivity in order to boost economic growth at the local and regional levels,
promote interconnections between cities, peoples and resources and facilitate intraregional and interregional trade,
1. Recognizes the need for continued international cooperation to address the issues relating to transport
and transit corridors as an important element of sustainable development;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the role of transport and transit corridors in ensuring
international cooperation for sustainable development;112
3. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to promote and facilitate effective international cooperation on
sustainable transport issues, and in this regard encourages further efforts, as appropriate, to strengthen the
coordination of the work of the United Nations system in the area of transportation;
4. Welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General to convene, towards the end of 2016, a global
sustainable transport conference, and notes that the conference will be funded through extrabudgetary resources;
5. Underlines that international transport corridors should be identified, designed and developed, keeping
in mind the safety and protection of transport users and the competitive advantages of each mode of transport and
addressing infrastructure needs and the regulatory and institutional framework for the services that those corridors
provide, including the promotion of social dialogue, safety and health in the workplace and gender balance in the
workforce;
6. Encourages States to consider adopting energy efficiency and low carbon technologies when making
improvements to transport and transit corridors and related infrastructure, and underlines the importance of such
technologies in international cooperation on transport issues;
7. Welcomes the efforts of the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, other international,
regional and subregional organizations, in particular the World Bank, the regional development banks, the World
Customs Organization, the World Trade Organization, the International Road Transport Union, the International
Union of Railways and the International Transport Forum, within their respective mandates, to develop and
operationalize international and regional transport and transit corridors;
8. Calls for efforts to promote regional and interregional economic integration and cooperation, including
by improving transportation infrastructure, enhancing connectivity and facilitating trade and investment;
9. Welcomes new and existing initiatives to enhance regional and interregional connectivity and transport
infrastructure in order to unleash the potential of cooperation among all modes of transport and achieve economic
dynamism for integrated sustainable development;
_______________
112

A/70/262.

463

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Calls upon Member States and international and regional organizations to further encourage enhanced
networking and periodic consultation among related stakeholders involved in the development and operation of
international transport and transit corridors;
11. Invites all States that have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the United
Nations conventions and agreements on transport and transit facilitation, including the International Convention on
the Harmonization of Frontier Control of Goods113 and the Customs Convention on the International Transport of
Goods under Cover of TIR Carnets (TIR Convention);114
12. Underscores the need to mobilize, as appropriate, additional financial resources for the development of
transport infrastructure and services, including through the promotion of public-private partnerships, so as to achieve
inclusive and sustainable development;
13. Encourages the organizations of the United Nations system and other international organizations,
relevant international financing institutions, multilateral and bilateral donors and the private sector to further
coordinate their efforts and to collaborate in mobilizing financial and technical assistance to countries for
comprehensive cooperation among all modes of transport so as to promote sustainable multimodal transit corridors.
RESOLUTION 70/198
A/RE S/70 /198

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/472,
para. 42),115 by a recorded vote of 146 to none, with 36 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Cuba,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen

_______________
113

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1409, No. 23583.
Ibid., vol. 1079, No. 16510.
115
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Zambia.
114

464

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

70/198.
A/RES/70/

Agricultural technology for sustainable development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/209 of 20 December 2013,

Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,116 Agenda 21,117 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,118 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development119 and the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),120
Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,121
Welcoming the Zero Hunger Challenge initiative launched by the Secretary-General at the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development as a vision for a future free from hunger, and taking note of the joint report
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development and the World Food Programme on the critical role of investments in social protection and agriculture,
Recalling its resolution 66/222 of 22 December 2011 on the International Year of Family Farming, 2014,
which raised the profile of the role of family farming and smallholder farming in contributing to the achievement of
food security and improved nutrition,
Recalling also its resolution 68/232 of 20 December 2013 on World Soil Day and the International Year of
Soils, by which it designated 5 December as World Soil Day and declared 2015 the International Year of Soils, with
the aim of increasing awareness and understanding of the importance of soil to food security and essential
ecosystem functions,
Welcoming the outcome of the forty-second session of the Committee on World Food Security, held in Rome
from 12 to 15 October 2015, taking note of the Committee’s voluntary Principles for Responsible Investment in
Agriculture and Food Systems,122 and recalling its Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure
of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security,123

_______________
116

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
117
Ibid., annex II.
118
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
119
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
120
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
121
Resolution 66/288, annex.
122
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/20, appendix D.
123
Ibid., document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.

465

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Welcoming also the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,124
adopted at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction,
Welcoming further the launch of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism established in the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda in order to support the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recalling relevant strategies and programmes of action, including the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,125 the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway,126 the Vienna Declaration and Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014–2024,127 reaffirming the importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063
and the programme of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,128 and recognizing the major challenge to the
achievement of durable peace and sustainable development in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations,
Recognizing that agricultural technology will have a beneficial impact on and an important role in the
successful implementation of the goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Acknowledging the positive transformative potential of strengthened urban-rural linkages in achieving
sustainable development, and noting in that regard the holding of the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III) in 2016,
Stressing the crucial role of women in the agricultural sector and their contribution to enhancing agricultural
and rural development, improving food security and nutrition and eradicating rural poverty, and underlining the fact
that meaningful progress in agricultural development necessitates, inter alia, closing the gender gap and ensuring
that women have equal access to agricultural technologies, related services and inputs and all necessary productive
resources, including tenure rights and access to land, fisheries and forests, as well as to affordable education and
training, social services, social protection, health care, health services and financial services, and access to and
participation in markets,
Recognizing that young people play a significant role in supporting sustainable economic growth and that
agricultural technology has an essential role to play in facilitating access to agricultural skills for young women and
men, improving the livelihoods of youth and securing the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child
labour,
Noting that sustainable agricultural technology, adapted to the needs of smallholders and family farmers, in
particular women and youth in rural areas, can contribute to their transition from subsistence farming to innovative,
commercial production, helping them to increase their own food security and nutrition, generate marketable
surpluses and add value to their production,
Acknowledging the role and work of civil society and the private sector in furthering progress in developing
countries and promoting sustainable agriculture and management practices, the use of agricultural technology and
the training of smallholder farmers, in particular rural women,
Emphasizing the need to continue to innovate in agriculture food chains in order to respond to the challenges
posed by, inter alia, climate change, the depletion and scarcity of natural resources, urbanization and globalization,
and recognizing that agricultural research and sustainable agricultural technologies can contribute greatly to
agricultural, rural and economic development, the adaptation of agriculture, food security and nutrition, help to build
resilience and mitigate the negative impact of climate change, desertification, land degradation and drought,
Stressing the need to support and strengthen information systems and statistical systems for better disaggregated
data collection and processing, which will be key in monitoring progress in the adoption of sustainable agricultural
technologies and their impact on improving food security, nutrition and sustainable agriculture,
_______________
124

Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chaps. I and II.
126
Resolution 69/15, annex.
127
Resolution 69/137, annexes I and II.
128
A/57/304, annex.
125

466

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;129

2. Urges Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and other stakeholders to strengthen efforts
to improve the development of sustainable agricultural technologies and their transfer and dissemination under
mutually agreed terms to developing countries, especially the least developed countries, in particular at the bilateral
and regional levels, and to support national efforts to foster the utilization of local know-how and agricultural
technologies, promote agricultural technology research and access to knowledge and information through suitable
communication for development strategies and enable rural women, as well as men and youth, to increase
sustainable agricultural productivity, reduce post-harvest losses and enhance food and nutritional security;
3. Encourages international, regional and national efforts to strengthen capacity in developing countries,
especially that of smallholder and family farmers, in particular rural women and youth, in order to enhance the
productivity and nutritional quality of food crops and animal products, promote sustainable practices in pre-harvest
and post-harvest agricultural activities and enhance food security and nutrition-related programmes and policies that
take into consideration the specific needs of women, young children and youth, with particular attention to securing
the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour;
4. Calls upon Member States and relevant United Nations organizations and other stakeholders to
mainstream gender perspectives into agricultural policies and projects and to focus on closing the gender gap by,
inter alia, encouraging gender-balanced investments, in order to achieve equal access for women to labour-saving
technologies and agricultural technology information and know-how, equipment, decision-making forums and
associated agricultural resources to ensure that agriculture, food security and nutrition-related programmes and
policies take into consideration the specific needs of women and the barriers that women face in accessing
agricultural inputs and resources;
5. Encourages Governments to develop and implement youth-focused agricultural development projects
and programmes, including through training, education, financial inclusion services, including microcredit services,
and capacity-building, including with regard to innovation, in association with the private sector, in order to
stimulate the interest and the involvement of youth in agriculture;
6. Acknowledges the need to revitalize the agricultural sector, promote rural development and ensure food
security, notably in developing countries, in a sustainable manner, reaffirms the commitment to supporting
sustainable agriculture, forestry, fisheries and pastoralism and to taking action to fight hunger and malnutrition
among the urban poor, recognizes the enormous investment needs in those areas, and encourages increased public
and private investments;
7. Invites Governments and international organizations, in collaboration with cooperatives and cooperative
organizations, to promote, as appropriate, consistent with the rules of the World Trade Organization, the growth of
agricultural cooperatives through easy access to affordable finance, the adoption of sustainable production
techniques, investment in rural infrastructure and irrigation, strengthened marketing mechanisms, access to
appropriate risk management instruments and support for the participation of women and youth in economic
activities;
8. Underlines the importance of supporting and advancing research in improving and diversifying crop
varieties and seed systems, as well as supporting the establishment of sustainable agricultural systems and
management practices, such as conservation agriculture, animal disease control and integrated pest management, in
order to make agriculture more resilient and, in particular, to make crops and farm animals more tolerant to diseases,
pests and environmental stresses, including drought and climate change, in accordance with national regulations and
relevant international agreements;
9. Stresses the need to significantly reduce pre-harvest, post-harvest and other food losses and waste
throughout the food supply chain through, inter alia, improved production planning, the promotion of resourceefficient production and processing practices, improved preservation and packing technologies, improved
transportation and logistics management and enhanced awareness of purchasing and consumption habits, to help all
actors in the value chain to enjoy greater benefits;
_______________
129

A/70/298.

467

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Underlines the importance of the sustainable use and management of water resources to increase and
ensure agricultural productivity, and calls for further efforts to develop and strengthen irrigation facilities and watersaving technology;
11. Encourages Member States, civil society and public and private institutions to develop partnerships to
support financial and market services, including training, capacity-building, infrastructure and extension services,
and calls for further efforts by all stakeholders to include smallholder farmers, in particular rural women and youth,
in planning and taking decisions about making appropriate sustainable agricultural technologies and practices
accessible and affordable to them;
12. Recognizes the potential of information and communications technology as a tool for improving
agricultural productivity, practices and smallholder livelihoods, strengthening agricultural markets and institutions,
improving agricultural services, empowering farmer communities and connecting farmers in developing countries
to regional and global agricultural markets, and stresses the need to ensure the access of women and youth to
information and communication technology, especially in rural areas;
13. Calls upon Member States to include sustainable agricultural development as an integral part of their
national policies and strategies, notes the positive impact that North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation
can have in this regard, and urges the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to include elements of
agricultural technology, research and development in efforts to realize the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,130 with a focus on the research and development of technology that is affordable, durable and
sustainable and that can be easily used by and disseminated to smallholder farmers, in particular rural women;
14. Requests relevant United Nations organizations, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the International Fund for Agricultural Development, to promote, support and facilitate the
exchange of experience among Member States through, inter alia, guidance and other public goods related to ways
to augment sustainable agriculture and management practices, such as conservation agriculture, and to increase the
adaptive capacity of agriculture and the use of agricultural technologies that support more sustainable food systems
and have a positive impact on the entire value chain, including technology for post-harvest crop storage, processing,
handling and transportation, including in pressing environmental circumstances;
15. Underlines the instrumental role of agricultural technology, agricultural research and technology transfer
on mutually agreed terms and the sharing of knowledge and practices in furthering sustainable development and in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, calls, therefore, upon Member States and encourages relevant
international bodies to support sustainable agricultural research and development, and in this regard calls for
continued support to the international agricultural research system, including the Consortium of International
Agricultural Research Centers and other relevant international organizations and initiatives;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include the item entitled “Sustainable development”
in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the
revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/199
A/RE S/70 /199

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472, para. 42)131

70/199.

United Nations forest instrument

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2006/49 of 28 July 2006, in which the Council adopted the
global objectives on forests with the timeline for review in 2015,
_______________
130
131

468

Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling also General Assembly resolution 62/98 of 17 December 2007, in which the Assembly adopted the
non-legally binding instrument on all types of forests,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2015/33 of 22 July 2015, entitled “International
arrangement on forests beyond 2015”, adopted on the recommendation of the United Nations Forum on Forests at
its eleventh session,132
Taking note of the report of the Economic and Social Council for 2015 to the General Assembly,133
Decides to extend the timeline of the global objectives on forests to 2030, in line with the timeline of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development,134 and to rename the non-legally binding instrument on all types of forests
the United Nations forest instrument, recognizing that the voluntary, non-binding character of the forest instrument,
as set out in the principle embodied in paragraph 2 (a) of the instrument, remains unchanged.
RESOLUTION 70/200
A/RE S/70 /200

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472, para. 42)135

70/200.

Global Code of Ethics for Tourism

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/212 of 21 December 2001, 60/190 of 22 December 2005 and 65/148 of
20 December 2010,
Recalling also the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development136 and the Plan of Implementation
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),137 the outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, as
endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,138 as endorsed by the Assembly in its resolution 65/280 of 17 June
2011, the outcome document of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, entitled
“SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway”, as endorsed by the Assembly in its resolution 69/15
of 14 November 2014, and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014–2024, adopted at the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, as endorsed
by the Assembly in its resolution 69/137 of 12 December 2014,
Recalling further the Manila Declaration on World Tourism of 10 October 1980,139 the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development,140 Agenda 21 of 14 June 1992141 and the Amman Declaration on Peace through
Tourism of 11 November 2000,142
_______________
132

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 22 and corrigendum (E/2015/42 and Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. B.
133
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/70/3).
134
Resolution 70/1.
135
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Burundi, Chad, Colombia, Congo,
Cuba, Ethiopia, Georgia, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Madagascar, Morocco, Niger, Philippines,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Samoa, Senegal, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sudan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey and
Turkmenistan.
136
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
137
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
138
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
139
A/36/236, annex, appendix I.
140
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
141
Ibid., annex II.
142
A/55/640, annex.

469

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recognizing, inter alia, that well-designed and well-managed tourism can make a significant contribution to
the three dimensions of sustainable development, has close linkages to other sectors and can create decent jobs and
generate trade opportunities,
Recognizing also the important dimension and role of sustainable tourism as a positive instrument towards the
eradication of poverty, the protection of the environment and the improvement of the quality of life for all people, its
potential to make a contribution to the three dimensions of sustainable development, especially of developing
countries, and its emergence as a vital force for the promotion of international understanding, peace and prosperity,
Welcoming the adoption of the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production
patterns by the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012 and the launching of the
sustainable tourism programme of the framework, and encouraging further implementation through capacitybuilding projects and initiatives to support sustainable tourism,
Noting the importance of the Global Code of Ethics for Tourism, which outlines principles to guide tourism
development and to serve as a frame of reference for the various stakeholders in the tourism sector, with the
objective of minimizing the negative impact of tourism on the environment and on cultural heritage while
maximizing the benefits of tourism in promoting sustainable development, poverty alleviation and gender equality
as well as understanding among nations,
Taking note of resolution 668 (XXI), adopted by the General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization at
its twenty-first session, held in Medellin, Colombia, from 12 to 17 September 2015, on a draft convention on
tourism ethics,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;143

2. Welcomes the work of the World Tourism Organization and its World Committee on Tourism Ethics in
the implementation of the Global Code of Ethics for Tourism, as adopted by the General Assembly of the World
Tourism Organization in 1999;144
3. Encourages the World Tourism Organization, through its World Committee on Tourism Ethics, to
continue to promote and disseminate the Global Code of Ethics for Tourism and to monitor the implementation of
the ethical principles related to tourism by both the public and private sectors;
4. Welcomes the growing interest among Member States, especially among the States and territories
members of the World Tourism Organization, and their increasing institutional and legal commitment towards the
implementation of the Global Code of Ethics for Tourism, reiterates its invitation to those Member States and other
tourism stakeholders, in particular in the private sector, that have not yet done so to introduce, as appropriate, the
_______________
143
144

470

A/70/224.
See E/2001/61, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

principles of the Global Code into their relevant laws, regulations, professional practices and codes of conduct, and
in this regard expresses appreciation to those Member States and industry practitioners that have already done so;
5. Recognizes the need to promote the development of sustainable tourism, including non-consumptive
tourism and ecotourism, taking into account the spirit of the International Year of Ecotourism, 2002, the World
Ecotourism Summit, 2002, the Quebec Declaration on Ecotourism145 and the Global Code of Ethics for Tourism, so
as to increase the benefits from tourism resources for the population in host communities while maintaining the
cultures and the environmental integrity of those communities and enhancing the protection of ecologically sensitive
areas and of the natural heritage, and to promote the development of sustainable tourism and capacity-building in
order to contribute to the strengthening of rural and local communities, taking into account the need to address, inter
alia, the challenges of climate change, halting the loss of biodiversity, safeguarding cultural artefacts and promoting
respect for living culture, heritage and traditions;
6. Invites the States Members of the United Nations and other stakeholders to support the activities
undertaken by, inter alia, the World Tourism Organization for the promotion of responsible, sustainable and
universally accessible tourism, including in the context of capacity-building to promote the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals, that creates jobs and promotes local culture and products, including by
empowering women and youth and extending the benefits of tourism to all sectors of society, including the most
vulnerable and marginalized groups of the population, while minimizing its negative impact;
7. Recalls the related targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development146 which, inter alia, aim to
devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local culture and
products as well as develop tools to monitor sustainable development impacts for sustainable tourism;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution within his report related to sustainable tourism, in consultation with the
World Tourism Organization, and decides to include an item entitled “Global Code of Ethics for Tourism” in the
provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the
Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/201
A/RE S/70 /201

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.1, para. 9)147

70/201.

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December 2001, 57/253 and 57/270 A of
20 December 2002, 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 64/236 of 24 December 2009, 65/152 of 20 December 2010, 66/197
of 22 December 2011, 66/288 of 27 July 2012, 67/203 of 21 December 2012, 68/210 of 20 December 2013, 68/309
of 10 September 2014, 68/310 of 15 September 2014, 69/108 of 8 December 2014 and 69/214 of 19 December
2014 and all other relevant resolutions on the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal

_______________
145

A/57/343, annex.
Resolution 70/1.
147
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
146

471

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling its resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013 on the format and organizational aspects of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development and 68/1 of 20 September 2013 on the review of the implementation of
its resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,148 Agenda 21,149 the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,150 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development151 and the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation)152 and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”,153 as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing
for Development,154 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus,155 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,156 the key
actions for the further implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development,157 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action158 and the outcome document of the special
event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,159
Recalling further the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,160
Recalling the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024161
and the Vienna Declaration,162
_______________
148

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
149
Ibid., annex II.
150
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
151
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
152
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
153
Resolution 66/288, annex.
154
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
155
Resolution 63/239, annex.
156
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
157
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
158
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
159
Resolution 68/6.
160
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
161
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
162
Ibid., annex I.

472

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling also the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,163
Reaffirming the commitment to implementing Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, including the time-bound goals and targets, and the other
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals and the Sustainable
Development Goals, and reaffirming also other internationally agreed goals in the economic, social and
environmental fields since 1992, as well as the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development,
Recognizing that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge facing the world today and an
indispensable requirement for sustainable development, in particular for developing countries, and that although
each country has the primary responsibility for its own sustainable development and poverty eradication and that the
role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized, concerted and concrete measures are
required at all levels to enable developing countries to achieve their sustainable development goals related to the
internationally agreed poverty-related targets and goals, including those contained in Agenda 21, the relevant
outcomes of United Nations conferences and the United Nations Millennium Declaration,164
Reaffirming the need to further mainstream sustainable development at all levels, integrating economic, social
and environmental aspects and recognizing their interlinkages, so as to achieve sustainable development in all its
dimensions, and reiterating that sustainable development is a key element of the overarching framework for United
Nations activities,
Recognizing that eradicating poverty, changing unsustainable and promoting sustainable patterns of
consumption and production and protecting and managing the natural resource base of economic and social
development are the overarching objectives of and essential requirements for sustainable development,
Reaffirming the importance of freedom, peace and security, respect for all human rights, including the right to
development and the right to an adequate standard of living, as well as the right to food, the rule of law, gender
equality and women’s empowerment, and the overall commitment to just and democratic societies for development,
Reaffirming also the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030,165 adopted at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1. Reaffirms the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”,153 and urges its full implementation;
2. Stresses the importance of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and the resulting
processes for the elaboration of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development166 and for the realization of
sustainable development;
3. Recognizes in this regard that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development builds upon elements from
the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we
want”, inter alia: the establishment of the high-level political forum on sustainable development, the format and
organizational arrangements of which were later established by its resolution 67/290; a strengthened Economic and
Social Council, as later defined in its resolution 68/1; the process that led to the adoption of the Sustainable
Development Goals, as later defined in its resolutions 68/309 and 70/1; the strengthening of the science-policy
interface, including in the form of a global sustainable development report; and the process that led to the adoption
of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism;

_______________
163

Resolution 69/15, annex.
Resolution 55/2.
165
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
166
Resolution 70/1.
164

473

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development;167
5. Urges the speedy and effective implementation and the effective follow-up and review of the sustainable
development priorities for small island developing States identified in the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway163 and set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and reaffirms that small island
developing States remain a special case for sustainable development in view of their unique and particular
vulnerabilities;
6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy
for All,168 and requests the Secretary-General to provide, in consultation with Member States and other relevant
stakeholders, an updated report on the progress of the activities of the Decade, relevant activities within the United
Nations system and the long-term institutional administrative and financial arrangements and accountability
arrangements to Member States and other stakeholders of the Sustainable Energy for All initiative, for submission to
the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
7. Acknowledges the importance of the regional dimension of sustainable development, recognizes that
follow-up and review at the regional and subregional levels can, as appropriate, provide useful opportunities for peer
learning, including through voluntary reviews, the sharing of best practices and discussion on shared targets, and
notes that inclusive regional processes will draw on national-level reviews and contribute to follow-up and review at
the global level, including at the high-level political forum on sustainable development;
8. Recalls paragraph 5 of its resolution 67/203, in which it decided to review the arrangement to designate
the Economic and Social Council as the ad interim Member State body to receive reports from the board and the
secretariat of the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns, as
elaborated in the 10-year framework of programmes,169 as well as its resolutions 68/210 and 69/214 in this regard,
in order to reach a permanent arrangement, also recalls the interactive discussions on sustainable consumption and
production at the July 2014 and July 2015 meetings of the high-level political forum on sustainable development,
held under the auspices of the Council, and affirms that due consideration should continue to be given to sustainable
consumption and production at the meetings of the high-level political forum on sustainable development, held
under the auspices of the Council;
9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the mainstreaming of the three dimensions of
sustainable development throughout the United Nations system,170 reiterates the call of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development and in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development for the further
mainstreaming of the three dimensions throughout the United Nations system, and in this regard invites the
Secretary-General to continue to report to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, on
progress made, including for the consideration of the high-level political forum on sustainable development;
10. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Sustainable
development”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation
of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise
agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.

_______________
167

A/70/283.
A/70/422.
169
A/CONF.216/5, annex.
170
A/70/75-E/2015/55.
168

474

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/202
A/RE S/70 /202

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.2, para. 8)171

70/202.

Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration of Barbados172 and the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States,173 the Mauritius Declaration174 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,175
the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway)176 and the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),177
including chapter VII, on the sustainable development of small island developing States,
Reaffirming also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,178
Reaffirming further its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling the outcome documents and decisions of all United Nations conferences and processes related to the
sustainable development priorities of small island developing States, including the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030,179

_______________
171

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
173
Ibid., annex II.
174
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
175
Ibid., annex II.
176
Resolution 69/15, annex.
177
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
178
Resolution 66/288, annex.
179
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
172

475

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Welcoming the determination of all parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change180 to take ambitious action to decisively address the threat posed by climate change and related
environmental degradation by adopting a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force
under the Convention applicable to all parties that shall address, in a balanced manner, inter alia, mitigation,
adaptation, financing, technology development and transfer, capacity-building and transparency of action and
support,
Recalling its resolutions 67/206 of 21 December 2012, 67/290 of 9 July 2013, 68/1 of 20 September 2013,
69/15 of 14 November 2014, 69/217 of 19 December 2014 and 69/288 of 8 June 2015,
Reaffirming that small island developing States remain a special case for sustainable development, in view of
their unique and particular vulnerabilities, and that they remain constrained in meeting their goals in all three
dimensions of sustainable development, and recognizing the ownership and leadership of small island developing
States in overcoming some of these challenges, while stressing that, in the absence of international cooperation,
achieving success will remain difficult,
Welcoming the partnerships announced at, inter alia, the third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, held in Apia from 1 to 4 September 2014, by Governments, international and regional
organizations, the private sector, civil society and major groups, recognizing, in this regard, that international
cooperation and partnerships of various kinds and across a wide variety of stakeholders are critical for the
implementation of the sustainable development of small island developing States, and welcoming also the holding
of the informal partnership dialogue in New York on 25 June 2015,
Welcoming also the meetings of the high-level political forum on sustainable development under the auspices
of the Economic and Social Council, in particular the meeting on small island developing States under the theme
“The Samoa Pathway: translating vision to action” held on 1 July 2015,
Recognizing that it is crucial to mobilize resources from all sources for the effective implementation of the
Samoa Pathway,
Recognizing also that, in spite of the considerable efforts of small island developing States and the
mobilization of their limited resources, their progress in the attainment of the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and in implementing the Barbados Programme of Action and
the Mauritius Strategy has been uneven, that some have regressed economically and that a number of significant
challenges remain,
Welcoming the long-standing cooperation and support provided by the international community, which has
played an important role in helping small island developing States to make progress in addressing their
vulnerabilities and in supporting their sustainable development efforts, and recalling paragraph 19 of the Samoa
Pathway, which calls for strengthening this cooperation,
Reaffirming the need to mainstream sustainable development at all levels, integrating economic, social and
environmental aspects, and recognizing their interlinkages, so as to enable small island developing States to achieve
sustainable development in all its dimensions,
Recalling the positive contribution of the International Year of Small Island Developing States, 2014, which
concluded in February 2015, to raising global awareness of the sustainable development challenges faced by small
island developing States, as well as their rich culture and natural heritage,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;181

2. Reaffirms the outcome document of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,176 and urges its speedy and effective
implementation, as well as effective monitoring, follow-up and review;
_______________
180
181

476

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
A/70/269.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Welcomes the renewed commitment of the international community to take urgent and concrete action to
address the vulnerabilities of small island developing States and to continue to seek solutions, including additional
ones, to the major challenges facing them in a concerted manner in order to support the implementation of the
Samoa Pathway;
4. Recalls the sustainable development priorities for small island developing States identified in the Samoa
Pathway, and set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,182 and the outcome documents of all related
United Nations conferences and processes;
5. Acknowledges in this regard that small island developing States are committed to the implementation of
the Samoa Pathway and are mobilizing resources at the national and regional levels to that effect, despite their
limited resource base, and calls upon the international community to assist and support small island developing
States in the implementation of the Samoa Pathway, including by integrating its provisions into their national and
regional policies and development frameworks;
6. Urges all partners to integrate the Samoa Pathway into their respective cooperation frameworks,
programmes and activities, as appropriate, to ensure its effective follow-up and implementation;
7. Recalls the need to fully mainstream a gender perspective into all United Nations summits, conferences
and special sessions and their follow-up processes;
8. Calls upon the United Nations system, international and regional financial institutions and other
multilateral development partners to continue to support small island developing States in their efforts to implement
national sustainable development strategies and programmes by incorporating the priorities and activities of small
island developing States into their relevant strategic and programmatic frameworks, including through the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework process, at both the national and regional levels, in line with their
mandates and overall priorities;
9. Urges the full and effective implementation of the commitments and partnerships announced at the
Conference and the fulfilment of the provisions on all means of implementation, as contained in the Samoa
Pathway;
10. Welcomes the convening of the Ministerial Meeting on Food Security and Climate Adaptation in Small
Island Developing States, held in Milan, Italy, from 14 to 16 October 2015, takes note of the Milan Declaration on
Enhancing Food Security and Climate Adaptation in Small Island Developing States, in the framework of the
Samoa Pathway, and looks forward to the development of an action programme on food and nutrition challenges in
small island developing States, as requested in the Samoa Pathway and reiterated in the Milan Declaration;
11. Decides, in accordance with paragraph 101 of the Samoa Pathway and in line with the priorities of small
island developing States, to establish the Small Island Developing States Partnership Framework, to monitor and
ensure the full implementation of pledges and commitments through partnerships for small island developing States
in order to promote the effective and efficient follow-up to the existing partnerships, in particular new partnerships
launched at the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, and to encourage new, genuine
and durable partnerships for the sustainable development of small island developing States, and in this regard:
(a) To form a steering committee on partnerships for small island developing States that shall be open to all
States Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized agencies, chaired by one Member State that is
a small island developing State and one Member State that is not a small island developing State, to be appointed by
the President of the General Assembly, which shall meet on a regular basis, with interpretation services provided on
an as-available basis, to support the follow-up of existing and promote and advocate the launching of new small
island developing States partnerships; entities of the United Nations system, international and regional
organizations, major groups and other stakeholders will be invited to contribute, as appropriate; the Secretariat, in
particular the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the Office of the High Representative for the Least
Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, will provide a
_______________
182

Resolution 70/1.

477

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

supporting role to the steering committee; the first meeting of the committee should be held as soon as possible, and
no later than February 2016, when it will discuss, inter alia, the working methods of the committee;
(b) To request the Secretariat, in consultation with the steering committee, to organize, on an annual basis,
an action-oriented, results-focused, global multi-stakeholder small island developing States partnership dialogue,
with interpretation services provided on an as-available basis, which will provide opportunities for reviewing
progress made by existing partnerships, including, where applicable, inputs from regional and national partnership
dialogues, and for the sharing of good practices, lessons learned and challenges and solutions from small island
developing States partnerships, and encourage the launch of new partnerships for small island developing States, in
line with their priorities;
(c) To request the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to finalize a standardized partnership
reporting template and process, in consultation with the steering committee, which takes into account existing
reporting mechanisms and the need to minimize the reporting burden and ensures reporting coherence;
(d) To encourage regional multi-stakeholder small island developing States partnership dialogues through
existing forums and meetings, where applicable, and notably through the regional commissions, in close
collaboration with small island developing States and partners, for reviewing and providing policy
recommendations at the regional level;
(e) To encourage small island developing States to organize national multi-stakeholder small island
developing States partnership dialogues, which could contribute to the regional and global dialogues outlined above,
on a voluntary basis, according to their needs, priorities and circumstances, and to invite the United Nations
system and the international community, upon request, to support the efforts of small island developing States in
this regard;
(f) To encourage small island developing States partnerships to share experiences, including through the
established partnership reporting template and process, and to participate on a voluntary basis in national, regional
and global multi-stakeholder small island developing States partnership dialogues;
12. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to submit the complete results of the comprehensive review of United
Nations system support for small island developing States as an addendum to the report of the Secretary-General181
before the end of the seventieth session, in accordance with its resolution 69/288;
13. Underlines the need to give due consideration to the issues and concerns of small island developing
States in all relevant major United Nations conferences and processes;
14. Recalls paragraph 11 of its resolution 67/290, paragraph 123 of the Samoa Pathway and paragraph 16 of
its resolution 69/217, notes that the high-level political forum shall devote adequate time at its 2016 meeting and at
its future meetings to continuing to address the sustainable development challenges facing small island developing
States and the follow-up to and implementation of the Samoa Pathway, and encourages the high-level political
forum to devote sufficient attention to these discussions, bearing in mind that small island developing States are a
special case for sustainable development, as well as lessons learned from the follow-up and review processes of
previous conferences on small island developing States and their outcome documents;
15. Urges that effective linkages be made between the follow-up and review arrangements for the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and those of all relevant United Nations conferences and processes, including
the Samoa Pathway, in line with the 2030 Agenda;
16. Decides to consider, during its seventy-first session, the conduct of a midterm review, in 2019, on the
progress made in addressing the priorities of small island developing States through the implementation of the
Samoa Pathway;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Sustainable
development”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first
session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
478

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/203
A/RE S/70 /203

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.3, para. 13)183

70/203.

World Tsunami Awareness Day

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, adopted
at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, as endorsed by the General Assembly in
its resolution 69/283 of 3 June 2015, and recognizing that one of the priorities for action of the Sendai Framework is
an understanding of disaster risk for prevention and mitigation and for the development and implementation of
appropriate preparedness and effective response to disasters, which continue to undermine efforts to achieve
sustainable development,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling its resolution 69/219 of 19 December 2014 and reaffirming that, in 2009, the General Assembly
designated 13 October as the date to commemorate the International Day for Disaster Reduction,184
Recognizing the support for the creation of a World Tsunami Day, expressed in the Leaders’ Declaration of the
seventh Japan-Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting, held on 22 and 23 May 2015, and in the New Tokyo Strategy 2015
for Mekong-Japan Cooperation, adopted at the Seventh Mekong-Japan Summit on 4 July 2015,
Reaffirming its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for
the proclamation of international years/days, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, which state that an international
year/day should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
_______________
183

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Viet Nam and Yemen.
184
See resolution 64/200.

479

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Emphasizing that tsunamis have claimed many lives and caused tremendous damage and are a common
challenge for many countries, as was witnessed, inter alia, in Chile in 1960, in the Philippines in 1976, in Papua
New Guinea in 1998, in Turkey in 1999, in Peru in 2001, in the coastal States of the Indian Ocean in 2004, off the
coast of Samoa and Tonga in 2009 and in eastern Japan in 2011,
Recognizing the significance of preparedness and the prompt dissemination of information through early
warning systems, the use of traditional knowledge and the concept of “Building back better” in the recovery,
rehabilitation and reconstruction phases in order to protect the lives of people and prevent the damage caused by
tsunamis, as referred to in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,
1.

Decides to designate 5 November as World Tsunami Awareness Day;185

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, other international and regional
organizations, as well as civil society, including non-governmental organizations and individuals, to observe World
Tsunami Awareness Day in an appropriate manner and in accordance with national priorities, in order to raise public
awareness of the risk caused by tsunamis;
3. Requests the secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, in collaboration with
relevant organizations of the United Nations system, mindful of the provisions of the annex to Economic and Social
Council resolution 1980/67, to facilitate the observance of World Tsunami Awareness Day, and stresses that the cost
of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution should be met from voluntary
contributions.
RESOLUTION 70/204
A/RE S/70 /204

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.3, para. 13)186

70/204.

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/219 of 22 December 1999, 56/195 of 21 December 2001, 60/195 of 22 December
2005, 64/200 of 21 December 2009, 65/157 of 20 December 2010, 66/199 of 22 December 2011, 67/209 of
21 December 2012, 68/211 of 20 December 2013, 69/219 of 19 December 2014 and 69/283 and 69/284 of 3 June
2015, and taking into consideration all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,187 Agenda 21,188 the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,189 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development190 and the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),191 and reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”,192 in particular the decisions related to disaster risk reduction,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
_______________
185

The designation of 5 November comes from the “Inamura-no-hi” anecdote about a villager who, on 5 November 1854, at the expense
of his property, saved the lives of village inhabitants by setting fire to his sheaves of rice, thus quickly disseminating information about a
tsunami, leading to the evacuation of the village, which he then made an effort to build back better.
186
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
187
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
188
Ibid., annex II.
189
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
190
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
191
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
192
Resolution 66/288, annex.

480

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling that this new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes the importance of promoting
resilience and disaster risk reduction for sustainable development,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, among other things, seeks to develop and implement holistic
disaster risk management at all levels in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,193
Recalling also the Sendai Declaration194 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,
and expressing its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of Japan for hosting the Third United
Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, from 14 to 18 March 2015, and to the Member States that
provided all the necessary support,
Recognizing the need for a broader and a more people-centred preventive approach to disaster risk and that
disaster risk reduction practices need to be multi-hazard and multisectoral, inclusive and accessible in order to be
efficient and effective,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of disasters and their devastating impact in recent years,
which have resulted in massive loss of life and long-term negative economic, social and environmental
consequences for vulnerable societies throughout the world and which hamper the achievement of their sustainable
development, in particular in developing countries,
Underscoring that addressing climate change as one of the drivers of disaster risk, while respecting the
mandate of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,195 represents an opportunity to reduce
disaster risks in a meaningful and coherent manner throughout the interrelated intergovernmental processes,
Recognizing the adverse effects of climate change as contributors to environmental degradation and extreme
weather events, which may, in certain instances, among other factors, contribute to disaster-induced human mobility,
Recognizing also the outcome of the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015,
underscoring the commitment of all States to work for an ambitious and universal climate agreement, and
reaffirming that the protocol, another legal instrument or agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention
applicable to all parties shall address in a balanced manner, inter alia, mitigation, adaptation, finance, technology
development and transfer, capacity-building and transparency of action and support,
Reaffirming the importance of strengthening international cooperation in the face of disasters, weather-related
hazards, including the El Niño phenomenon, and the adverse effects of climate change to prevent major damage and
ensure an adequate response and attention to the affected populations in a timely manner in order to ensure
resilience to their impacts,
Recognizing that disaster-prone developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, small island
developing States, landlocked developing countries and African countries, as well as middle-income countries
_______________
193

Resolution 69/283, annex II.
Ibid., annex I.
195
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
194

481

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

facing specific challenges, warrant particular attention in view of their higher vulnerability and risk levels, which
often greatly exceed their capacity to respond to and recover from disasters, and recognizing also that similar
attention and appropriate assistance should also be extended to other disaster-prone countries with specific
characteristics, such as archipelagic countries, as well as countries with extensive coastlines,
Noting with appreciation the initiative of the Secretary-General to hold the World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May 2016, and noting the importance of giving due consideration to disaster risk
reduction and strengthening resilience at the Summit,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system, and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 69/219;196
2. Urges the effective implementation of the Sendai Declaration194 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030;193
3. Reiterates its call for the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health
and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities and
countries;
4. Also reiterates its call for the prevention of new and the reduction of existing disaster risk through the
implementation of integrated and inclusive economic, structural, legal, social, health, cultural, educational,
environmental, technological, political and institutional measures that prevent and reduce hazard exposure and
vulnerability to disaster, increase preparedness for response and recovery and thus strengthen resilience;
5. Stresses the importance of the continued substantive consideration of the issue of disaster risk reduction,
encourages countries, the relevant United Nations bodies and agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system and other relevant institutions and stakeholders to take into consideration the important role of
coordinated disaster risk reduction activities for, inter alia, the achievement of sustainable development, and in this
regard also encourages them to take into consideration the United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk
Reduction for Resilience in the coordination and elucidation of their respective activities, in the context of
sustainable development and according to the Sendai Framework;
6. Encourages focused action within and across sectors by countries at the local, national, regional and
global levels in the four priority areas of the Sendai Framework, namely, understanding disaster risk, strengthening
disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk, investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience and enhancing
disaster preparedness for effective response and to “build back better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction;
7. Calls upon all relevant actors to work towards the achievement of the seven global targets agreed in the
Sendai Framework;
8. Encourages Member States to give appropriate consideration to disaster risk reduction in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development197 where it is reflected across several Goals and
targets;
9. Reiterates its strong encouragement of and the need for effective coordination and coherence, as
applicable, between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development198 and the Sendai Framework, as well as the negotiations
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, while respecting
the respective mandates, in order to build synergies and resilience, and achieving the global goal of eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty;
_______________
196

A/70/282.
Resolution 70/1.
198
Resolution 69/313.
197

482

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Welcomes the commencement of the work of the open-ended intergovernmental expert working group
on indicators and terminology on disaster risk reduction, and looks forward to its outcomes, in coherence with the
work of the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Sustainable Development Goal Indicators;
11. Decides to give due consideration to the review of the global progress in the implementation of the
Sendai Framework as part of the integrated and coordinated follow-up processes to United Nations conferences and
summits, aligned with the Economic and Social Council, the high-level political forum on sustainable development
and the quadrennial comprehensive policy review cycles, as appropriate, taking into account the contributions of the
Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction and regional platforms for disaster risk reduction and the updated
monitoring tool based on the Hyogo Framework for Action Monitor;
12. Recognizes that, while each State has the primary responsibility for preventing and reducing disaster
risk, it is a shared responsibility between Governments and relevant stakeholders, and also recognizes that non-State
and other relevant stakeholders, including major groups, parliaments, civil society, the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement, non-governmental organizations, national platforms for disaster risk reduction, focal
points for the Sendai Framework, local government representatives, scientific institutions and the private sector, as
well as organizations and relevant agencies, programmes and funds of the United Nations system and other relevant
institutions and intergovernmental organizations, play an important role as enablers in providing support to States, in
accordance with national policies, laws and regulations, in the implementation of the Sendai Framework at the local,
national, regional and global levels;
13. Stresses the importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective and the perspectives of persons with
disabilities in disaster risk management so as to strengthen the resilience of communities and reduce social
vulnerabilities to disasters, and in this regard recognizes the need for the inclusive participation and contribution of
women, children, older persons, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, as well as the
role of youth, volunteers, migrants, local communities, academia, scientific and research entities and networks,
business, professional associations, private sector financing institutions and the media in all forums and processes
related to disaster risk reduction, in accordance with the Sendai Framework;
14. Encourages Governments to promote women’s full, equal and effective participation and leadership in
the design, management, resourcing and implementation of gender-sensitive disaster risk reduction policies, plans
and programmes;
15. Underlines the importance of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, the regional and
subregional platforms for disaster risk reduction and the thematic platforms in order to forge partnerships,
periodically assess progress on implementation and share practice and knowledge on disaster risk-informed policies,
programmes and investments, including on development, climate issues and disaster-induced human mobility, as
appropriate, as well as to promote the integration of disaster risk management in other relevant sectors; regional
intergovernmental organizations should play an important role in the regional platforms for disaster risk reduction;
16. Reaffirms that international cooperation for disaster risk reduction includes a variety of sources and is a
critical element in supporting the efforts of developing countries to reduce disaster risk;
17. Recognizes the scale of action needed at the national level, in particular, for the development of national
and local disaster risk reduction strategies and the establishment and strengthening of national disaster loss
databases, as well as the conduct of risk assessments, and reaffirms the need for the enhancement of the
implementation capacity and capability of developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, small
island developing States, landlocked developing countries and African countries, as well as middle-income
countries facing specific challenges, including the mobilization of support through international cooperation, for the
provision of means of implementation, in accordance with their national priorities;
18. Acknowledges the importance of the work of the agencies, programmes and funds of the United Nations
system and other relevant institutions in disaster risk reduction, the substantial increase in demands on the United
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction and the need for timely, stable and predictable resources necessary for
supporting the implementation of the Sendai Framework;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, to review the requirements for the United Nations system
to support the implementation of the Sendai Framework and to include the findings in his report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session, as requested in paragraph 22 of the present resolution, within existing
resources;
483

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

20. Recognizes the continued importance of voluntary funding, and urges donors to continue to provide
sufficient funding to the United Nations Trust Fund for Disaster Reduction to support the implementation of the
Sendai Framework, including through the contribution of unearmarked funds;
21. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Sustainable
development”, a sub-item entitled “Disaster risk reduction” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session,
unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/205
A/RE S/70 /205

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.4, para. 8)199

70/205.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 43/53 of 6 December 1988, 54/222 of 22 December 1999, 62/86 of 10 December
2007, 63/32 of 26 November 2008, 64/73 of 7 December 2009, 65/159 of 20 December 2010, 66/200 of
22 December 2011, 67/210 of 21 December 2012, 68/212 of 20 December 2013 and 69/220 of 19 December 2014,
and other resolutions and decisions relating to the protection of the global climate for present and future generations
of humankind,
Noting that the content of the present resolution does not prejudge the outcome of the twenty-first session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Paris from
30 November to 13 December 2015,
Welcoming the convening of the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention,
underscoring the commitment of all States to work for an ambitious and universal climate agreement, and
reaffirming that any protocol, other legal instrument or agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention
applicable to all parties shall address in a balanced manner, inter alia, mitigation, adaptation, finance, technology
development and transfer, capacity-building and transparency of action and support,
Acknowledging that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change200 is the primary
international, intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global response to climate change, expressing
determination to address decisively the threat posed by climate change and environmental degradation, recognizing
that the global nature of climate change calls for the widest possible international cooperation aimed at accelerating
the reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions and addressing adaptation to the adverse impacts of climate
change, and noting with grave concern the significant gap between the aggregate effect of parties’ mitigation
pledges in terms of global annual emissions of greenhouse gases by 2020 and aggregate emission pathways,
consistent with having a likely chance of holding the increase in global average temperature below 2 degrees
Celsius, or 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels,
Recalling the objectives, principles and provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change,
Noting the reiteration by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention that the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action shall be guided by the principles of the Convention,

_______________
199
200

484

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,201 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development202 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation),203 the 2005 World Summit Outcome,204 the outcomes of the thirteenth to twentieth
sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and of
the third to tenth sessions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol, the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, adopted at the
Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in Istanbul, Turkey, from 9 to 13 May
2011,205 the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,206 the
Mauritius Declaration207 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States208 and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway,209
Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,210
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Taking note of the successful and timely initial resource mobilization process of the Green Climate Fund,
making it the largest dedicated climate fund and enabling it to start its activities in supporting developing country
parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
Noting the need for enhanced coordination and cooperation at all levels among the parties to and secretariats
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the United Nations Convention to Combat

_______________
201

Resolution 55/2.
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
203
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
204
Resolution 60/1.
205
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
206
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
207
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
208
Ibid., annex II.
209
Resolution 69/15, annex.
210
Resolution 66/288, annex.
202

485

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,211
and the Convention on Biological Diversity,212 as appropriate, while respecting their individual mandates,
1. Reaffirms that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time, expresses profound alarm
that the emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise globally, remains deeply concerned that all countries,
particularly developing countries, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change and are already
experiencing an increase in such impacts, including persistent drought and extreme weather events, land
degradation, sea-level rise, coastal erosion and ocean acidification, further threatening food security and efforts to
eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development, and in this regard emphasizes that mitigation of and
adaptation to climate change represent an immediate and urgent global priority;
2. Notes the determination of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change at its eighteenth session, expressed in its decision 2/CP.18,213 to adopt a protocol, another legal
instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all parties at its twenty-first
session, and for it to come into effect and be implemented from 2020;
3. Takes note of the outcome of the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and of the tenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving
as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, hosted by the Government of Peru in Lima from
1 to 14 December 2014;214
4. Recalls in particular the invitation of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its nineteenth
session, expressed in its decision 1/CP.19,215 to all parties to initiate or intensify domestic preparations for their
intended nationally determined contributions, without prejudice to the legal nature of the contributions, in the
context of adopting a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention
applicable to all parties towards achieving the objective of the Convention, as set out in its article 2, that will
represent a progression beyond the current undertaking of each party;
5. Welcomes the submission of intended nationally determined contributions from more than 170 parties,
takes note of the synthesis report on the aggregate effect of such contributions216 by the secretariat of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, taking into account that some intended nationally determined
contributions were communicated after the submission of the report, and notes the need for further actions;
6. Reiterates the resolve of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, as set out in paragraphs 3 and
4 of its decision 1/CP.19, to accelerate the full implementation of the decisions constituting the agreed outcome
pursuant to its decision 1/CP.13217 and to enhance ambition in the pre-2020 period in order to ensure the highest
possible mitigation efforts under the Convention by all parties;
7. Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change on the United Nations Climate Change Conference held in Lima from 1 to 14 December 2014;218
8. Also takes note of decision 2/CP.20 adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its
twentieth session, held in Lima from 1 to 14 December 2014, on the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and
Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts;219
9. Further takes note of the invitation of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention to parties to
communicate their intended nationally determined contributions in a manner that facilitates the clarity, transparency
and understanding thereof;
_______________
211

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
213
See FCCC/CP/2012/8/Add.1.
214
FCCC/CP/2014/10/Add.1–3 and FCCC/KP/CMP/2014/9/Add.1.
215
See FCCC/CP/2013/10/Add.1.
216
FCCC/CP/2015/7.
217
See FCCC/CP/2007/6/Add.1.
218
A/70/230, sect. I.
219
See FCCC/CP/2014/10/Add.2.
212

486

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Notes the work undertaken by the Lima-Paris Action Agenda, with a view to galvanizing action to
address climate change;
11. Notes with appreciation the hosting by the Government of France of the twenty-first session of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention and the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the
Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015;
12. Welcomes the offer by the Government of Morocco to host the twenty-second session of the Conference
of the Parties to the Convention in 2016;
13. Urges Member States to promote the integration of a gender perspective into environmental and climate
change policies and to strengthen mechanisms and provide adequate resources towards achieving the full and equal
participation of women in decision-making at all levels on environmental issues;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, as a follow-up to paragraph 96 of the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,210 to submit an action plan for the
Secretariat that will be designed to work within existing procurement rules and policies aimed at integrating
sustainable development practices into its operations and facilities management, building on existing efforts and
promoting cost-effectiveness, and in accordance with legislative frameworks, including financial rules and
regulations, while maintaining accountability to Member States, with the specific goal of a United Nations that does
not, through its operations or facilities management, have a negative impact on the climate, as soon as possible, or
by 2020, if practicable;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to make provisions for the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention and its subsidiary bodies in his proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019;
16. Invites the secretariat of the Convention to report, through the Secretary-General, to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session on the work of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, and decides to
include, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Protection of global climate for
present and future generations of humankind” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise
agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/206
A/RE S/70 /206

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.5, para. 8)220

70/206.

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/221 of 19 December 2014, as well as other resolutions relating to the
implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,221
Recalling also its request, in its resolution 69/221, that the Secretary-General submit to the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session a report on the implementation of the United Nations Decade for Deserts and the Fight
against Desertification (2010–2020),
Recalling further that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development recognized the need for
urgent action to reverse land degradation and, in view of this, for striving to achieve a land-degradation-neutral
world in the context of sustainable development,

_______________
220
221

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.

487

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling that, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the international community
should combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including land affected by desertification, drought and
floods, and strive to achieve a land-degradation-neutral world by 2030,
Noting that, in striving to achieve target 15.3 of Goal 15 of the Sustainable Development Goals, it is also
important to address wider elements of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including ending poverty
and hunger, tackling inequality, empowering women and stimulating economic growth,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Noting in this regard that combating desertification, land degradation and drought, including through
sustainable land management, can contribute to easing forced migration flows influenced by a number of factors,
including economic, social, security and environmental concerns, which can, in turn, reduce current and potential
fighting over resources in degraded areas,
Recognizing that land degradation increases the risk of hunger and undernutrition and poses serious threats to
human societies, ecosystems and peace and stability,
Acknowledging that striving to achieve land degradation neutrality would significantly contribute to the three
dimensions of sustainable development through the rehabilitation, restoration, conservation and sustainable
management of land resources, and that this could potentially involve the development of voluntary national targets,
Noting that desertification, land degradation, drought and climate change are closely related and that, if not
addressed, they would pose a serious challenge to sustainable development for all countries, in particular developing
countries,
Noting also that a significant proportion of land degradation occurs beyond arid, semi-arid and dry
subhumid areas,
Expressing its deep appreciation and gratitude to the Government of Turkey for hosting the twelfth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, held in Ankara from 12 to
23 October 2015,
Concerned by extreme weather phenomena and their devastating consequences, especially in arid, semi-arid
and dry subhumid regions, including recurrent and long spells of drought, flooding and increasing frequency and
severity of dust storms and sandstorms, and their negative impact on the environment and the economy,
Emphasizing the need to promote sustainable land management, sustainable forest management and the
restoration of degraded lands in order to combat desertification, land degradation and drought,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa;222
_______________
222

488

A/70/230, sect. II.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Welcomes the outcomes of the twelfth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa;
3. Encourages developed countries party to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in
Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,221 to actively support
the efforts of developing countries party to the Convention in promoting sustainable land management practices and
in seeking to achieve land degradation neutrality, by providing substantial financial resources, facilitated access to
appropriate technology and other forms of support, including through capacity-building measures;
4. Also encourages developed countries party to the Convention, and invites other countries in a position to
do so, multilateral financial institutions, the private sector, civil society organizations and technical and financial
institutions, to:
(a) Provide scientific, technical and financial assistance to help affected countries party to the Convention
requesting assistance to set and achieve voluntary land degradation neutrality targets and to implement sustainable
land management practices and land degradation neutrality initiatives;
(b) Establish equitable partnerships that encourage responsible and sustainable investments and practices by
the private sector, which contribute to achieving land degradation neutrality that supports the health and productivity
of the land and its people;
5. Invites parties affected by desertification, land degradation and drought to scale up their efforts, using
available internal and external resources, for the implementation of their national action programmes, as
appropriate;
6. Reiterates that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development reaffirmed women’s vital
role and their full and equal participation and leadership in all areas of sustainable development, and in this regard
invites donors and international organizations, including the organizations of the United Nations system, as well as
the international financial institutions, regional banks and major groups, including the private sector, to fully
integrate their commitments and their considerations on gender equality and women’s empowerment and to ensure
the participation of women and effective gender mainstreaming in their decision-making in combating
desertification, land degradation and drought;
7. Requests the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, and appropriate bodies of the
Convention, within the scope of the Convention, to improve the effectiveness of collaboration with the secretariats
of the other Rio conventions and other partners at the national and, as appropriate, subnational levels to support the
implementation, monitoring and follow-up of voluntary land degradation neutrality targets and initiatives;
8. Invites the secretariat of the Convention to take the initiative and invite other relevant agencies and
stakeholders, such as United Nations agencies, international organizations, financial institutions, civil society
organizations and the private sector, to seek cooperation to achieve target 15.3 of Goal 15 of the Sustainable
Development Goals;
9. Reiterates that degraded land, if recovered, would, inter alia, contribute to restoring natural resources,
thus potentially improving food security and nutrition in the affected countries and, in the process, could, inter alia,
contribute to the absorption of carbon emissions;
10. Decides to include, in the United Nations calendar of conferences and meetings for the biennium 2016–
2017, the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention and its subsidiary bodies envisaged for the
biennium, and requests the Secretary-General to make provisions for the sessions of the Conference of the Parties
and its subsidiary bodies in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Sustainable
development”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa” in the provisional
agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second
Committee.
489

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/207
A/RE S/70 /207

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.6, para. 9)223

70/207.

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to
sustainable development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 64/203 of 21 December 2009, 65/161 of 20 December 2010, 66/202 of 22 December
2011, 67/212 of 21 December 2012, 68/214 of 20 December 2013 and 69/222 of 19 December 2014 and its
previous resolutions relating to the Convention on Biological Diversity,224
Recalling also the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992,225 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,226 the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development227 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)228 and the outcome document of the special event
to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals convened by the President of the
General Assembly,229
Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,230 and, inter alia, the commitments concerning biodiversity contained therein,
Reaffirming also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development231 and its principles,
Reaffirming further its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that the objectives of the Convention, to be pursued in accordance with its relevant provisions, are
the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of
_______________
223

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
225
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annexes I and II.
226
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
227
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
228
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
229
Resolution 68/6.
230
Resolution 66/288, annex.
231
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
224

490

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources,
by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to
technologies, and by appropriate funding,
Reaffirming the intrinsic value of biological diversity, as well as the ecological, genetic, social, economic,
scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of biological diversity and its critical role in
maintaining ecosystems that provide essential services, which are critical foundations for sustainable development
and human well-being,
Recognizing that the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention is crucial for sustainable
development, poverty eradication and the improvement of human well-being and a major factor underpinning the
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law,
States have the sovereign right to exploit their own resources pursuant to their own environmental policies and the
responsibility to ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment of
other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
Recalling that, in its resolution 65/161, the General Assembly declared 2011–2020 the United Nations Decade
on Biodiversity, with a view to contributing to the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020,232
Recognizing that the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous peoples and local
communities make an important contribution to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and that their
wider application can support social well-being and sustainable livelihoods,
Taking note of the decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological
Diversity at its twelfth meeting entitled “Article 8 (j) and related provisions”,233
Recalling the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples234 and the outcome document
of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples,235
Recognizing the vital role that women play in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, and
reaffirming the need for the full participation of women at all levels of policymaking and implementation for the
conservation of biological diversity,
Recognizing also the important role of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora,236 an international agreement that stands at the intersection between trade, the environment and
development, promotes the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, should contribute to tangible benefits
for local people and ensures that no species entering into international trade is threatened with extinction,
recognizing further the economic, social and environmental impacts of poaching and of illicit trafficking in wildlife,
where firm and strengthened action needs to be taken on both the supply and demand sides, emphasizing in this
regard the importance of effective international cooperation among relevant multilateral environmental agreements
and international organizations, and further stressing the importance of basing the listing of species on agreed
criteria,
Noting the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, at its tenth
meeting, of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
Arising from Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity,237 and acknowledging the role of access to
genetic resources and equitable benefit-sharing arising from their utilization in contributing to the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity, poverty eradication and environmental sustainability and, thereby, to the
achievement of sustainable development,
_______________
232

United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/2, annex.
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/29, decision XII/12.
234
Resolution 61/295, annex.
235
Resolution 69/2.
236
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
237
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/1.
233

491

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting also that 91 States and 1 regional economic integration organization have signed and that 68 States and
1 regional economic integration organization that are parties to the Convention have deposited their instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the Nagoya Protocol, and noting in this regard that the Protocol
entered into force on 12 October 2014,
Noting further that the Nagoya Protocol, the objective of which is the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits
arising from the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources, by appropriate
transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by
appropriate funding, contributes to the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its
components,
Noting that 195 States and 1 regional economic integration organization are parties to the Convention and that
169 States and 1 regional economic integration organization are parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the
Convention on Biological Diversity,238
Noting also that 50 States and 1 regional economic integration organization have signed and that 32 States and
1 regional economic integration organization that are parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety have deposited
their instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary
Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety,239
Recalling the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its ninth meeting of the strategy
for resource mobilization in support of the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention,240 as well as
decision X/3, adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its tenth meeting,241 on the review of its implementation,
and the targets for resource mobilization, under Aichi Target 20 of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020,
adopted by the Conference of the Parties in its decision XII/3,242
Noting the outcomes of the twelfth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, the seventh
meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol and the first
meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Nagoya Protocol, all held in
Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea, in 2014,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological Diversity;243

2. Notes with appreciation the entry into force of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and
the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological
Diversity237 on 12 October 2014;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the Gangwon Declaration on Biodiversity for Sustainable Development,
adopted at the high-level segment of the twelfth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention;
4. Encourages the respective parties, in close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, to take concrete
measures towards achieving the objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity224 and the Nagoya Protocol,
requests the parties, in close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, to coherently and efficiently implement the
obligations and commitments under the Convention and the Protocol, and in this regard emphasizes the need to
comprehensively address at all levels the difficulties that impede their full implementation;
5. Recognizes that the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity can significantly contribute to
disaster risk reduction and to reducing the adverse impacts of climate change, including by adding resilience to
fragile ecosystems and making them less vulnerable;
6. Urges the parties to the Convention to facilitate the transfer of technology for the effective
implementation of the Convention in accordance with its provisions, in this regard takes note of the strategy for the
practical implementation of the programme of work on technology transfer and scientific and technical cooperation
_______________
238

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2226, No. 30619.
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/BS/COP-MOP/5/17, annex, decision BS-V/11.
240
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I, decision IX/11.
241
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
242
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/29, sect. I.
243
A/70/230, sect. III.
239

492

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

developed by the Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group on Technology Transfer and Scientific and Technological
Cooperation, as well as of decision XI/2, entitled “Review of progress in implementation of national biodiversity
strategies and action plans and related capacity-building support to parties”,244 and also takes note of the relevant
decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its twelfth meeting in this regard;242
7. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the secretariat of the Convention, parties to the Convention
and the Global Environment Facility, as the financial mechanism of the Convention, in conjunction with United
Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, as well as other entities, in organizing capacitybuilding workshops to support countries in the updating of national biodiversity strategies and action plans, with a
view to enhancing capacity and addressing the need for human, technical and financial resources to implement the
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020232 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets,232 adopted by the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention at its tenth meeting, in particular for developing countries;
8. Urges parties to promote the mainstreaming of gender considerations, taking into account the 2015–
2020 Gender Plan of Action under the Convention on Biological Diversity,245 in developing, implementing and
revising their national and, where appropriate, regional biodiversity strategies and action plans and equivalent
instruments in implementing the three objectives of the Convention;
9. Calls upon Governments and all stakeholders to take appropriate measures to mainstream consideration
of the socioeconomic impacts and benefits of the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and its
components, as well as ecosystems that provide essential services, into relevant programmes and policies at all
levels, in accordance with national legislation, circumstances and priorities;
10. Reaffirms the importance of continuing to pursue more efficient and coherent implementation of the
three objectives of the Convention, and calls upon parties and stakeholders to strengthen international cooperation
measures for the fulfilment of obligations contained in the Convention, including through addressing
implementation gaps, in particular with regard to article 15 of the Convention;
11. Also reaffirms the importance of the achievement of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and the
implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 by the parties to the Convention;
12. Recognizes that parties to the Convention have reiterated that resources, financial, human and technical,
need to be mobilized from all sources, and that this should be balanced with the effective implementation of the
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020, stresses the need for further consideration of the evaluation of all
resources mobilized in terms of the biodiversity outcomes achieved, and in this regard welcomes the decision of the
parties to the Convention on an overall substantial increase in total biodiversity-related funding for the
implementation of the Strategic Plan from a variety of sources, including national and international resource
mobilization, international cooperation and the exploration of new and innovative financial mechanisms, and takes
note of the decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its twelfth meeting in this regard;
13. Invites countries that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the Convention;
14. Invites parties to the Convention to ratify or accede to the Nagoya Protocol, and invites the Executive
Secretary of the Convention and the Global Environment Facility, within its mandate as the financial mechanism of
the Convention, in collaboration with relevant organizations, to continue to support capacity-building and
development activities to support the ratification and implementation of the Protocol;
15. Also invites parties to the Convention to consider, as appropriate, ratifying or acceding to the Cartagena
Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity;238
16. Invites parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to consider, as appropriate, ratifying or acceding to
the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety;239
17. Takes note of the work done by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Intersessional Working Group on Article 8 (j) and
Related Provisions, and in this regard invites the secretariat of the Convention, through the Secretary-General, to report
on the progress made when reporting on the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly;
_______________
244
245

See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/11/35, annex I.
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/29, decision XII/7, annex.

493

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

18. Stresses the importance of mainstreaming biodiversity in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development246 as part of national implementation plans for the Sustainable Development Goals, in
particular all biodiversity-related Goals and targets;
19. Takes note of the third plenary meeting of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, which aims to provide the best available policy-relevant information on
biodiversity to assist decision makers;
20. Stresses the importance of the engagement of the private sector and other stakeholders in the
implementation of the three objectives of the Convention and in the achievement of the biodiversity targets, invites
them to align their policies and practices more explicitly with the objectives of the Convention, including through
partnerships, in accordance with national legislation, circumstances and priorities, and in this regard stresses the
importance of the ongoing work of the Global Partnership on Business and Biodiversity;
21. Notes the ongoing work of the Joint Liaison Group of the secretariats and offices of the relevant
subsidiary bodies of the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,247
and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change248 (the Rio conventions) and the Liaison Group
of Biodiversity-related Conventions, acknowledges the importance of improving coherence in the implementation
of those conventions, recognizes the importance of enhancing synergies among the biodiversity-related conventions,
without prejudice to their specific objectives, and encourages the conferences of the parties to the biodiversityrelated multilateral environmental agreements to consider strengthening efforts in this regard, taking into account
relevant experiences and bearing in mind the respective independent legal status and mandates of those instruments;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, including progress in the implementation of the Convention and the
Aichi Biodiversity Targets and difficulties encountered in the process of their implementation, and decides to
include, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Convention on Biological
Diversity” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the
revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/208
A/RE S/70 /208

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.7, para. 8)249

70/208.

Harmony with Nature

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,250 Agenda 21,251 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,252 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development253 and the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),254

_______________
246

Resolution 70/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
248
Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.
249
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
250
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
251
Ibid., annex II.
252
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
253
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
254
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
247

494

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,255
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling its resolutions 64/196 of 21 December 2009, 65/164 of 20 December 2010, 66/204 of 22 December
2011, 67/214 of 21 December 2012, 68/216 of 20 December 2013 and 69/224 of 19 December 2014 on Harmony
with Nature and its resolution 63/278 of 22 April 2009, by which it designated 22 April as International Mother
Earth Day,
Recalling also the 1982 World Charter for Nature,256
Noting the interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on Harmony with Nature, held on 27 April 2015 to
commemorate International Mother Earth Day, on the promotion of the balanced integration of the economic, social
and environmental dimensions of sustainable development through Harmony with Nature,
Recognizing that planet Earth and its ecosystems are our home and that “Mother Earth” is a common
expression in a number of countries and regions, noting that some countries recognize the rights of nature in the
context of the promotion of sustainable development, and expressing the conviction that, in order to achieve a just
balance among the economic, social and environmental needs of present and future generations, it is necessary to
promote harmony with nature,
Noting that, in promoting a holistic approach to achieving sustainable development in harmony with nature,
Earth system science plays a significant role,
Expressing concern about documented environmental degradation, potentially more frequent and intense
natural disasters and the negative impact on nature resulting from human activity, and recognizing the need to
strengthen scientific knowledge on the effects of human activities on the Earth systems, with the aim of promoting
and ensuring an equitable, balanced and sustainable relationship with the Earth,
Taking note of the Peoples’ World Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth, hosted by
the Plurinational State of Bolivia in Cochabamba from 20 to 22 April 2010,257
Recognizing that a number of countries consider Mother Earth the source of all life and nourishment and that
these countries consider Mother Earth and humankind to be an indivisible, living community of interrelated and
interdependent beings,
Noting that in recent years there have been many initiatives on sustainable development governance, including
policy documents on living well in harmony with nature,
Taking note of the conceptual framework of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity
and Ecosystem Services,258
Recognizing that gross domestic product was not designed as an indicator for measuring environmental
degradation resulting from human activity and the need to overcome this limitation with regard to sustainable
development and the work carried out in this regard,
_______________
255

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Resolution 37/7, annex.
257
See A/64/777, annexes I and II.
258
IPBES/2/17.
256

495

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing also the uneven availability of basic statistical data under the three dimensions of sustainable
development and the need to improve their quality and quantity,
Reaffirming that fundamental changes in the way societies produce and consume are indispensable for
achieving global sustainable development and that all countries should promote sustainable consumption and
production patterns, with the developed countries taking the lead and with all countries benefiting from the process,
taking into account the Rio principles,
Recognizing that many ancient civilizations, indigenous peoples and indigenous cultures have a rich history of
understanding the symbiotic connection between human beings and nature that fosters a mutually beneficial
relationship,
Recognizing also the work undertaken by civil society, academia and scientists in regard to signalling the
precariousness of life on Earth, as well as their efforts, along with those of Governments and private sector
organizations, to devise more sustainable models and methods for production and consumption,
Considering that sustainable development is a holistic concept that requires the strengthening of
interdisciplinary linkages in the different branches of knowledge,
1.

Takes note of the sixth report of the Secretary-General;259

2. Decides to initiate, in 2016, a virtual dialogue on Harmony with Nature among, inter alia, experts on
Earth jurisprudence worldwide, including those who have been active in the interactive dialogues of the General
Assembly, in order to inspire citizens and societies to reconsider how they interact with the natural world in order to
implement the Sustainable Development Goals in harmony with nature, noting that some countries recognize the
rights of nature in the context of the promotion of sustainable development, and requests that the experts submit a
summary to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session and that the virtual dialogue be hosted on the website
on Harmony with Nature;
3. Also decides to continue observing International Mother Earth Day annually on 22 April, requests the
Secretary-General to provide continuing support, and encourages Member States to observe the International Day at
the national level;
4. Invites Member States to consider existing studies and reports on Harmony with Nature, including the
follow-up to the discussions at the interactive dialogues of the General Assembly, such as the dialogue held on
27 April 2015 on the promotion of the balanced integration of the economic, social and environmental dimensions
of sustainable development through Harmony with Nature;
5. Decides to put on hold the issue of the timing of an inclusive and interactive dialogue of the General
Assembly on Harmony with Nature, pending the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee;
6. Recalls its resolutions requesting that the Secretary-General establish a trust fund for the participation of
independent experts in these interactive dialogues, and in this regard invites Member States and other relevant
stakeholders to consider contributing to the trust fund once it is established;
7. Also recalls the launching of the Harmony with Nature website during the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development by the secretariat of the Conference and the Division for Sustainable Development of
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
use the website maintained by the Division to gather information and contributions on ideas and activities to
promote a holistic approach to sustainable development in harmony with nature and to advance the integration of
interdisciplinary scientific work, including success stories on the use of traditional knowledge and on existing
national legislation;
8. Calls for holistic and integrated approaches to sustainable development, in its three dimensions, that will
guide humanity to live in harmony with nature and lead to efforts to restore the health and integrity of the Earth’s
ecosystems;
_______________
259

496

A/70/268.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

9.

Invites States:

(a) To further build up a knowledge network in order to advance a holistic conceptualization of sustainable
development in its three dimensions to identify different economic approaches that reflect the drivers and values of
living in harmony with nature, relying on current scientific information to achieve sustainable development, and to
facilitate the support and recognition of the fundamental interconnections between humanity and nature;
(b) To promote harmony with the Earth, as found in indigenous cultures, to learn from those cultures and to
provide support for and promote efforts being made from the national level down to the local community level to
reflect the protection of nature;
10. Encourages all countries to develop and strengthen the quality and quantity of basic national statistical
data on the three dimensions of sustainable development, and invites the international community and the pertinent
bodies of the United Nations system to assist the efforts of developing countries by providing capacity-building and
technical support;
11. Recognizes the need for broader measures of progress to complement gross domestic product in order to
better inform policy decisions, and in this regard notes the ongoing work of the Statistical Commission on a work
programme to develop broader measures of progress and to conduct a technical review of existing efforts in
this area;260
12. Decides to include, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Harmony
with Nature” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the
revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/209
A/RE S/70 /209

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.8, para. 8)261

70/209.

United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (2005–2014)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/211 of 19 December 2014 and other previous resolutions on the United Nations
Decade of Education for Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also the commitment made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to ensure inclusive
and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all,
Reaffirming further the commitment made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to ensure that all
learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development, including, among others,
through education for sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion
of a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of culture’s
contribution to sustainable development,
_______________
260
261

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 4 (E/2013/24), chap. I, sect. C, decision 44/114.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

497

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Acknowledging the importance for achieving sustainable development of delivering quality education to all
girls and boys, which will require reaching children living in extreme poverty, children with disabilities, migrant and
refugee children and those in conflict and post-conflict situations and providing safe, non-violent, inclusive and
effective learning environments for all, and recognizing the importance of scaling up investments and international
cooperation to allow all children to complete free, equitable, inclusive and quality early childhood, primary and
secondary education, including through scaling up and strengthening initiatives, such as the Global Partnership for
Education, and by upgrading education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and increasing the
percentage of qualified teachers in developing countries, including through international cooperation, especially in
the least developed countries and small island developing States,
Acknowledging also the importance of adopting science, technology and innovation strategies as integral
elements of national sustainable development strategies to help to strengthen knowledge-sharing and collaboration
and the importance of scaling up investment in science, technology, engineering and mathematics education and
enhancing technical, vocational and tertiary education and training and of ensuring equal access for women and girls
and encouraging their participation therein,
Acknowledging further the importance of education for achieving sustainable development, including in the
context of the Millennium Development Goals, Agenda 21,262 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),263 the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, the World Conference on Education for Sustainable Development, organized by the Government of
Japan and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, held in Aichi-Nagoya, Japan, from
10 to 12 November 2014, the World Education Forum 2015, held in Incheon, Republic of Korea, from 19 to
22 May 2015, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Education 2030 Framework for Action,
adopted on 4 November 2015 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization during its thirty-eighth session,
Noting the key findings contained in the review of the implementation of the United Nations Decade of
Education for Sustainable Development, 2005–2014, prepared by the Director General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,264 the challenges outlined therein and the recommendations for
the realization of the full potential of the Decade,
Noting also the Global Action Programme on Education for Sustainable Development as follow-up to the
United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development after 2014,265 the Aichi-Nagoya Declaration on
Education for Sustainable Development,266 adopted at the World Conference on Education for Sustainable
Development, and the Incheon Declaration of the World Education Forum 2015,267
Recognizing the importance of promoting a holistic approach to education for sustainable development and of
encouraging the reinforcement of the interdisciplinary linkages of the three pillars of sustainable development,
economic, social and environmental, including different branches of knowledge,

_______________
262

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
263
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
264
A/70/228.
265
See A/69/76.
266
A/70/228, annex.
267
Incheon Declaration: Education 2030: Towards inclusive and equitable quality education and lifelong learning for all.

498

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing also the role of education for sustainable development in promoting and enhancing public
awareness of the eradication of poverty, of sustainable consumption and production, of combating climate change
and of building disaster-resilient communities, among other things,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1. Takes note of the report of the Director General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization on the review of the implementation of the United Nations Decade of Education for
Sustainable Development, 2005–2014;264
2. Reaffirms education for sustainable development as a vital means of implementation for sustainable
development, as outlined in the Aichi-Nagoya Declaration on Education for Sustainable Development,266 and
welcomes the increasing international recognition of education for sustainable development in quality education and
lifelong learning;
3. Calls upon the international community to provide inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels
– early childhood, primary, secondary and tertiary, including technical and vocational training – so that all people
may have access to lifelong learning opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to
exploit opportunities to participate fully in society and contribute to sustainable development;
4. Encourages Governments and other concerned stakeholders to scale up education for sustainable
development action through implementation of the Global Action Programme on Education for Sustainable
Development as follow-up to the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development after 2014;265
5. Encourages Governments to increase efforts to systemically integrate and institutionalize education for
sustainable development in the education sector and other relevant sectors, as appropriate, including through, inter
alia, the provision of financial resources, the inclusion of education for sustainable development in relevant policies
and the development of the capacities of policymakers, institutional leaders and educators, as well as through the
strengthening of research, innovation and monitoring and evaluation on education for sustainable development in
order to support the scaling up of good practices;
6. Encourages all countries, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system,
relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to enhance international cooperation in
supporting the efforts of developing countries towards the realization of the full potential of education for
sustainable development;
7. Decides to give consideration, as appropriate, to the contribution of education for sustainable
development in the follow-up and review framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;268
8. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as the lead agency for
education for sustainable development, to continue to provide coordination for the implementation of the Global
Action Programme on Education for Sustainable Development, in cooperation with Governments, United Nations
organizations, funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders, and to continue to
advocate the importance of ensuring adequate resources for education for sustainable development, and calls upon
the United Nations system to increase efforts to fully mainstream a gender perspective into the implementation of
the Global Action Programme;
9. Invites the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, to continue to provide support and assist Member States, upon their request, in
developing their national capacities to promote education for sustainable development, including through
knowledge-sharing and standard-setting, the exchange of best practices, data collection, research and study;
10. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other relevant United
Nations bodies to continue to assess, in consultation with Member States, progress towards the achievement of
education for sustainable development;
_______________
268

Resolution 70/1.

499

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations country teams continue to further integrate
and mainstream education into their programming exercises, in particular United Nations Development Assistance
Frameworks, in consultation with relevant national authorities, while respecting national and other relevant policies
and priorities, when assisting countries in the pursuit of their development objectives;
12. Encourages all countries, relevant intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations
system, relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to give due consideration to the
contribution of education to the achievement of sustainable development in the formulation of national, regional and
international development policies and international cooperation instruments;
13. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Sustainable
development”, a sub-item entitled “Education for sustainable development” in the provisional agenda of its seventysecond session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/210
A/RE S/70 /210

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/473, para. 10)269

70/210.

Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)
and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)

The General Assembly,
Recalling the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, held in Vancouver, Canada,
in 1976,270 and the second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held in Istanbul, Turkey,
in 1996,271
Recalling also relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on the implementation of the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), including its resolutions 64/207 of 21 December 2009, 65/165 of
20 December 2010, 66/207 of 22 December 2011, 67/216 of 21 December 2012, 68/239 of 27 December 2013 and
69/226 of 19 December 2014, which addressed the convening in 2016 of the United Nations Conference on
Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III),
Recalling further relevant decisions and resolutions of the Economic and Social Council on the coordinated
implementation of the Habitat Agenda, including Council resolution 2015/34 of 22 July 2015 on human settlements,
adopted by the Council at its 2015 session,
Reaffirming the outcome document, entitled “The future we want”, of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,272 in particular paragraphs 134
to 137 on sustainable cities and human settlements, in which, inter alia, it is recognized that cities are engines of
economic growth, which, if well planned and developed, including through integrated planning and management
approaches, can promote economically, socially and environmentally sustainable societies,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
_______________
269

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
See Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, Vancouver, 31 May–11 June 1976 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum).
271
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996 (A/CONF.165/14), chap. I,
resolution 1, annexes I and II.
272
Resolution 66/288, annex.
270

500

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling that this new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, inter alia, acknowledges the importance of
making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that the Addis Ababa Action Agenda acknowledges, inter alia, that expenditures and investments in
sustainable development are being devolved to the subnational level, which often lacks adequate technical and
technological capacity, financing and support, and recalling also the commitment therein to scaling up international
cooperation to strengthen the capacities of municipalities and other local authorities,
Reiterating the importance of the wide participation of all relevant stakeholders, including local authorities, in
the promotion of sustainable urbanization and settlements, and stressing the importance of ensuring that such
participation is balanced, taking into account the type, the dimension and the region of the participants,
Taking note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat) on its twenty-fifth session, held from 17 to 23 April 2015,273 and its resolutions contained therein, in
particular resolution 25/1,274 in which the Governing Council encouraged member States, among other things, to
consider the important role that sustainable urbanization and human settlements can play as a key driver of
sustainable development in their national and subnational development plans,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
Recalling its resolution 67/148 of 20 December 2012, in which it called upon the United Nations system,
including the funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, to increase efforts to fully mainstream a gender
perspective into all issues under their consideration and within their mandates, as well as into all United Nations
summits, conferences and special sessions and their follow-up processes,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat
Agenda275 and on the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat);276
2. Also takes note of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on
Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III) on the work of its second session,277 including its
resolution 1/2015 on the preparations for the Conference and its decisions;278
3. Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of Ecuador for its generous offer to host the United
Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III) from 17 to 20 October 2016 and
its pledge to cover the costs of the Conference;
_______________
273

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/70/8).
Ibid., annex.
275
E/2015/72.
276
A/70/210.
277
A/CONF.226/PC.2/6.
278
Ibid., annex I.
274

501

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of Indonesia for its offer to host and cover the costs of the
third session of the Preparatory Committee, to be held in Surabaya, Indonesia, from 25 to 27 July 2016;
5. Recognizes the World Urban Forum as the foremost global arena for interaction among policymakers,
local government leaders, non-governmental stakeholders and expert practitioners in the field of human settlements,
and expresses its appreciation to the Government of Malaysia and to the city of Kuala Lumpur for offering to host
the ninth session of the Forum in 2018, which will be the first session to have a thematic focus on the
implementation of the New Urban Agenda to be adopted at Habitat III;
6.

Encourages Member States to participate, at the highest possible level, in Habitat III;

7. Encourages countries and international and bilateral donors, as well as the private sector, financial
institutions and foundations and other donors and all relevant stakeholders in a position to do so, to continue to
support the national, regional and global preparations for Habitat III through voluntary contributions to the
Habitat III trust fund and to support the participation of representatives of developing countries in the forthcoming
session of the Preparatory Committee and in the Conference itself, in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 13 (c) of its resolution 67/216, and invites voluntary contributions to support the participation of Habitat
Agenda partners and other relevant stakeholders in the forthcoming session of the Committee;
8. Takes note of the invitation of the Preparatory Committee to advance negotiations on the outstanding
issues in the preparations for the Conference, including the draft provisional rules of procedure of the Conference279
and the arrangements for the accreditation and participation of major groups and other stakeholders in the
preparatory process and in Habitat III,280 and decides to approve the provisional rules of procedure of the
Conference and the arrangements for the accreditation and participation of major groups and other stakeholders in
the preparatory process and in Habitat III as set out in annexes I and II to the present resolution;
9. Encourages effective contributions from and the improved participation of all relevant stakeholders,
including local authorities, at all stages of the preparatory process and at the Conference itself, building on the
positive experience enabled by the rules of procedure of the Governing Council of UN-Habitat and the inclusive
engagement modalities of Habitat II, and notes the organization of the second World Assembly of Local and
Regional Authorities back to back with Habitat III in recognition of the role of local authorities and communities in
sustainable urban development and in the implementation of the New Urban Agenda;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General of Habitat III for his support for the work of the
General Assembly of Partners for Habitat III, as a special initiative of the World Urban Campaign, in supporting and
improving stakeholders’ engagement in and contributions to the preparatory process for Habitat III and the
Conference itself;
11. Reaffirms its decision that Habitat III is to result in a concise, focused, forward-looking and actionoriented outcome document, which should reinvigorate the global commitment to and support for housing and
sustainable urban development and the implementation of the New Urban Agenda;
12. Reiterates its invitation to the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee to prepare the draft outcome
document of the Conference on the basis of inputs from broad regional and thematic consultations, as well as the
policy recommendations elaborated by the policy units and comments thereon received by participating States281
and all stakeholders, and to circulate the draft no later than six months prior to the Conference;
13. Recalls its decisions in its resolution 67/216 on the objective and results of the Conference, while
remaining mindful of the need to hold the Conference and carry out the preparatory process in the most inclusive,
efficient, effective and improved manner in order to ensure its success, and decides that a process of open-ended
informal consultative meetings should be held for five days in April 2016, with interpretation services on an asavailable basis, before the submission of the draft outcome document by the Co-Chairs of the Bureau, in order to
provide opportunity for feedback on the conclusions of the policy units and the thematic and regional meetings;
_______________
279

A/CONF.226/PC.2/2, annex.
A/CONF.226/PC.2/3.
281
Pursuant to paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 67/216, participating States are all States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies and of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
280

502

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

14. Invites the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee to convene further informal intergovernmental
negotiations in New York, with interpretation services on an as-available basis, as required, after the submission of
the draft outcome document, in the most efficient and effective manner, for three days in May 2016, three days in
June 2016 and three days in July 2016;
15. Invites representatives of local authorities’ associations, in May 2016, and representatives of major
groups and other stakeholders, in June 2016, to two-day informal hearings, with interpretation services on an asavailable basis, to exchange views with countries on the zero draft of the outcome document of Habitat III, taking
full advantage of the intergovernmental negotiations in May and June 2016 and building on the inclusive
engagement modalities of Habitat II;
16. Stresses the need for flexibility in convening the informal meetings of the intergovernmental
negotiations and the possibility of convening additional consultations, as required, with interpretation services on an
as-available basis;
17. Strongly encourages Member States to conclude negotiations on the draft outcome document at the third
session of the Preparatory Committee;
18. Encourages UN-Habitat and other relevant United Nations bodies to continue to support and assess, in
line with existing mandates and resources and in consultation with Member States, progress towards the
achievement of sustainable urbanization for sustainable development;
19. Invites Governments to endeavour to promote sustainable urban development and to discuss the role of
cities and human settlements, building on the existing outcomes of conferences on major global issues, such as the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, towards Habitat III;
20. Encourages Member States to establish or strengthen policies at all levels in order to provide for the
coordinated development and financing of urban settlements of all sizes and to fully harness the potential
contribution of sustainable urbanization and human settlements to sustainable development;
21. Also encourages Member States to take into account, in preparing for Habitat III and the implementation
of its outcome, to be presented as the New Urban Agenda, and in the formulation of policies, plans and programmes
at the local, national, regional and international levels, the role of sustainable urbanization as a driver of sustainable
development, urban-rural linkages and the interlinkages among the social, economic and environmental dimensions
of sustainable development in promoting stable, prosperous and inclusive societies;
22. Encourages Member States, the international and bilateral donors and financial institutions to contribute
generously to UN-Habitat through increased voluntary financial contributions to the United Nations Habitat and
Human Settlements Foundation, including the Urban Basic Services Trust Fund and the technical cooperation trust
funds, and invites Governments in a position to do so and other stakeholders to provide predictable multi-year
funding and increased non-earmarked contributions to support the implementation of the UN-Habitat strategic plan
for 2014–2019;
23. Reiterates the importance of the Nairobi headquarters location of UN-Habitat, and requests the
Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of UN-Habitat and the United Nations Office at Nairobi under review
so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary services to UN-Habitat and other United Nations
organs and organizations in Nairobi;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of UN-Habitat under review in order to
continue efforts to improve its efficiency, effectiveness, transparency and accountability in supporting the
implementation of its mandate;
25. Reiterates its recognition that, over the years, the responsibilities of UN-Habitat have changed
considerably in their scope and complexity and that the requirement to provide substantive and technical support to
developing countries has changed in areas related to sustainable cities and human settlements, as reflected in its
strategic plan for 2014–2019;
26. Welcomes resolution 25/7 of the Governing Council of UN-Habitat,274 by which the Council decided to
strengthen the governance of the UN-Habitat and the oversight role of the Governing Council and the Committee of
Permanent Representatives;
503

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

27. Reiterates its invitation to Member States and Habitat Agenda partners to formulate and implement
sustainable urban development policies that promote just, resilient and inclusive cities and human settlements,
considering the contributions of all relevant stakeholders, with a particular focus on the needs of women and those
who are most vulnerable, including children and youth, older persons, persons living with disability, rural-to-urban
migrants, internally displaced persons and indigenous peoples;
28. Stresses the importance of discussing the implementation of the New Urban Agenda, including the role
of Governments, the private sector, civil society, the United Nations system and other actors, in the context of the
negotiations thereon;
29. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Gene ral Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, including an update on the outcome of the United Nations Conference
on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), to be held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016, and
decides to include the item entitled “Implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations Conferences on Human
Settlements and on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development and strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless otherwise
agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
Annex I
Provisional rules of procedure of the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development (Habitat III)
I.

Representation and credentials

Rule 1
Composition of delegations
The delegation of each State participating in the Conference and that of the European Union shall consist of a
head of delegation and such other representatives, alternate representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 2
Alternates and advisers
The head of delegation may designate an alternate representative or an adviser to act as a representative.
Rule 3
Submission of credentials
The credentials of representatives and the names of alternate representatives and advisers shall be submitted to
the secretariat of the Conference, if possible not less than one week before the date fixed for the opening of the
Conference. The credentials shall be issued either by the Head of State or Government or by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs or, in the case of the European Union, by the President of the European Commission.
Rule 4
Credentials Committee
A Credentials Committee of nine members shall be appointed at the beginning of the Conference. Its
composition shall be based on that of the Credentials Committee of the General Assembly of the United Nations at
its seventieth session. It shall examine the credentials of representatives and report to the Conference without delay.
Rule 5
Provisional participation in the Conference
Pending a decision of the Conference on their credentials, representatives shall be entitled to participate
provisionally in the Conference.
504

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

II.

Officers

Rule 6
Elections
The Conference shall elect from among the representatives of participating States the following officers: a
President, 14 Vice-Presidents282 and an ex officio Vice-President from the host country, a Rapporteur-General, and
the Chair of the Main Committee established in accordance with rule 46. These officials shall be elected on the basis
of ensuring the representative character of the General Committee, the composition of which shall be in accordance
with rule 11. The Conference may also elect such other officers as it deems necessary for the performance of its
functions.
Rule 7
General powers of the President
1. In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon him/her elsewhere by these rules, the President shall
preside at the plenary meetings of the Conference, declare the opening and closing of each meeting, direct the
discussions, ensure observance of these rules, accord the right to speak, put questions to the vote and announce
decisions. The President shall rule on points of order and, subject to these rules, shall have complete control of the
proceedings and over the maintenance of order thereat. The President may propose to the Conference the closure of
the list of speakers, a limitation on the time to be allowed to speakers and on the number of times the representative
of each participant in the Conference may speak on a question, the adjournment or the closure of the debate and the
suspension or the adjournment of a meeting.
2.

The President, in the exercise of his/her functions, remains under the authority of the Conference.

Rule 8
Acting President
1. If the President is absent from a meeting or any part thereof, he/she shall designate one of the Vice-Presidents
to take his/her place.
2.

A Vice-President acting as President shall have the same powers and duties as the President.

Rule 9
Replacement of the President
If the President is unable to perform his/her functions, a new President shall be elected.
Rule 10
Voting rights of the President
The President, or a Vice-President acting as President, shall not vote, but shall appoint another member of
his/her delegation to vote in his/her place.
III. General Committee
Rule 11
Composition
The President, the Vice-Presidents, the Rapporteur-General and the Chair of the Main Committee shall
constitute the General Committee. The President, or, in his/her absence, one of the Vice-Presidents designated by
him/her, shall serve as Chair of the General Committee. The Chair of the Credentials Committee and other
Committees established by the Conference in accordance with rule 48 may participate, without the right to vote, in
the General Committee.
_______________
282

Three from each of the following groups: African States; Asia-Pacific States; Eastern European States; and Western European and other
States; and two from Latin America and Caribbean States.

505

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Rule 12
Substitute members
If the President or a Vice-President of the Conference is to be absent during a meeting of the General
Committee, he/she may designate a member of his/her delegation to sit and vote in the Committee. In case of
absence, the Chair of a Main Committee shall designate the Vice-Chair of that Committee as his/her substitute.
When serving on the General Committee, a Vice-Chair of a Main Committee shall not have the right to vote if
he/she is of the same delegation as another member of the General Committee.
Rule 13
Functions
The General Committee shall assist the President in the general conduct of the business of the Conference and,
subject to the decisions of the Conference, shall ensure the coordination of its work.
IV.

Secretariat of the Conference

Rule 14
Duties of the Secretary-General of the Conference
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations or his designated representative shall act in the capacity of
Secretary-General of the Conference in all meetings of the Conference and its subsidiary organs.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations may designate a member of the secretariat to act in his place at
such meetings.
3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations or his designated representative shall direct the staff required by
the Conference.
Rule 15
Duties of the secretariat
The secretariat of the Conference shall, in accordance with these rules:
(a)

Provide simultaneous interpretation of speeches made at meetings;

(b)

Receive, translate, reproduce and circulate the documents of the Conference;

(c)

Publish and circulate the official documents of the Conference;

(d)

Prepare and circulate records of public meetings;

(e)

Make and arrange for the keeping of sound recordings;

(f) Arrange for the custody and preservation of the documents of the Conference in the archives of the
United Nations;
(g)

Generally perform all other work that the Conference may require.

Rule 16
Statements by the secretariat
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, or any member of the secretariat designated for that purpose,
may at any time make either oral or written statements concerning any question under consideration.
V.

Opening of the Conference

Rule 17
Temporary President
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, or, in his absence, any member of the secretariat designated by
him for that purpose, shall open the first meeting of the Conference and preside until the Conference has elected its
President.
506

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Rule 18
Decisions concerning organization
The Conference shall, at its first meeting:
(a)

Adopt its rules of procedure;

(b)

Elect its officers and constitute its subsidiary organs;

(c) Adopt its agenda, the draft of which shall, until such adoption, be the provisional agenda of the
Conference;
(d)

Decide on the organization of its work.

VI. Conduct of business
Rule 19
Quorum
The President may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to proceed when at least one third of the
representatives of the States participating in the Conference are present. The presence of representatives of a
majority of the States so participating shall be required for any decision to be taken.
Rule 20
Speeches
1. No one may address the Conference without having previously obtained the permission of the President.
Subject to rules 21, 22 and 25 to 27, the President shall call upon speakers in the order in which they signify their
desire to speak. The secretariat shall be in charge of drawing up a list of speakers.
2. Debate shall be confined to the question before the Conference, and the President may call a speaker to order
if his/her remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion.
3. The Conference may limit the time allowed to each speaker and the number of times each participant may
speak on any question. Permission to speak on a motion to set such limits shall be accorded to only two
representatives in favour of and two opposing such limits, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the
vote. In any event, with the consent of the Conference, the President shall limit each intervention on procedural
matters to five minutes. When the debate is limited and a speaker exceeds the allotted time, the President shall call
him/her to order without delay.
Rule 21
Points of order
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may at any time raise a point of order, which shall be
immediately decided by the President in accordance with these rules. A representative may appeal against the ruling
of the President. The appeal shall be immediately put to the vote, and the President’s ruling shall stand unless
overruled by a majority of the representatives present and voting. A representative may not, in raising a point of
order, speak on the substance of the matter under discussion.
Rule 22
Precedence
The Chair or Rapporteur of the Main Committee, or the representative of a subcommittee or working group,
may be accorded precedence for the purpose of explaining the conclusions arrived at by the body concerned.
Rule 23
Closing of the list of speakers
During the course of a debate, the President may announce the list of speakers and, with the consent of the
Conference, declare the list closed.
507

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Rule 24
Right of reply
1. Notwithstanding rule 23, the President shall accord the right of reply to a representative of any State
participating in the Conference or of the European Union who requests it. Any other representative may be granted
the opportunity to make a reply.
2. The statements made under this rule shall normally be made at the end of the last meeting of the day, or at the
conclusion of the consideration of the relevant item if that is sooner.
3. The representatives of a State or of the European Union may make no more than two statements under this
rule at a given meeting on any item. The first shall be limited to five minutes and the second to three minutes;
representatives shall in any event attempt to be as brief as possible.
Rule 25
Adjournment of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time move the adjournment of the
debate on the question under discussion. In addition to the proposer of the motion, permission to speak on the
motion shall be accorded to only two representatives in favour of and two opposing the adjournment, after which
the motion shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 26
Closure of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time move the closure of the debate
on the question under discussion, whether or not any other representative has signified his/her wish to speak.
Permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two representatives opposing the closure, after which
the motion shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 27
Suspension or adjournment of the meeting
Subject to rule 38, a representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time move the
suspension or the adjournment of the meeting. No discussion on such motions shall be permitted and they shall,
subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 28
Order of motions
The motions indicated below shall have precedence in the following order over all proposals or other motions
before the meeting:
(a)

To suspend the meeting;

(b)

To adjourn the meeting;

(c)

To adjourn the debate on the question under discussion;

(d)

To close the debate on the question under discussion.

Rule 29
Submissions of proposals and substantive amendments
Proposals and substantive amendments shall normally be submitted in writing to the secretariat of the
Conference, which shall circulate copies to all delegations. Unless the Conference decides otherwise, substantive
proposals shall be discussed or put to a decision no earlier than 24 hours after copies have been circulated in all
languages of the Conference to all delegations. The President may, however, permit the discussion and consideration
of amendments, even though these amendments have not been circulated or have only been circulated on the
same day.
508

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Rule 30
Withdrawal of proposals and motions
A proposal or a motion may be withdrawn by its sponsor at any time before a decision on it has been taken,
provided that it has not been amended. A proposal or a motion thus withdrawn may be reintroduced by any
representative.
Rule 31
Decisions on competence
Subject to rule 28, any motion calling for a decision on the competence of the Conference to adopt a proposal
submitted to it shall be put to the vote before a decision is taken on the proposal in question.
Rule 32
Reconsideration of proposals
When a proposal has been adopted or rejected, it may not be reconsidered unless the Conference, by a twothirds majority of the representatives present and voting, so decides. Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider
shall be accorded to only two speakers opposing reconsideration, after which the motion shall be immediately put to
the vote.
VII. Decision-making
Rule 33
General agreement
The Conference shall make its best endeavours to ensure that the work of the Conference is accomplished by
general agreement (consensus).
Rule 34
Voting rights
Each State participating in the Conference shall have one vote.
Rule 35
Majority required
1. Subject to rule 33, decisions of the Conference on all matters of substance shall be taken by a two-thirds
majority of the representatives present and voting.
2. Except as otherwise provided in these rules, decisions of the Conference on all matters of procedure shall be
taken by a majority of the representatives present and voting.
3. If the question arises whether a matter is one of procedure or of substance, the President of the Conference
shall rule on the question. An appeal against this ruling shall be put to the vote immediately, and the President’s
ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the representatives present and voting.
4.

If a vote is equally divided, the proposal or motion shall be regarded as rejected.

Rule 36
Meaning of the phrase “representatives present and voting”
For the purpose of these rules, the phrase “representatives present and voting” means representatives casting
an affirmative or negative vote. Representatives who abstain from voting shall be regarded as not voting.
Rule 37
Method of voting
1. Except as provided in rule 44, the Conference shall normally vote by show of hands, except that a
representative may request a roll call, which shall then be taken in the English alphabetical order of the names of the
509

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

States participating in the Conference, beginning with the delegation whose name is drawn by lot by the President.
The name of each State shall be called in all roll calls and its representative shall reply “yes”, “no” or “abstention”.
2. When the Conference votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote shall replace a vote by show of hands
and a recorded vote shall replace a roll call. A representative may request a recorded vote, which shall, unless a
representative requests otherwise, be taken without calling out the names of the States participating in the
Conference.
3. The vote of each State participating in a roll call or a recorded vote shall be inserted in any record of or report
on the Conference.
Rule 38
Conduct during voting
After the President has announced the commencement of voting, no representative shall interrupt the voting
except on a point of order in connection with the process of voting.
Rule 39
Explanation of vote
Representatives may make brief statements, consisting solely of explanations of vote, before the voting has
commenced or after the voting has been completed. The President may limit the time to be allowed for such
explanations. The representative of a State sponsoring a proposal or motion shall not speak in explanation of vote
thereon, except if it has been amended.
Rule 40
Division of proposals
A representative may move that parts of a proposal be voted on separately. If a representative objects, the
motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two
representatives in favour of and two opposing the division. If the motion is carried, those parts of the proposal that
are subsequently approved shall be put to the Conference for decision as a whole. If all operative parts of the
proposal have been rejected, the proposal shall be considered to have been rejected as a whole.
Rule 41
Amendments
A proposal is considered an amendment to another proposal if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises part of
that proposal. Unless specified otherwise, the word “proposal” in these rules shall be considered as including
amendments.
Rule 42
Order of voting on amendments
When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the amendment shall be voted on first. When two or more
amendments are moved to a proposal, the Conference shall vote first on the amendment furthest removed in
substance from the original proposal and then on the amendment next furthest removed therefrom and so on until all
the amendments have been put to the vote. Where, however, the adoption of one amendment necessarily implies the
rejection of another amendment, the latter shall not be put to the vote. If one or more amendments are adopted, the
amended proposal shall then be voted upon.
Rule 43
Order of voting on proposals
1. If two or more proposals, other than amendments, relate to the same question, they shall, unless the
Conference decides otherwise, be voted on in the order in which they were submitted. The Conference may, after
each vote on a proposal, decide whether to vote on the next proposal.

510

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Revised proposals shall be voted on in the order in which the original proposals were submitted, unless the
revision substantially departs from the original proposal. In that case, the original proposal shall be considered as
withdrawn and the revised proposal shall be treated as a new proposal.
3. A motion requiring that no decision be taken on a proposal shall be put to the vote before a decision is taken
on the proposal in question.
Rule 44
Elections
All elections shall be held by secret ballot, unless, in the absence of any objection, the Conference decides to
proceed without taking a ballot when there is an agreed candidate or slate.
Rule 45
1. When one or more elective places are to be filled at one time under the same conditions, those candidates, in a
number not exceeding the number of such places, obtaining in the first ballot a majority of the votes cast and the
largest number of votes, shall be elected.
2. If the number of candidates obtaining such a majority is less than the number of places to be filled, additional
ballots shall be held to fill the remaining places, the voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the largest
number of votes in the previous ballot, in a number not exceeding twice the number of places remaining to
be filled.
VIII. Subsidiary bodies
Rule 46
Main Committee
The Conference may establish a Main Committee and a drafting Committee, which may be set up in
accordance with the practice of other United Nations conferences.
Rule 47
Representation on a Main Committee
Each State participating in the Conference and the European Union may be represented by one representative
on the Main Committee established by the Conference. It may assign to the Committee such alternate
representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 48
Other committees and working groups
1. In addition to the Main Committee referred to above, the Conference may establish such committees and
working groups as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions.
2. Subject to the decision of the plenary of the Conference, the Main Committee may set up subcommittees and
working groups.
Rule 49
1. The members of the committees and working groups of the Conference, referred to in rule 48, paragraph 1,
shall be appointed by the President, subject to the approval of the Conference, unless the Conference decides
otherwise.
2. Members of the subcommittees and working groups of committees shall be appointed by the Chair of the
committee in question, subject to the approval of the committee, unless the committee decides otherwise.

511

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Rule 50
Officers
Except as provided in rule 6 or otherwise decided, each committee, subcommittee and working group shall
elect its own officers.
Rule 51
Quorum
1. The Chair of the Main Committee may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to proceed when
representatives of at least one quarter of the States participating in the Conference are present. The presence of
representatives of a majority of the States so participating shall be required for any decision to be taken.
2. A majority of the representatives of the General Committee or the Credentials Committee or of any
committee, subcommittee or working group shall constitute a quorum provided that they are representatives of
participating States.
Rule 52
Officers, conduct of business and voting
The rules contained in sections II, VI (except rule 19) and VII above shall be applicable, mutatis mutandis, to
the proceedings of committees, subcommittees and working groups, except that:
(a) The Chairs of the General Committee and the Credentials Committee and the Chairs of the committees,
subcommittees and working groups may exercise the right to vote, provided that they are representatives of
participating States;
(b) Decisions of committees, subcommittees and working groups shall be taken by a majority of the
representatives present and voting, except that the reconsideration of a proposal or an amendment shall require the
majority established by rule 32.
IX. Languages and records
Rule 53
Languages of the Conference
Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the languages of the Conference.
Rule 54
Interpretation
1.

Speeches made in a language of the Conference shall be interpreted into other such languages.

2. A representative may speak in a language other than a language of the Conference if the delegation concerned
provides for interpretation into one such language.
Rule 55
Languages of official documents
Official documents of the Conference shall be made available in the languages of the Conference.
Rule 56
Sound recordings of meetings
Sound recordings of meetings of the Conference and of the Main Committee shall be made and kept in
accordance with the practice of the United Nations. Unless otherwise decided by the Conference or the Main
Committee, no such recordings shall be made of any of the other meetings of the Conference.

512

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

X.

Public and private meetings

Rule 57
General principles
The plenary meetings of the Conference and the meetings of any committee shall be held in public unless the
body concerned decides otherwise. All decisions taken by the plenary of the Conference at a private meeting shall
be announced at an early public meeting of the plenary.
Rule 58
As a general rule, meetings of other bodies of the General Committee, subcommittees or working groups shall
be held in private.
Rule 59
Communiqués on private meetings
At the close of a private meeting, the presiding officers of the organ concerned may issue a communiqué
through the secretariat of the Conference.
XI. Other participants and observers
Rule 60
Intergovernmental organizations and other entities that have received a standing invitation from the General
Assembly to participate in the capacity of observer in the sessions and work of all international conferences
convened under its auspices
Representatives designated by intergovernmental organizations and other entities that have received a standing
invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the capacity of observer in the sessions and work of all
international conferences convened under its auspices have the right to participate as observers, without the right to
vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee or
working group.
Rule 61
Representatives of the specialized agencies and related organizations283
Representatives designated by the specialized agencies and related organizations may participate, without the
right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee
or working group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 62
Representatives of other intergovernmental organizations
Save where otherwise specifically provided with respect to the European Union in these rules of procedure,
representatives designated by other intergovernmental organizations invited to the Conference may participate as
observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate,
any other committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 63
Representatives of interested United Nations organs
Representatives designated by interested organs of the United Nations may participate as observers, without
the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other
committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities.
_______________
283

For the purpose of these rules, the term “related organizations” includes the International Atomic Energy Agency, the International
Criminal Court, the International Seabed Authority, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization and the World Trade
Organization.

513

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Rule 64
Representatives of local authorities
Representatives of local authorities accredited to the Conference, in accordance with the arrangements set up
to that effect in annex II to the present resolution, may participate, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of
the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee or working group on questions
within the scope of their activities.
Rule 65
Representatives of non-governmental organizations284
1. Non-governmental organizations accredited to participate in the Conference may designate representatives to
attend public meetings of the Conference and the Main Committee as observers.
2. Upon the invitation of the presiding officer of the body concerned and subject to the approval of the
Conference, such observers may make oral statements on questions in which they have special competence. If the
number of requests to speak is too large, the non-governmental organizations shall be requested to form themselves
into constituencies, such constituencies to speak through spokespersons.
Rule 66
Associate members of regional commissions285
Representatives designated by the associate members of regional commissions may participate as observers,
without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other
committee or working group.
Rule 67
Written statements
Written statements submitted by the designated representatives referred to in rules 60 to 66 shall be circulated
by the secretariat to all delegations in the quantities and in the language in which the statements are made available
to it at the site of the Conference, provided that a statement submitted on behalf of a non-governmental organization
is related to the work of the Conference and is on a subject in which the organization has a special competence.
Written statements shall not be made available at the expense of the United Nations and shall not be issued as
official documents.
XII. Amendment and suspension of the rules of procedure
Rule 68
Method of amendment
These rules of procedure may be amended by a decision of the Conference taken by a two-thirds majority of
the representatives present and voting, after the General Committee has reported on the proposed amendment.
Rule 69
Method of suspension
Any of these rules may be suspended by the Conference provided that 24 hours’ notice of the proposal for the
suspension has been given, which may be waived if no representative objects. Any such suspension shall be limited
to a specific and stated purpose and to a period required to achieve that purpose.
_______________
284

Paragraph 23.3 of Agenda 21 provides that: “Any policies, definitions or rules affecting access to and participation by nongovernmental organizations in the work of the United Nations institutions or agencies associated with the implementation of Agenda 21
must apply equally to all major groups”. Agenda 21 defines major groups as comprising women, children and youth, indigenous people, nongovernmental organizations, local authorities, workers and their trade unions, business and industry, the scientific and technological community
and farmers. Therefore, based on Agenda 21, rule 65 shall apply equally to non-governmental organizations and other major groups.
285
American Samoa, Anguilla, Aruba, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Curaçao, French Polynesia, Guadeloupe, Guam,
Martinique, Montserrat, New Caledonia, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, Sint Maarten, Turks and Caicos Islands and United
States Virgin Islands.

514

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Annex II
Arrangements for accreditation and participation of major groups and other relevant stakeholders in the
preparatory process and in the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development
(Habitat III)
I.

Background

1. The General Assembly, in resolution 67/216, encouraged effective contributions from and the active
participation of all relevant stakeholders, including local governments, major groups as identified in Agenda 21, the
relevant United Nations funds and programmes, the regional commissions and specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions and other Habitat Agenda partners, at all stages of the preparatory process for the
Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III) and at the Conference itself.
2. In its resolution 69/226, the General Assembly emphasized the importance of the wide participation of all
relevant stakeholders, including local authorities, in the promotion of sustainable urbanization and settlements and
called upon Member States to ensure the effective participation in the preparatory process and in the Conference
itself of local governments and all other stakeholders.
3. In the same resolution, the General Assembly decided that the major groups and the non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as those accredited to Habitat II
and the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, would register in order to
participate in the Conference. The General Assembly also decided that non-governmental organizations not in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council wishing to attend and contribute to the Conference, and
whose work was relevant to the subject of the Conference, could participate as observers in the Conference, as well
as in the preparatory meetings, in accordance with the provisions contained in part VII of Council resolution
1996/31 of 25 July 1996, and subject to the approval of the Preparatory Committee in plenary meeting, and that,
while respecting fully the provisions contained in rule 57 of the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of
the Council, such a decision should be made by consensus.
4. The following arrangements for accreditation and participation of major groups and other relevant
stakeholders in the preparatory process and in Habitat III will apply.
II.

Accreditation criteria and procedures for organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council

5. Interested non-governmental organizations and major groups, including local authorities and other
stakeholders, whose work is relevant to the subject of the Conference, that are currently in consultative status with
the Economic and Social Council and that wish to participate in the Conference or in sessions of its Preparatory
Committee should pre-register on the website of the Conference (www.habitat3.org).
III. Accreditation criteria for organizations accredited to Habitat II and the United Nations summit for the
adoption of the post-2015 development agenda
6. Organizations accredited to Habitat II and the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, whose work is relevant to the subject of the Conference and that wish to participate in the
Conference or in sessions of its Preparatory Committee, should pre-register on the website of the Conference.
IV.

Accreditation criteria and procedures for organizations without consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council

7. Those non-governmental organizations and major groups not in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council but wishing to attend and to contribute to the Conference and its preparatory process may apply to
the Conference secretariat for that purpose. Such special accreditation will be limited solely to the Conference and
its preparatory process.
8.

The application requires the submission of the following information:
(a)

Name of the organization and pertinent contact information, such as address and main contact details;
515

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(b)

Purpose of the organization;

(c) Programmes and activities of the organization in areas relevant to the subject of the Conference,
indicating in which country or countries they are carried out;
(d)

Confirmation of the activities of the organization at the national, regional or international levels;

(e) Copies of annual or other reports of the organization, with financial statements and a list of financial
sources and contributions, including governmental contributions;
(f)

A list of the members of the governing body of the organization and their countries of nationality;

(g) A description of the membership of the governing body of the organization indicating, as appropriate,
the total number of members and, where applicable, the names of organizations that are members and their
geographical distribution;
(h)

A copy of the constitution and/or by-laws of the organization;

(i)

A completed online registration form.

9. The registration of municipal and other local or regional authorities can be arranged under the auspices of an
accredited non-governmental organization or as members of a national delegation through their permanent mission
to the United Nations.
10. The deadlines for submitting accreditation applications are as follows:
(a)

Preparatory Committee, third session: 1 April 2016;

(b)

Habitat III: 2 May 2016.

11. Applications for special accreditation should be made online at the website of the Conference. The Conference
secretariat, with support from the United Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service and others, as appropriate,
will review the relevance of the work of the applicants on the basis of their background and involvement in
sustainable urban development issues. If the evaluation shows, on the basis of the information provided, that the
applicant organization is competent and its activities are relevant to the work of the Conference, the Conference
secretariat will recommend to the Preparatory Committee, for its decision, the accreditation of the organization. In
cases where such recommendation is not made, the Conference secretariat will make available to the Preparatory
Committee the reasons. The Conference secretariat will submit its recommendations to the Preparatory Committee
for review and consideration by participating States on a non-objection basis.286
12. An organization that has been granted accreditation to attend a session of the Preparatory Committee may
attend all of its future sessions and the Conference itself.
V.

Modalities for participation in the preparatory process and the Conference

13. The provisions of paragraphs 14 to 16 of General Assembly resolution 67/290 apply mutatis mutandis to the
Conference and its preparatory process.287
Participation in sessions of the Preparatory Committee
14. Representatives of accredited organizations may address the Preparatory Committee in plenary meetings.
Given the short duration of each session of the Preparatory Committee, however, it is requested that statements be
made available in writing for electronic distribution.
_______________
286

The list of proposed, as well as final, names will be brought to the attention of the Conference. The general basis of any objections shall
be made known to the Bureau by the participating States.
287
For the purposes of the Conference and its preparatory process, paragraph 15 (d) of General Assembly resolution 67/290 will be
understood to provide the opportunity to present written and oral contributions only.

516

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Participation modalities at the Conference
15. Accredited organizations will have direct access to the official Conference venue. For security and safety reasons,
on some days of the Conference a limit on the number of major group participants may need to be established. The
Conference secretariat will inform the major groups regarding these arrangements through the Conference website.
16. A small but representative number of participants from major groups will be invited to address the Conference
in plenary meetings. Individual speakers will be identified through the self-organized mechanisms of the major
groups, in coordination with the President of the Conference, through the Conference secretariat.
17. At the Conference, a number of stakeholder events and activities are expected to take place. The details and
topics of those events will be announced at a later date.
RESOLUTION 70/211
A/RE S/70 /211

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/474/Add.1, para. 8)288

70/211.

Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and
interdependence

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 62/199 of 19 December 2007, 63/222 of 19 December 2008, 64/210 of 21 December
2009, 65/168 of 20 December 2010, 66/210 of 22 December 2011 and 68/219 of 20 December 2013 on the role of
the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence,
Acknowledging the vital importance of an inclusive, transparent and effective multilateral system to address
the urgent global challenges of today, recognizing the universality of the United Nations, and reaffirming its
commitment to promote and strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the role and authority of the General Assembly on global matters of concern to the international
community, as set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
Acknowledging that the United Nations, particularly the General Assembly, provides a universal and inclusive
multilateral forum that confers incomparable value to its discussions and its decisions on global matters of concern
to the international community,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;289

_______________
288
289

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
A/70/326.

517

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the sub-item entitled “Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of
globalization and interdependence” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, unless otherwise agreed
in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee;
4. Requests, in this regard, without setting any precedent, that the report of the Secretary-General to be
submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session be an update to the current report.289
RESOLUTION 70/212
A/RE S/70 /212

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/474/Add.2, para. 13)290

70/212.

International Day of Women and Girls in Science

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling its resolution 68/220 of 20 December 2013 on science, technology and innovation for development,
in which it recognized that full and equal access to and participation in science, technology and innovation for
women and girls of all ages is imperative for achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls,
Recalling also all relevant agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women, including on
access and participation of women and girls in education, training and science and technology, including for the
promotion of women’s equal access to full employment and decent work, adopted at its fifty-fifth session,291
Realizing that gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls will make a crucial contribution to
progress across all the Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Realizing also that women, representing half of the world’s population, continue to be excluded from
participating fully in the economy,
Reaffirming its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
_______________
290

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, Greece,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Panama,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Ukraine, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
291
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 7 (E/2011/27), chap. I, sect. A.

518

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for
the proclamation, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, stating that an international day or year should not be proclaimed
before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Reaffirming also that women have a vital role to play in achieving sustainable development, and reiterating its
resolve to ensure their full and effective participation in sustainable development policies, programmes and
decision-making at all levels,
Recognizing that women and girls play a critical role in science and technology communities and that their
participation should be strengthened,
Recognizing also the important contribution of the science and technology community to sustainable
development and in promoting the empowerment, participation and contribution of women and girls in science,
technology and innovation,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the International
Telecommunication Union and other relevant organizations in supporting women scientists and in promoting the
access of women and girls to and their participation in science, technology, engineering and mathematics education,
training and research activities at all levels,
1.

Decides to proclaim 11 February of each year the International Day of Women and Girls in Science;

2. Invites all Member States, all organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and other international
and regional organizations, the private sector and academia, as well as civil society, including non-governmental
organizations and individuals, to observe the International Day of Women and Girls in Science in an appropriate
manner, including through education and public awareness-raising activities, in order to promote the full and equal
participation of women and girls in education, training, employment and decision-making processes in the sciences,
eliminate all discrimination against women, including in the field of education and employment, and overcome legal,
economic, social and cultural barriers thereto by, inter alia, encouraging the development of science education
policies and programming, including school curricula, as appropriate, to encourage greater participation of women
and girls, promote career development for women in science and recognize the achievements of women in science;
3. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and UN-Women, mindful
of the provisions contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to work together to
facilitate the implementation of the International Day in collaboration with all relevant organizations already
involved in the promotion of women and girls in science;
4. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and civil society organizations for appropriate observance.
RESOLUTION 70/213
A/RE S/70 /213

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/474/Add.2, para. 13)292

70/213.

Science, technology and innovation for development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/200 of 23 December 2003, 59/220 of 22 December 2004, 60/205 of 22 December
2005, 61/207 of 20 December 2006, 62/201 of 19 December 2007, 64/212 of 21 December 2009, 66/211 of
22 December 2011 and 68/220 of 20 December 2013,

_______________
292

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

519

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/46 of 28 July 2006, 2009/8 of 24 July 2009,
2010/3 of 19 July 2010, 2011/17 of 26 July 2011, 2012/6 of 24 July 2012, 2013/10 of 22 July 2013, 2014/28 of
16 July 2014 and 2015/27 of 22 July 2015,
Recalling the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society,293
Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,294
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recognizing the importance of technology as one of the key means of implementation in the pursuit of
sustainable development, along with finance, capacity-building, an institutional framework and trade,
Taking note of the reports of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its fourteenth,
fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth sessions,295
Recalling its resolutions 64/208 of 21 December 2009 and 65/280 of 17 June 2011,
Recognizing the importance of the creation of a conducive environment that attracts and supports private
investment, entrepreneurship and corporate social responsibility, including an efficient, adequate, balanced and
effective intellectual property framework, while encouraging access to science and technology by developing
countries,
Recognizing also the vital role that science, technology and innovation, including environmentally sound
technologies, can play in development and in facilitating efforts to address global challenges, such as efforts to
eradicate poverty, achieve food security and nutrition, enhance access to energy and increase energy efficiency, fight
diseases, improve education, protect the environment, accelerate the pace of economic diversification and
transformation, improve productivity and competitiveness and ultimately support sustainable development,
Recalling the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women on access and participation of
women and girls in education, training and science and technology, adopted at its fifty-fifth session,296
Recognizing that science, technology and innovation cooperation and collaboration with, as well as foreign
direct investment in and trade with and among, developing countries is fundamental to enhancing their ability to
produce, access, comprehend, select, adapt and use science, technology and innovation knowledge,
Concerned that many developing countries lack affordable access to information and communications
technologies and that, for the majority of the poor, the promise of science, technology and innovation remains
unfulfilled, and emphasizing the need to effectively harness technology to bridge the digital divide,
_______________
293

See A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
295
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 11 (E/2011/31); ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 11 and
corrigendum (E/2012/31 and Corr.1); ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 11 and corrigendum (E/2013/31 and Corr.1); ibid., 2014, Supplement
No. 11 (E/2014/31); and ibid., 2015, Supplement No. 11 (E/2015/31).
296
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 7 (E/2011/27), chap. I, sect. A.
294

520

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing that international support can help developing countries to benefit from technological advances
and enhance their productive capacity to build, support and nurture innovation capacity to enable the development,
adoption and dissemination of technology,
Reaffirming the need to enhance the science, technology and innovation programmes of the relevant entities of
the United Nations system,
Noting with appreciation the collaboration between the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in designing and carrying out science,
technology and innovation policy reviews,
Welcoming the establishment of a Technology Facilitation Mechanism by the third International Conference
on Financing for Development,297
Noting the ongoing efforts by the World Intellectual Property Organization, under its existing mandate, to
establish technology and innovation support centres in over 50 countries, providing access to technological
information through patent databases and access to scientific literature through the Access to Research for
Development and Innovation programme, the Access to Specialized Patent Information programme and the
development of national intellectual property and innovation strategies,
Reaffirming the importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as its 10-year plan of
action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next
50 years, and its continental programme embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development and regional initiatives,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;298

2.

Reaffirms its commitment:

(a) To the actions agreed upon by the least developed countries and development partners on science,
technology and innovation, as outlined in paragraphs 52 and 53 of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries;299
(b) To promote and support greater efforts to develop renewable sources of energy, including appropriate
technology;
(c) To support the efforts of developing countries, individually and collectively, to harness new agricultural
technologies in order to increase agricultural productivity through environmentally sustainable means;
(d) To support better coordination and coherence, including the application of best practices in coordination
and the sharing of lessons learned among United Nations agencies and international organizations providing
technical assistance and capacity-building in the field of science, technology and innovation directed towards
development priorities and needs;
3. Also reaffirms the commitments that the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development300 has made in, inter alia, science, technology and innovation, as an
important action area for sustainable development;
4. Recognizes the current role of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other
relevant United Nations entities, as well as other relevant organizations, in helping Governments, upon request, to
_______________
297

Resolution 69/313, annex, para. 123.
A/66/208, A/68/227 and A/70/276.
299
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
300
Resolution 69/313, annex.
298

521

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ensure that science, technology and innovation policies are integrated into and are supportive of national
development strategies and sustainable development in their countries and that their science, technology and
innovation policies and programmes support national development agendas;
5. Also recognizes that science, technology and innovation, including information and communications
technologies, are vital for the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development,301 and for the full participation of developing countries in the global
economy;
6. Further recognizes that full and equal access to and participation in science, technology and innovation
for women of all ages is imperative for achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women, and underlines
that addressing barriers to equal access for women and girls to science, technology and innovation requires a
systematic, comprehensive, integrated, sustainable, multidisciplinary and multisectoral approach, and in this regard
urges Governments to mainstream a gender perspective in legislation, policies and programmes;
7. Notes the importance of facilitating access to and sharing accessible and assistive technologies, through
the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms and other actions, to advance disability-inclusive development,
ensure accessibility for persons with disabilities and promote their empowerment, recognizing that persons with
disabilities make up an estimated 15 per cent of the world’s population;
8. Requests the Commission on Science and Technology for Development to provide a forum within
which to continue to assist the Economic and Social Council as the focal point in the system-wide follow-up to the
outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society293 and to continue its science, technology and innovation
activities, including by sharing best practices;
9. Encourages the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in collaboration with relevant
partners, such as the World Intellectual Property Organization, the International Telecommunication Union, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations University, to continue to
undertake science, technology and innovation policy reviews, with a view to assisting developing countries in
identifying the measures that are needed to integrate science, technology and innovation policies into their national
development strategies;
10. Encourages the World Intellectual Property Organization to continue to undertake technical support
activities, including the development of national intellectual patent and innovation strategies;
11. Encourages Governments to strengthen and foster investment in research and development for
environmentally sound technologies and to promote the involvement of the business and financial sectors in the
development of those technologies, and invites the international community to support those efforts;
12. Encourages efforts to increase the availability of data to support the measurement of national innovation
systems (such as the existing global innovation indices) and empirical research on innovation and development to
assist policymakers in designing and implementing innovation strategies;
13. Also encourages the increase and use of high-quality, timely and reliable data disaggregated by sex, age,
geography, income, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability and other characteristics relevant in national contexts,
enhanced capacity-building support to developing countries, including the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States, for this purpose, and international cooperation, including
through technical and financial support, to further strengthen the capacity of national statistical authorities and
bureaux;
14. Further encourages existing arrangements and the further promotion of regional, subregional and
interregional joint research and development projects, where feasible, by mobilizing existing scientific and research
and development resources and by the networking of sophisticated scientific facilities and research equipment;
15. Emphasizes that science, technology and innovation are critical for meeting the Sustainable
Development Goals;
_______________
301

522

Resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Encourages the enhancement of capacity-building support for developing countries, including the
strengthening of national data systems and evaluation programmes, particularly in African countries, the least
developed countries, small island developing States, landlocked developing countries and middle-income countries;
17. Calls upon Member States and the United Nations development system, and encourages other
stakeholders, as appropriate, to continue to strengthen their support for the different science, technology and
innovation partnerships with developing countries in primary, secondary and higher education, vocational education
and continuing education, for business opportunities for the private sector, for science, technology and innovation
infrastructure and for science, technology and innovation advice for developing countries;
18. Welcomes the establishment of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism by the third International
Conference on Financing for Development297 and its launch at the United Nations summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda,302 and looks forward to its full operationalization;
19. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, a sub-item entitled “Science, technology and innovation for development” in the provisional
agenda of its seventy-second session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second
Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/214
A/RE S/70 /214

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/474/Add.3, para. 7)303

70/214.

Culture and sustainable development

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 41/187 of 8 December 1986, 46/158 of 19 December 1991, 51/179 of 16 December
1996, 52/197 of 18 December 1997, 53/184 of 15 December 1998, 55/192 of 20 December 2000, 57/249 of
20 December 2002, 65/166 of 20 December 2010 and 66/208 of 22 December 2011, concerning culture and
development, 66/288 of 27 July 2012, entitled “The future we want”, and 68/223 of 20 December 2013 and 69/230
of 19 December 2014 on culture and sustainable development,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
_______________
302
303

Ibid., para. 70.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

523

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling that, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, inter alia, the natural and cultural diversity of
the world is acknowledged and it is recognized that cultures and civilizations can contribute to, and are crucial
enablers of, sustainable development,
Recalling also the 2005 Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural
Expressions,304 as well as other international conventions of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization that acknowledge cultural diversity and economic and social development,305
Recognizing that culture is an essential component of human development, that it represents a source of
identity, innovation and creativity for the individual and the community and that it is an important factor in social
inclusion and poverty eradication, providing for sustainable economic growth and ownership of development
processes,
Recognizing also the importance of respect and understanding for cultural diversity throughout the world and
of working together and not against each other and of fostering intercultural understanding and dialogue, mutual
listening and learning and an ethic of global citizenship and solidarity,
Recalling the principles of the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization,306 and acknowledging that cultural diversity is a source of enrichment for
humankind and an important contribution to the sustainable development of local communities, peoples and
nations, empowering them to play an active and unique role in development initiatives,
Recognizing the importance of multilingualism as a means of promoting, protecting and preserving the
diversity of languages and cultures globally and that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity and
international understanding, and recognizing also the importance for the peoples of the world to communicate in
their own language,
Recalling the concerns expressed in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action307 on the
underrepresentation of women in decision-making positions in the area of culture, which has prevented women
from having a significant impact in the area of culture and development,
Recalling also the importance of the promotion of national cultures, artistic creation in all its forms and
international and regional cultural cooperation, and reaffirming in this regard the relevance of strengthening national
efforts and regional and international cooperation mechanisms for cultural action and artistic creation and
recognizing respect for cultural pluralism, as defined by the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, as policies
for the inclusion and participation of all citizens that guarantee social cohesion and the vitality of civil society and
peace, enhance cultural development and contribute to sustainable development,
Recognizing the linkages between cultural and biological diversity and the positive contribution of local and
indigenous traditional knowledge in addressing environmental challenges in a sustainable manner,
Taking note of the declaration adopted in Florence, Italy, on 4 October 2014, at the third United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization World Forum on Culture and Cultural Industries, which follows
the Hangzhou Declaration: Placing Culture at the Heart of Sustainable Development Policies, adopted in Hangzhou,
China, on 17 May 2013, and the Bali Promise, adopted at the World Culture Forum, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 24
to 27 November 2013, on the role that culture plays as a driver of sustainable development,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
_______________
304

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2440, No. 43977.
The Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1954); the Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (1970); the Convention concerning
the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (1972); the Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage
(2001); and the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003).
306
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-first Session, Paris,
15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25, annex I.
307
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
305

524

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Reaffirms the role of culture as an enabler of sustainable development that provides people and
communities with a strong sense of identity and social cohesion and contributes to more effective and sustainable
development policies and measures at all levels, and stresses in this regard that policies responsive to cultural
contexts can yield better, sustainable, inclusive and equitable development outcomes;
2. Recognizes the potential of culture as a driver of sustainable development, which contributes to a strong
and viable economic sector by generating income, creating decent jobs and addressing both the economic and social
dimensions of poverty through cultural heritage and cultural and creative industries, while providing innovative and
effective solutions to cross-cutting issues, such as education, health, gender equality and the environment;
3. Emphasizes the important contribution of culture to the three dimensions of sustainable development
and to the achievement of national development objectives and the Sustainable Development Goals and other
internationally agreed development goals, and in this regard acknowledges:
(a) That culture contributes to inclusive economic development, as cultural heritage, cultural and creative
industries, sustainable cultural tourism and cultural infrastructure are sources of income generation and job creation,
including at the community level, thus improving living conditions and fostering community-based economic
growth, and contribute to empowering individuals;
(b) That culture contributes to inclusive social development for all, including local communities and
indigenous peoples, with respect for cultural diversity, safeguarding of the cultural and natural heritage, fostering of
cultural institutions and strengthening of cultural and creative industries;
(c) That culture contributes to environmental sustainability, since the protection of cultural and biological
diversity and the natural heritage is crucial to sustainable development, while supporting traditional systems of
environmental protection, and resource management can contribute to the increased sustainability of fragile
ecosystems and the preservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, reducing land degradation and mitigating the
effects of climate change;
4. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Reaffirms that sustainable development cannot be realized without peace and security and that peace and
security will be at risk without sustainable development, and acknowledges that culture can contribute to sustainable
development by constituting a valuable resource for empowering communities to participate fully in social and
cultural life, facilitating inclusive governance and dialogue at the national, regional and international levels and
contributing to conflict prevention and resolution, as well as to reconciliation and recovery;
6. Recognizes that culture should be taken into account in the promotion and implementation of new
sustainable consumption and production patterns that contribute to the responsible use of resources and address the
adverse impacts of climate change;
7. Acknowledges that quality education is enriched by culture, which transmits shared values, knowledge
and skills;
8. Welcomes the inclusion in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of several targets reflecting the
contribution of culture to sustainable development, recalls that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets are
integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development, and in this regard looks
forward to their achievement, building on the positive results and impact of programmes utilizing culture as an
enabler of sustainable development;
9. Decides to give consideration, as appropriate, to the contribution of culture to sustainable development
in the follow-up and review framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
10. Invites all countries, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system, relevant
non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders:
(a) To raise public awareness of the importance of cultural diversity for sustainable development, promoting
its positive value through education and media tools;
(b) To ensure a more visible and effective integration and mainstreaming of culture into economic, social
and environmental development policies and strategies at all levels;
525

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(c) To ensure that women and men can equally access, participate in and contribute to cultural life and
decision-making, and to further commit themselves to the development of cultural policies and programmes with a
gender perspective at the local, national and international levels in order to promote gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls;
(d) To promote capacity-building, where appropriate, at all levels for the development of a dynamic cultural
and creative sector, in particular by encouraging creativity, innovation and entrepreneurship, supporting the
development of cultural institutions and cultural industries, providing technical and vocational training for culture
professionals and increasing employment opportunities in the cultural and creative sector for sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth and development;
(e) To actively support the emergence of local markets for cultural goods and services and to facilitate the
effective and licit access of such goods and services to international markets, taking into account the expanding
range of cultural production and consumption and, for States parties to it, the provisions of the Convention on the
Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions;304
(f) To preserve and maintain local and indigenous traditional knowledge and community practices of
environmental management, which are valuable examples of culture as a vehicle for sustainable development, and
to foster synergies between modern science and technology and local and indigenous knowledge, practices and
innovation;
(g) To promote global awareness of the linkages between cultural and biological diversity, including
through the protection and encouragement of the customary use of biological resources, in accordance with
traditional cultural practices, as a key element of a comprehensive approach to sustainable development;
(h) To support national legal frameworks and policies for the protection and preservation of cultural heritage
and cultural property,308 encouraging initiatives to fight against illicit trafficking in cultural property and the return of
cultural property, in accordance with national legislation and applicable international legal frameworks, including by
promoting international cooperation to prevent the misappropriation of cultural heritage and products, recognizing
the importance of intellectual property rights in sustaining those involved in cultural creativity;
(i) To note that, in achieving these objectives, innovative mechanisms of financing can make a positive
contribution in assisting developing countries in mobilizing additional resources for development on a stable,
predictable and voluntary basis, and to reiterate that such voluntary mechanisms should be effective, should aim to
mobilize resources that are stable and predictable, should supplement and not be a substitute for traditional sources
of financing, should be disbursed in accordance with the priorities of developing countries and should not unduly
burden such countries;
(j) To mobilize culture as a vehicle to foster tolerance, mutual understanding, peace and reconciliation in
the context of conflict-prevention, conflict-resolution and peacebuilding processes;
11. Expresses deep concern that cultural property, including religious sites and objects, is increasingly
targeted by terrorist attacks, often resulting in its damage, theft or complete destruction, and condemns such attacks;
12. Encourages all countries, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system,
relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to enhance international cooperation in
supporting the efforts of developing countries towards the development, strengthening and consolidation of cultural
industries, cultural tourism and culture-related microenterprises and to assist those countries in developing the
necessary infrastructure and skills, as well as in mastering information and communications technologies and in
gaining access to new technologies on mutually agreed terms;
13. Encourages initiatives to foster cultural cooperation agreements and networks at the regional level for
knowledge- and information-sharing for sustainable development;
14. Invites the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, to continue to provide support, to facilitate financing and to assist Member
_______________
308

As defined in article 1 of the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 823, No. 11806).

526

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

States, upon their request, in developing their national capacities to optimize the contribution of culture to
sustainable development, including through information-sharing, the exchange of best practices, data collection,
research and study and the use of appropriate evaluation indicators, as well as to implement applicable international
cultural conventions, taking into account the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
15. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other relevant United
Nations bodies to continue to assess, in consultation with Member States, the contribution of culture to the
achievement of sustainable development through the compilation of quantitative data, including indicators and
statistics, with a view to informing development policies and relevant reports, where appropriate;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations country teams continue to further integrate
and mainstream culture into their programming exercises, in particular United Nations Development Assistance
Frameworks, in consultation with relevant national authorities, when assisting countries in the pursuit of their
development objectives;
17. Encourages all countries, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system,
relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to give due consideration to the
contribution of culture to the achievement of sustainable development in the formulation of national, regional and
international development policies and international cooperation instruments;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the sub-item entitled “Culture and sustainable development” in the provisional agenda of its
seventy-second session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/215
A/RE S/70 /215

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/474/Add.4, para. 8)309

70/215.

Development cooperation with middle-income countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that the new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes, inter alia, that middle-income
countries still face significant challenges to achieve sustainable development and that, in order to ensure that
achievements made to date are sustained, efforts to address ongoing challenges should be strengthened through the
_______________
309

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

527

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

exchange of experiences, improved coordination and better and focused support of the United Nations development
system, the international financial institutions, regional organizations and other stakeholders,
Reaffirming its resolution 67/226 of 21 December 2012 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system,
Recalling its resolutions 63/223 of 19 December 2008, 64/208 of 21 December 2009, 66/212 of 22 December
2011 and 68/222 of 20 December 2013,
Taking note of the outcomes of the international conferences on development cooperation with middle-income
countries held in Madrid on 1 and 2 March 2007,310 in San Salvador on 3 and 4 October 2007,311 in Windhoek from
4 to 6 August 2008312 and in San José from 12 to 14 June 2013,313
Noting the regional conferences on development cooperation with middle-income countries held in Cairo on
11 and 12 March 2008, in Minsk on 16 and 17 May 2013, in Amman on 23 May 2013 and in Minsk on 23 and
24 April 2015,
Emphasizing that cohesive, nationally owned sustainable development strategies, supported by integrated
national financing frameworks, will be at the heart of efforts by Member States, reiterating that each country has
primary responsibility for its own economic and social development and that the role of national policies and
development strategies cannot be overemphasized, highlighting the need to respect each country’s policy space and
leadership in the implementation of policies for poverty eradication and sustainable development while remaining
consistent with relevant international rules and commitments, recognizing that national development efforts need to
be supported by an enabling international economic environment, including coherent and mutually supporting
world trade, monetary and financial systems and strengthened and enhanced global economic governance, and
highlighting the fact that processes to develop and facilitate the availability of appropriate knowledge and
technologies globally, as well as capacity-building, are also critical, including pursuing policy coherence and an
enabling environment for sustainable development at all levels and by all actors and reinvigorating the global
partnership for sustainable development,
Reaffirming that the fundamental characteristics of the operational activities for development of the United
Nations system should be, inter alia, their universal, voluntary and grant nature, their neutrality and their
multilateralism, as well as their ability to respond to the development needs of programme countries in a flexible
manner, and that the operational activities are carried out for the benefit of programme countries, at their request and
in accordance with their own policies and priorities for development,
Emphasizing that there is no “one size fits all” approach to development and that development assistance by the
United Nations development system should respond to the varying development needs of programme countries,
including the development needs of middle-income countries, and should be aligned with their national development
plans and strategies in accordance with its mandates, keeping in mind the needs of the least developed countries,
Noting that national averages based on criteria such as per capita income do not always reflect the actual
particularities and development needs of middle-income countries and that, despite notable reductions in poverty,
middle-income countries are still home to the majority of the world’s people living in poverty and inequalities remain,
Recognizing that high degrees of inequality may contribute to vulnerability in middle-income countries and
constrain sustainable development in many of those countries, and that economic growth needs to be sustained,
inclusive and equitable,
Stressing that middle-income countries continue to face particular challenges related to, inter alia, job creation,
the diversification and transformation of their economies and access to international markets and, in this regard, that
efforts to create a national enabling environment for development should be complemented by a global enabling
environment,
_______________
310

See A/62/71-E/2007/46, annex.
See A/62/483-E/2007/90, annex.
312
See A/C.2/63/3, annexes I and II.
313
See A/C.2/68/5.
311

528

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the resolve of Member States to enhance and strengthen domestic resource mobilization and fiscal
space, including, where appropriate, through modernized tax systems, more efficient tax collection, the broadening
of the tax base and the effective combating of tax evasion and capital flight, and reiterating that, while each country
is responsible for its tax system, it is important to support national efforts in these areas by strengthening technical
assistance and enhancing international cooperation and participation in addressing international tax matters,
Recognizing the need to better understand the multidimensional nature of development and poverty, and
acknowledging the significant role that the United Nations system has played and should continue to play in this
regard,
Reaffirming that achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls, and the full realization of their
human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable
development, and in that regard reiterating the need for gender mainstreaming, including targeted actions and
investments in the formulation and implementation of all financial, economic, environmental and social policies,
Expressing concern about the adverse impact and consequences of the world financial and economic crisis,
including on development, and evidence of an uneven, fragile and slow recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and stability and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility
in global markets, falling commodity prices, high unemployment, particularly among young people, unsustainable
debt in some countries and widespread fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and
reflect the need for additional progress towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stressing the need for
continuing efforts to address systemic fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international
financial system while implementing the reforms agreed upon to date,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;314

2. Acknowledges the efforts made and successes achieved by many middle-income countries in eradicating
poverty and achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
as well as their significant contribution to global and regional development and economic stability;
3. Also acknowledges that identifying structural gaps can improve the understanding of development needs
of developing countries, including middle-income countries;
4. Expresses concern that some middle-income countries are highly indebted and face increased challenges
to their long-term debt sustainability;
5. Welcomes the solidarity of middle-income countries with other developing countries, in particular the
financial, technical, technology transfer and capacity-building support being provided by middle-income countries,
particularly to the least developed countries, through South-South and triangular cooperation, while stressing that
South-South cooperation is a complement to, and not a substitute for, North-South cooperation, and in this regard
calls upon the United Nations development system to continue its ongoing efforts to mainstream support to SouthSouth cooperation and triangular cooperation;
6. Requests the United Nations development system to ensure that it addresses the diverse development needs
of middle-income countries in a coordinated manner through, inter alia, an accurate assessment of the national priorities
and needs of these countries, taking into account the use of variables that go beyond per capita income criteria;
7. Stresses, in that regard, that the quadrennial comprehensive policy review negotiations in 2016 should
give due consideration to ways in which the United Nations development system could improve its support to
different country contexts, including how to provide efficient, effective, better-focused and better-coordinated
support to middle-income countries in order to strengthen their efforts to overcome the significant challenges that
they face in achieving sustainable development, and invites the Economic and Social Council to discuss, inter alia,
concrete proposals to this effect in the ongoing process of dialogues of the Council on the long-term positioning of
the United Nations development system;
_______________
314

A/70/227.

529

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

8. Calls upon developed countries and developing countries members of the World Trade Organization
declaring themselves in a position to do so to realize the timely implementation of duty-free and quota-free market
access on a lasting basis for all products originating from all the least developed countries, consistent with the decisions
of the World Trade Organization, and also calls upon those countries to take steps to facilitate market access for
products of the least developed countries, including by developing simple and transparent rules of origin applicable
to imports from the least developed countries, in accordance with the guidelines adopted by the members of the
World Trade Organization at its Ninth Ministerial Conference, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 3 to 7 December 2013;
9. Recognizes the importance of the role of the private sector, as well as of the role of public-private
partnerships, in meeting the challenges of sustainable development for middle-income countries and other
developing countries;
10. Also recognizes that the creation, development and diffusion of innovations and new technologies and
associated know-how, including the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms, are powerful drivers of
economic growth and sustainable development;
11. Welcomes the launch, by its resolution 70/1, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism, and looks forward to its expeditious
operationalization;
12. Recognizes the great importance of providing trade-related capacity-building for developing countries,
including African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing
States and middle-income countries, including for the promotion of regional economic integration and
interconnectivity;
13. Acknowledges that good governance and the rule of law at the national and international levels are
essential for sustained economic growth, sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and hunger;
14. Recognizes that middle-income countries still face significant challenges in achieving sustainable
development and that, in order to ensure that achievements made to date are sustained, efforts to address ongoing
challenges should be strengthened through the exchange of experiences, improved coordination and better and
focused support of the United Nations development system, the international financial institutions, regional
organizations and other stakeholders, requests those stakeholders to ensure that the diverse and specific
development needs of middle-income countries are appropriately considered and addressed, in a tailored fashion, in
their relevant strategies and policies, with a view to promoting a coherent and comprehensive approach towards
individual countries, and acknowledges that official development assistance and other forms of concessional
financing are still important for a number of these countries and have a role to play in achieving targeted results,
taking into account the specific needs of these countries;
15. Encourages shareholders in multilateral development banks to develop graduation policies that are
sequenced, phased and gradual and to explore ways to ensure that their assistance best addresses the opportunities
and challenges presented by the diverse circumstances of middle-income countries;
16. Recognizes that Governments will have the primary responsibility for follow-up and review at the
national, regional and global levels in relation to the progress made in implementing the Sustainable Development
Goals and targets and that quality, accessible, timely and reliable disaggregated data will be needed to help with the
measurement of progress and to ensure that no one is left behind, and in this regard reiterates the commitment to
intensify efforts to strengthen statistical capacities in developing countries, including middle-income countries;
17. Recalls paragraph 11 of its resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013, and stresses that the concerns and specific
challenges of middle-income countries should be given consideration, as appropriate, in the follow-up and review
process of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
18. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include, under the item entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the sub-item entitled “Development cooperation with middle-income countries” in the provisional
agenda of its seventy-second session, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second
Committee.
530

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/216
A/RE S/70 /216

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/475/Add.1, para. 8)315

70/216.

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Istanbul Declaration316 and the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020,317 adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in
Istanbul, Turkey, from 9 to 13 May 2011, and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/280 of 17 June
2011, in which the Assembly called upon all the relevant stakeholders to commit to implementing the Istanbul
Programme of Action,
Reaffirming the overarching goal of the Istanbul Programme of Action of overcoming the structural challenges
faced by the least developed countries to eradicate poverty, achieve the internationally agreed development goals
and enable graduation from the least developed country category,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming further its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling its resolution 69/231 of 19 December 2014 on the follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
Recalling also its resolution 67/221 of 21 December 2012 on the smooth transition for countries graduating
from the list of least developed countries,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2015/35 of 23 July 2015 on the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020318 and on the implementation, effectiveness and
added value of smooth transition measures;319
2. Calls upon the least developed countries, their development partners, the United Nations system and all
other actors to further intensify their efforts to fully and effectively implement, in a coordinated, coherent and
expeditious manner, the commitments made in the Istanbul Programme of Action317 in its eight priority areas,
namely: (a) productive capacity; (b) agriculture, food security and rural development; (c) trade; (d) commodities; (e)
_______________
315

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. I.
317
Ibid., chap. II.
318
A/70/83-E/2015/75.
319
A/70/292.
316

531

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

human and social development; (f) multiple crises and other emerging challenges; (g) mobilizing financial resources
for development and capacity-building; and (h) good governance at all levels;
3. Underscores that the ownership, leadership and primary responsibility for development in the least
developed countries rest with themselves, and also underscores that good governance, inclusiveness and
transparency, as well as domestic resource mobilization, are central to the development process of the least
developed countries and that these efforts need to be given concrete and substantial international support, in a spirit
of shared responsibility and mutual accountability, through renewed and strengthened global partnership, and calls
upon the international community to assist the least developed countries in building their capacities and to
strengthen the global partnership for development, including through strengthened support from all sources in all
priority areas of the Istanbul Programme of Action in order to ensure its timely, effective and full implementation
during the remainder of the decade;
4. Notes with appreciation that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development320 and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development321 incorporate a number of key
development challenges and priorities for the least developed countries;
5. Underlines that the special needs and development priorities of the least developed countries, as
contained in the Istanbul Programme of Action, such as productive capacity-building, including through the rapid
and timely development of infrastructure and energy, should be given appropriate consideration in relation to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
6. Also underlines the need for strong synergy, coherence and efficiency regarding the implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda;
7. Reaffirms that the least developed countries, as the most vulnerable group of countries, need enhanced
global support to overcome the structural challenges they face in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and in this regard calls upon the international community to prioritize and strengthen support from all
sources to facilitate the coordinated implementation and coherent follow-up to and monitoring of the Istanbul
Programme of Action, the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda in the least developed countries;
8. Recalls its decision, in its resolution 69/231, on the modalities of the Comprehensive High-level
Midterm Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for
the Decade 2011–2020, and decides that the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review will be held in Antalya,
Turkey, from 27 to 29 May 2016;
9. Welcomes the appointment of the Permanent Representatives of Belgium and Benin as the co-facilitators
to oversee and direct informal intergovernmental consultations on all issues relating to the Comprehensive Highlevel Midterm Review;
10. Decides that the preparatory meeting of experts, to be chaired by the co-facilitators, will be held from 28
to 31 March 2016, in accordance with its resolution 69/231, and that it will consider the draft outcome document;
11. Reaffirms the scope of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review, as contained in paragraph 28 of
its resolution 69/231;
12. Encourages participants to consider the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review as an opportunity
to highlight how the concrete measures, initiatives, partnerships and actions that they have taken to date have
supported the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action and to launch other concrete measures,
initiatives and partnerships, individually or collectively, that have the potential to further progress in the
implementation of the Programme of Action, building on the momentum of recent and relevant United Nations
meetings, agendas and conferences, and the decisions contained therein;
13. Reaffirms the critical importance of the full and effective participation of the least developed countries in
the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review at the national, regional and global levels, stresses that adequate
_______________
320
321

532

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

resources should be provided, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to mobilize extrabudgetary
resources in order to cover the cost of the participation of at least three government representatives of each least
developed country in the Midterm Review and at least two representatives of each least developed country in the
preparatory meeting of experts;
14. Notes the ongoing national- and regional-level preparations that will make important contributions to the
Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review;
15. Reiterates its call upon all Member States, and invites the organizations of the United Nations system
and other international and regional financial institutions, to actively participate in the Comprehensive High-level
Midterm Review, at the highest possible level, and in its preparatory processes;
16. Underlines the need to reduce the vulnerability of the least developed countries to economic, natural and
environmental shocks and disasters, as well as climate change, and to enhance their ability to meet these and other
challenges by strengthening their resilience, and in this regard stresses that it is important that all countries and other
actors work together to further develop and implement concrete measures on an urgent basis at the national and
international levels so as to build the resilience of the least developed countries to withstand economic shocks and
mitigate their adverse effects, to withstand and overcome the adverse effects of climate change, to enhance
sustainable growth and protect biodiversity and to withstand natural hazards in order to reduce the risk of disasters,
as agreed upon in the Istanbul Programme of Action;
17. Takes note of the feasibility study for a United Nations technology bank for the least developed countries
prepared by the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries322
and the report of the Secretary-General on the feasibility study for a United Nations technology bank for the least
developed countries,323 and appreciates the work done by the High-level Panel;
18. Welcomes with appreciation, and accepts, the offer by Turkey to host the technology bank and science,
technology and innovation supporting mechanism dedicated to the least developed countries under the auspices of
the United Nations in Gebze, and requests the Secretary-General to conclude a host country agreement with the
Government of Turkey in that regard;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States, in particular the least developed
countries, development partners and the host country, and drawing on the appropriate expertise inside and outside
the United Nations system, to take the steps necessary to launch and operationalize the technology bank for the least
developed countries, funded by voluntary contributions, by 2017, and to mobilize and ensure the continued support
for the technology bank from all relevant stakeholders, including through:
(a) Establishing a multi-stakeholder governing council comprising the representatives of the Governments
and the non-governmental sectors of the least developed countries, the host country, other Member States and the
Secretary-General, which, among other things, will formulate principles and policies governing the activities and
operations of the technology bank, in line with the recommendations of the High-level Panel, as guiding principles
and inform the General Assembly regularly on the work of the technology bank;
(b) Establishing a trust fund with the flexibility necessary to attract voluntary funding from Member States
and other stakeholders, including the private sector and foundations;
(c) Mobilizing the organizations of the United Nations system and other international and regional
organizations to support the launch and operationalization of the technology bank and its effective functioning;
20. Recalls the importance of avoiding duplication and enhancing synergies between the technology bank
for the least developed countries and the Technology Facilitation Mechanism;324
21. Reiterates its recommendation that the consultative mechanism specified in its resolution 59/209 of
20 December 2004 be established by the graduating country, in cooperation with its bilateral and multilateral
development and trading partners, to facilitate the preparation of the transition strategy and the identification of the
_______________
322

See http://unohrlls.org/custom-content/uploads/2015/10/Feasibility-Study-of-Technology-Bank.pdf.
A/70/408.
324
Resolution 69/313, para. 123, and resolution 70/1, para. 70.
323

533

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

associated actions and the negotiation of their duration and phasing-out for a period appropriate to the development
situation of the country, and that it be integrated into other relevant consultative processes and initiatives between
the graduating country and its development partners;
22. Invites development partners to make available timely information about country-specific support
measures and related smooth transition measures for the least developed countries in the areas of financial support,
technical assistance and trade-related measures, including their time frames, characteristics and modalities;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session a progress
report on the implementation, effectiveness and added value of smooth transition measures, including initiatives
taken by the United Nations system to support countries during their graduation from the least developed country
category;
24. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report, by the first quarter of
2016, on the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action, in lieu of his report to the General Assembly at
its seventy-first session and to the Economic and Social Council at its 2016 session , and decides to include, under
the item entitled “Groups of countries in special situations”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless
otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee;
25. Decides to consider the report of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review at its seventy-first
session, under the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries” of the item entitled “Groups of countries in special situations”.
RESOLUTION 70/217
A/RE S/70 /217

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/475/Add.2, para. 9)325

70/217.

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries
for the Decade 2014–2024,326 adopted at the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries, held in Vienna from 3 to 5 November 2014, at which all relevant stakeholders expressed their
commitment to the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Reaffirming the overarching goal of the Vienna Programme of Action of addressing the special development
needs and challenges of landlocked developing countries arising from their landlockedness, remoteness and
geographical constraints in a more coherent manner and thus contributing to an enhanced rate of sustainable and
inclusive growth, which can contribute to the eradication of poverty by moving towards the goal of ending extreme
poverty,
Recalling its resolution 69/232 of 19 December 2014,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,

_______________
325
326

534

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 69/137, annexes I and II.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,327
Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held
in 2012, entitled “The future we want”,328
Recalling further the Sendai Declaration and Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,329
while recognizing that landlocked developing countries face some specific disaster risk challenges, and reiterating
the commitment to addressing disaster risk reduction and building resilience to disasters within the context of
sustainable development and poverty eradication,
Recalling the Almaty Declaration330 and the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of
Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries,331
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the sea, aggravated by remoteness from world markets and
high transit costs and risks, continues to impose serious constraints on export earnings, private capital inflow and
domestic resource mobilization of landlocked developing countries and therefore adversely affects their overall
growth and socioeconomic development,
Recognizing also that the primary responsibility for establishing effective transit systems rests with landlocked
and transit developing countries,
Acknowledging the importance of promoting collaboration between landlocked developing countries and
transit countries on the basis of common interest, and noting that collaboration efforts need to be supported by an
enabling international economic environment, taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of
development and respecting national priorities,
Recognizing the need to promote both public and private investment in energy infrastructure and clean energy
technologies, as well as the special vulnerabilities and needs of landlocked developing countries,
Stressing the importance of the contribution of landlocked developing countries to Expo 2015, held in Milan,
Italy, from 1 May to 31 October 2015 on the theme “Feeding the planet, energy for life”, and of the effective
participation of landlocked developing countries in the activities of the United Nations Decade of Sustainable
Energy for All, including the Sustainable Energy for All initiative, and in Expo 2017, which will be held in Astana
and which will focus on the theme “Future energy”,
Acknowledging the need to promote meaningful regional integration to encompass cooperation among
countries and the importance of enhancing existing transport infrastructure facilities for the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action,
Recognizing that the Vienna Programme of Action is based on renewed and strengthened partnerships to
accompany landlocked developing countries in harnessing benefits from international trade, structurally
transforming their economies and achieving more inclusive and sustainable growth,
_______________
327

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
329
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
330
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003
(A/CONF.202/3), annex II.
331
Ibid., annex I.
328

535

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note of the Livingstone Call for Action for the Accelerated Implementation of the Vienna Programme
of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries, adopted at the high-level follow-up ministerial meeting to the
second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, held in Livingstone, Zambia, in
June 2015,
Taking note also of the declaration of the high-level meeting of Heads of State and Government of landlocked
developing countries on the theme “Linking Landlocked Developing Countries to Global Opportunities”, held at
United Nations Headquarters on 28 September 2015,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024;332
2. Welcomes the recognition of the special needs and challenges of landlocked developing countries in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development333 and in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,334 and affirms that the
effective implementation of those outcomes, together with the six priority areas of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024,335 can drive the social and economic progress of
landlocked developing countries and assist in their transformation from landlocked to land-linked countries;
3. Recognizes that landlocked developing countries face specific challenges in their efforts towards the
eradication of poverty and pursuit of sustainable development, and in this regard underscores the importance of
continued international support to complement the efforts of landlocked developing countries;
4. Invites the landlocked developing countries, transit countries, their development partners, the United
Nations system and all other actors to implement at all levels the actions that have been agreed upon in the Vienna
Programme of Action in its six priority areas, namely: fundamental transit policy issues; infrastructure development
and maintenance; international trade and trade facilitation; regional integration and cooperation; structural economic
transformation; and means of implementation; in a coordinated, coherent and expeditious manner;
5. Invites Member States to mainstream the Vienna Programme of Action into their national and sectoral
development strategies in order to ensure its effective implementation;
6. Invites development partners to provide targeted technical and financial support, as appropriate, towards
the implementation of the specific actions listed in the Vienna Programme of Action;
7. Calls upon the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, and invites international
organizations, such as the World Bank, the regional development banks, the World Trade Organization, the World
Customs Organization, the Common Fund for Commodities, regional economic integration organizations and other
relevant regional and subregional organizations, to integrate the Vienna Programme of Action into their programmes
of work, as appropriate, within their respective mandates, and to support landlocked and transit developing countries
in their implementation of the Programme of Action in a well-coordinated and coherent manner;
8. Appreciates the efforts made by Member States and other development partners, including the
governing bodies of the Economic Commission for Africa, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, inter alia, to mainstream the Vienna
Programme of Action;
9. Stresses that the harmonization, simplification and standardization of rules and documentation should be
promoted, including the full and effective implementation of international conventions on transport and transit and
bilateral, subregional and regional agreements, stresses also that cooperation on fundamental transit policies, laws
and regulations between landlocked developing countries and their transit neighbours is crucial for the effective and
integrated solution of cross-border trade and transit transport problems, and underlines that this cooperation should
be promoted on the basis of the mutual interests of both landlocked developing countries and transit countries;
_______________
332

A/70/305.
Resolution 70/1.
334
Resolution 69/313, annex.
335
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
333

536

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Underlines that infrastructure development plays a key role in reducing the cost of development for
landlocked developing countries and that the development and maintenance of transit transport infrastructure,
information and communications technology and energy infrastructure are crucial for landlocked developing
countries in order to reduce high trading costs, improve their competitiveness and become fully integrated in the
global market;
11. Welcomes the call in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda for the establishment of a new global infrastructure
forum, building on existing multilateral collaboration mechanisms, led by the multilateral development banks, and
underlines that this forum will encourage a greater range of voices to be heard, particularly from developing
countries, to identify and address infrastructure and capacity gaps, including in landlocked developing countries;
12. Stresses that the magnitude of the resources required to invest in infrastructure development and
maintenance remains a major challenge and requires forging international, regional, subregional and bilateral
cooperation on infrastructure projects, allocating more from national budgets, effectively deploying international
development assistance and multilateral financing in the development and maintenance of infrastructure and
strengthening the role of the private sector, and recognizes that both public and private investment have key roles to
play in infrastructure financing, including through development banks, development finance institutions and tools
and mechanisms such as public-private partnerships, blended finance, which combines concessional public finance
with non-concessional private finance and expertise from the public and private sector, special-purpose vehicles,
non-recourse project financing, risk mitigation instruments and pooled funding structures;
13. Encourages multilateral development banks, including regional banks, in collaboration with other
stakeholders, to address gaps in trade, transport and transit-related regional infrastructure, including by completing
missing links connecting, inter alia, landlocked developing countries within regional networks;
14. Underlines that greater integration of landlocked developing countries into world trade and global value
chains is vital for increasing their competitiveness and ensuring their economic development;
15. Calls upon members of the World Trade Organization to fully and expeditiously implement all the
decisions of the “Bali package” of the Ninth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization, held in Bali,
Indonesia, from 3 to 6 December 2013, and to expeditiously ratify the Agreement on Trade Facilitation;
16. Stresses the importance, for the economic development of landlocked developing countries, of their
increased participation in the multilateral trading system;
17. Also stresses that improved trade facilitation, including through further streamlining and harmonization
of customs and transit procedures and formalities and transparent and efficient border management and coordination
of agencies involved in border clearance, would help landlocked developing countries to enhance the
competitiveness of their export products and services;
18. Calls upon development partners to effectively implement the Aid for Trade initiative, giving adequate
consideration to the special needs and requirements of landlocked developing countries, including capacity-building
for the formulation of trade policies, participation in trade negotiations and the implementation of trade facilitation
measures, as well as the diversification of export products;
19. Stresses the need to promote meaningful regional integration to encompass cooperation among countries
in a broader range of areas than just trade and trade facilitation, including investment, research and development and
policies aimed at accelerating regional industrial development and regional connectivity, that this approach is aimed
at fostering structural change and economic growth in landlocked developing countries as a goal, and also as a
means of collectively linking regions to global markets, that this would enhance competitiveness and help to
maximize benefits from globalization and that documentation and the sharing and dissemination of best practices
are important to allow cooperating partners to benefit from each other’s experience;
20. Recognizes that the economies of many landlocked developing countries are still reliant on a few export
commodities, which often have low value addition, stresses the need for renewed and strengthened partnerships for
development to support landlocked developing countries in diversifying their economic base and enhancing value
addition to their exports by entering and moving up global value chains through the development of their productive
capacities, including through private sector involvement, and the development of small and medium-sized
537

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

enterprises, with a view to increasing the competitiveness of the products of landlocked developing countries in
export markets, and welcomes the establishment of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism in the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda;336
21. Underlines that, in order for landlocked developing countries to fully utilize their export and trade
potential, it is important to undertake measures that promote structural economic transformation capable of reducing
the negative impact of their geographical disadvantages and external shocks, creating jobs and ultimately leading to
poverty eradication and inclusive and sustainable growth and development, stresses that each landlocked developing
country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development and that the role of national
policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized, and in this regard stresses that the national
development efforts of landlocked developing countries need to be supported by an enabling international economic
environment;
22. Recognizes that landlocked developing countries remain highly vulnerable to external economic shocks
and to the multiple other challenges faced by the international community;
23. Also recognizes the adverse impacts of climate change, land degradation, desertification and
deforestation on the economies of landlocked developing countries, recognizes the potential benefits of mutually
addressing these challenges, and calls upon the international community to continue to support the efforts of
landlocked developing countries to address these challenges in an integrated manner, including through research on
the impacts of climate change in landlocked developing countries, as appropriate;
24. Urges those landlocked developing countries that have not yet done so to ratify, at their earliest
convenience, the Multilateral Agreement for the Establishment of an International Think Tank for Landlocked
Developing Countries in order to fully operationalize the think tank;
25. Invites developing countries, guided by the spirit of solidarity and consistent with their capabilities, to
provide support for the effective implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action in mutually agreed areas of
cooperation within the framework of South-South cooperation, which is a complement to, but not a substitute for,
North-South cooperation;
26. Underlines the importance of increasing and using high-quality, timely and reliable data disaggregated
by sex, age, geography, income, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability and other characteristics relevant in
national contexts, and stresses the need to enhance capacity-building support for developing countries, including
landlocked developing countries, for this purpose and to provide international cooperation, including through
technical and financial support, to further strengthen the capacity of national statistical authorities and bureaux;
27. Also underlines the critical role of the private sector, including through foreign direct investment, in the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action;
28. Further underlines the prominent role that foreign direct investment plays in accelerating development
and poverty reduction through employment, the transfer of managerial and technological know-how and non-debtcreating flows of capital, recognizes the considerable role and potential of private sector involvement in
infrastructure development for transport, telecommunications and utilities for landlocked developing countries,
encourages Member States to facilitate foreign direct investment flows to landlocked developing countries in this
regard, and calls upon landlocked and transit developing countries to promote an enabling environment to attract
foreign direct investment and private sector involvement;
29. Urges that effective linkages be made between the follow-up and review arrangements for the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and those of all relevant United Nations conferences and processes, including
the Vienna Programme of Action, in line with the 2030 Agenda;
30. Underlines the importance of successful implementation, follow-up and review of the Vienna
Programme of Action at the national, subregional, regional and global levels;
31. Stresses that, in accordance with the mandate given by the General Assembly, the Office of the High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing
_______________
336

538

Resolution 69/313, annex, para. 123.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

States will ensure the coordinated follow-up to, effective monitoring of and reporting on the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action and will undertake advocacy efforts at the national, regional and global levels, and
also stresses that the Office, in collaboration with other relevant stakeholders, should work on developing relevant
indicators for measuring the progress on implementing the Programme of Action in landlocked developing
countries, within their existing mandates;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first
session, under the item entitled “Groups of countries in special situations”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the
second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries”, unless otherwise agreed in the
discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/218
A/RE S/70 /218

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/476/Add.1, para. 8)337

70/218.

Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/234 of 19 December 2014 and all other resolutions related to the eradication of
poverty,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by Heads of State and Government on the
occasion of the Millennium Summit,338 as well as the international commitment to eradicate extreme poverty and to
halve, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income is less than 1 United States dollar a day339 and
the proportion of people who suffer from hunger,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome340 and the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,341
Taking note of the ongoing efforts to implement the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2011–2020,342 adopted in May 2011 at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,343 adopted in September
2014 at the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, and the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024,344 adopted in November 2014 at the second
United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, and recognizing that middle-income countries
still face significant challenges in achieving sustainable development and the need, among other things, for
improved coordination and better and focused support of the United Nations development system,
Reaffirming the importance of supporting Agenda 2063 of the African Union, as well as its 10-year plan of
action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next
50 years, its continental programme embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development, and regional initiatives, such as the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme,
_______________
337

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
Resolution 55/2.
339
Since 2008, United Nations reports on the Millennium Development Goals have been using a poverty line of 1.25 United States dollars
a day.
340
Resolution 60/1.
341
Resolution 66/288, annex.
342
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
343
Resolution 69/15, annex.
344
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
338

539

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006 on the follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005
World Summit, including the Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development
goals, its resolution 63/303 of 9 July 2009, entitled “Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development”, its resolution 65/1 of 22 September 2010 on the outcome
document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals and
its resolution 68/6 of 9 October 2013 on the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
Taking note with appreciation of Economic and Social Council resolution 2011/37 of 28 July 2011, entitled
“Recovering from the world financial and economic crisis: a Global Jobs Pact”, of the ministerial declaration
adopted at the high-level segment of the 2012 session of the Council,345 which called for increased efforts to
enhance coordination at all levels with a view to strengthening national development strategies, investing in
productive capacities, helping to start and grow business and promoting opportunities for full and productive
employment and decent work for all, and of the integration segment of the 2015 session of the Council, which was
convened under the theme “Achieving sustainable development through employment creation and decent work
for all”,
Recalling the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development346 and the
Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,347
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recognizing that the importance of the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development,
Concerned at the global nature of poverty and inequality, underlining the fact that the eradication of poverty
and hunger is an ethical, social, political and economic imperative of all humankind, and in this regard recognizing
that there is a need to better understand the multidimensional nature of development and poverty,
Reaffirming that each country faces specific challenges in its pursuit of sustainable development, that the most
vulnerable countries and, in particular, African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States deserve special attention, as do countries in situations of conflict and
post-conflict countries, and that there are also serious challenges within many middle-income countries,
Expressing concern about the adverse impact of the consequences of the world financial and economic crisis,
including on development, and evidence of an uneven, fragile and slow recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and stability and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility
_______________
345

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/67/3/Rev.1), chap. IV, sect. F.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
347
Resolution 63/239, annex.
346

540

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

in global markets, excessive volatility of commodity prices, high unemployment, particularly among young people,
unsustainable debt in some countries and widespread fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic
recovery and reflect the need for additional progress towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and
stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen
the international financial system while implementing the reforms agreed upon to date,
Reaffirming that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time, that its adverse impacts
undermine the ability of all countries to achieve sustainable development, that increases in global temperature, sea
level rise, ocean acidification and other climate change impacts are seriously affecting coastal areas and low-lying
coastal countries, including many least developed countries and small island developing States, and that the survival
of many societies and of the biological support systems of the planet are at risk, further threatening food security and
efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development, and thus requiring urgent action to maintain,
preserve and sustain the development gains achieved in the past decades,
Concerned that, past the midway point of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2008–2017), while there has been progress in reducing poverty, especially in some middle-income countries, such
progress has been uneven, with the number of people living in poverty in its different forms and dimensions
continuing to increase and inequalities to rise in some countries, with women and children constituting the majority
of the most affected groups, especially in the least developed countries and particularly in sub-Saharan Africa,
Recognizing that rates of economic growth vary among countries and that these differences must be addressed
by, among other actions, promoting pro-poor growth and social protection,
Emphasizing that corruption at all levels, including the illicit transfer of funds and assets, is an obstacle to
development, stressing the need for the return of such funds and assets to their countries of origin, and calling upon
all Member States to identify, assess and act on money-laundering risks, including through effective implementation
of the Financial Action Task Force standards on anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism financing,
Urging all countries that have not yet done so to ratify and accede to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption,348 and encouraging parties to review its implementation, committing to making the Convention an
effective instrument to deter, detect, prevent and counter corruption and bribery, prosecute those involved in corrupt
activities and recover and return stolen assets to their country of origin, and encouraging the international
community to develop good practices on asset return,
Reaffirming that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge facing the world today and an
indispensable requirement for sustainable development, particularly in Africa, in the least developed countries, small
island developing States and in some middle-income countries, and underlining the importance of accelerating
sustainable, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development, including full, productive
employment generation and decent work for all, with a view to reducing inequalities within and among countries,
Acknowledging that the eradication of poverty requires a balanced approach to the three dimensions of
sustainable development – economic, social and environmental – in order to ensure that gains are irreversible,
Reaffirming that women are key contributors to the economy and to combating poverty and inequalities,
through both paid and unpaid work, at home, in the community and in the workplace, and that evidence shows that
gender equality, the empowerment of women and their full and equal participation and leadership in the economy
are vital in order to achieve sustainable development and significantly enhance economic growth and productivity,
and reaffirming also that gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls will make a crucial contribution
to progress in realizing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and are critical factors in the eradication of
poverty,
Recognizing the importance of supporting countries in their efforts to eradicate poverty and promote the
empowerment of the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including women, children and youth, indigenous
peoples, older persons, persons with disabilities, migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons,
Recognizing also that the difficult socioeconomic conditions that exist in many developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, have contributed to the feminization of poverty,
_______________
348

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.

541

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing further the centrality of mobilizing financial and non-financial resources for development at the
national and international levels and the effective use of those resources, as well as the importance of policy
coherence and an enabling environment for sustainable development, at all levels and by all actors, and of
reinvigorating the global partnership for sustainable development in support of the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, as established by the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals,
Expressing concern that aggregate/net official development assistance (ODA) fell from 0.30 per cent in 2013
to 0.29 per cent in 2014, while noting that aggregate/net ODA has increased since 2000 and has long been a key
source of financing for development, and reiterating the call on those Member States that have made commitments
to fulfil those commitments and step up efforts to increase their assistance and make additional concrete efforts
towards meeting their ODA targets,
Underscoring that, for all countries, public policies and the mobilization and effective use of domestic
resources, underscored by the principle of national ownership, are central to the common pursuit of sustainable
development, including achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, and recognizing that domestic resources are
first and foremost generated by economic growth, supported by an enabling environment at all levels,
Acknowledging that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for but rather a complement to North-South
cooperation, and recognizing the contributions of South-South and triangular cooperation to the efforts of
developing countries to eradicate poverty and pursue sustainable development,
Acknowledging also that good governance at the national and international levels and sustainable, inclusive,
sustained and equitable economic growth, supported by full employment and decent work for all, rising productivity
and a favourable environment, including public and private investment and entrepreneurship, are necessary to
eradicate poverty, achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development
Goals, as established by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the unfinished business of the
Millennium Development Goals, and to realize a rise in living standards, and that corporate social responsibility
initiatives play an important role in maximizing the impact of public and private investment,
Underlining the priority and urgency given by Heads of State and Government to the eradication of poverty,
as expressed in the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields,
Emphasizing the essential role of inclusive and sustainable industrial development as part of a comprehensive
strategy of structural economic transformation in eradicating poverty and supporting sustained economic growth
and thus in contributing to achieving sustainable development in developing countries, including the most
vulnerable countries, in particular African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States, while recognizing the specific challenges facing middle-income countries, and
emphasizing also that countries in situations of conflict and post-conflict countries also deserve special attention,
Taking note of the work done under the inter-agency, system-wide plan of action for poverty eradication
coordinating the efforts of the United Nations system in its advisory and programmatic support to Member States,
involving more than 21 agencies, funds, programmes and regional commissions, and encouraging the alignment of
that work with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Stressing the importance of policies to address longer-term structural issues, including structural constraints
faced by women as economic agents, and to diversify commodity economies and integrate commodity policies into
wider development and poverty eradication strategies at all levels,
Stressing also the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no
country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Second United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017), under the item entitled “Eradication of poverty and other
development issues”;349
_______________
349

542

A/70/281.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Reaffirms that the objective of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2008–2017) is to support, in an efficient and coordinated manner, the follow-up to the implementation of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, as established by the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development,350 and the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals
relating to the eradication of poverty and to coordinate international support to that end;
3. Also reaffirms that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the
greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, as well as an overarching
objective of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, of which the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development351 is an integral part;
4. Further reaffirms that each country must take primary responsibility for its own economic and social
development and that the role of national policies and development strategies for the achievement of sustainable
development and poverty eradication cannot be overemphasized, and recognizes that increased effective national
efforts should be complemented by concrete, effective and supportive international programmes, measures and
policies aimed at expanding the development opportunities of developing countries, while taking into account
national conditions and ensuring respect for national ownership strategies and sovereignty;
5. Emphasizes the need to accord the highest priority within the United Nations development agenda to the
eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions in order to ensure that gains are irreversible, while stressing
the importance of addressing the causes and challenges of poverty through integrated, coordinated and coherent
strategies at the national, intergovernmental and inter-agency levels, in accordance with the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields;
6. Reiterates the need to strengthen the leadership role of the United Nations in promoting international
cooperation for development and its role at the regional level, in particular that of its regional commissions, as
appropriate, which is critical for the eradication of poverty;
7. Emphasizes that the promotion of regional, subregional and interregional cooperation can have a
catalytic impact on poverty eradication efforts and offers many benefits, including the exchange of best policies,
experiences and technical expertise, the mobilization of resources and the expansion of economic opportunities and
conditions favourable to job creation;
8. Calls upon the international community, including Member States, to continue to accord the highest
priority to poverty eradication within the United Nations development agenda and to urgently take measures to
address the root causes and challenges of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, hunger
and all forms of malnutrition, in the light of their negative impact on sustainable development, through integrated,
coordinated and coherent strategies at all levels, and calls upon donor countries in a position to do so to support the
effective national efforts of developing countries in this regard through the provision of predictable financial
resources on a bilateral and multilateral basis;
9. Stresses the importance of public-private partnerships in a wide range of areas, with the aim of eradicating
poverty and promoting full and productive employment and decent work for all and social integration, as appropriate;
10. Acknowledges the complexity of the challenge of poverty eradication, and in this regard emphasizes that,
in accelerating poverty eradication, the organizations of the United Nations development system must be driven by
national priorities, with the development of national capacities in developing countries continuing to be a core area
of focus, and operate in an integrated, coordinated and coherent manner, through development programmes and
projects that address poverty eradication as their underlying objective, within their respective mandates, in order to
ensure that gains are irreversible, making full use of the interlinked and mutually reinforcing pillars of the United
Nations development system, and encourages the use of diverse strategies;
11. Recognizes the role of the specialized agencies and United Nations funds and programmes, including
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, in contributing to international advocacy for eradicating poverty in all its
forms and dimensions, through, inter alia, education and training;
_______________
350
351

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.

543

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

12. Emphasizes that international public finance plays an important role in complementing the efforts of
countries to mobilize public resources domestically, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable countries with
limited domestic resources, and that an important use of international public finance, including ODA, is to catalyse
additional resource mobilization from other public and private sources, and that ODA providers reaffirm their
respective commitments, including the commitment by many developed countries to achieve the target of
0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance (ODA/GNI) to developing countries and
0.15 per cent to 0.2 per cent of ODA/GNI to the least developed countries;
13. Welcomes the increase in the volume of ODA since the adoption of the Monterrey Consensus,346
expresses its concern that many countries still fall short of their ODA commitments, reiterates that the fulfilment of
all ODA commitments remains crucial, welcomes those few countries that have met or surpassed their commitment
to 0.7 per cent of ODA/GNI and the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of ODA/GNI to the least developed countries,
urges all other countries to step up efforts to increase their ODA and to make additional concrete efforts towards the
ODA targets, welcomes the decision by the European Union reaffirming its collective commitment to achieve the
target of 0.7 per cent of ODA/GNI within the time frame of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
undertaking to meet collectively the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of ODA/GNI to the least developed countries in
the short term and to reach 0.20 per cent of ODA/GNI to the least developed countries within the time frame of the
2030 Agenda, and encourages ODA providers to consider setting a target to provide at least 0.20 per cent of
ODA/GNI to the least developed countries;
14. Recognizes the importance of focusing the majority of concessional resources on those countries with
the greatest needs and least ability to mobilize other resources, notes with great concern in this regard the decline in
the share of ODA to the least developed countries, commits to reversing this decline, and welcomes those who are
allocating at least 50 per cent of their ODA to the least developed countries;
15. Stresses the importance of mobilizing greater domestic support towards the fulfilment of ODA
commitments, including through raising public awareness, and providing data on aid effectiveness and
demonstrating tangible results, encourages partner countries to build on progress achieved in ensuring that ODA is
used effectively to help to achieve development goals and targets, encourages the publication of forward-looking
plans that increase the clarity, predictability and transparency of future development cooperation, in accordance with
national budget allocation processes, and urges countries to track and report resource allocations for gender equality
and the empowerment of women;
16. Notes that an important use of international public finance, including ODA, is to catalyse additional
resource mobilization from other sources, public and private, also noting that it can support improved tax collection
and help to strengthen domestic enabling environments and build essential public services and can also be used to
unlock additional finance through blended or pooled financing and risk mitigation, notably for infrastructure and
other investments that support private sector development;
17. Recalls the commitment to hold open, inclusive and transparent discussions on the modernization of the
ODA measurement and on the proposed measure of “total official support for sustainable development”, and affirms
that any such measure will not dilute the commitments already made;
18. Welcomes the increasing efforts to improve the quality of ODA and to increase its development impact,
recognizes the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council, notes other initiatives, such
as the high-level forums on aid effectiveness, which produced, inter alia, the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness,
the Accra Agenda for Action352 and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, which make
important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made commitments to them, including through the
adoption of the fundamental principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization and managing for results,
and bears in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that will guarantee effective assistance and that the
specific situation of each country needs to be fully considered;
19. Recognizes the urgent need to address poverty, hunger, malnutrition and food security, which will lead to
rich payoffs across the Sustainable Development Goals, and encourages the international community to enhance
international cooperation and devote resources to developing rural and urban areas and sustainable agriculture and
_______________
352

544

A/63/539, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

fisheries and to supporting smallholder farmers, especially women farmers, herders and fishers in developing
countries, particularly in the least developed countries;
20. Also recognizes that social and economic development depends on the sustainable management of the
natural resources of the planet, and stresses the importance of conserving and sustainably using oceans and seas,
freshwater resources, forests, mountains and drylands and protecting biodiversity, ecosystems and wildlife, as well
as promoting sustainable tourism, tackling water scarcity and water pollution, strengthening cooperation on
desertification, dust storms, degraded land and soil and drought, promoting resilience and disaster risk reduction,
addressing decisively the threat posed by climate change and environmental degradation and implementing the
10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns;353
21. Encourages all relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, to strengthen United Nations funding for the
eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions through voluntary contributions to existing poverty-related
system-wide funds;
22. Recognizes that sustainable, inclusive, sustained and equitable economic growth is essential for
eradicating poverty and hunger, in particular in developing countries, and stresses that national efforts in this regard
should be complemented by an enabling international environment and by ensuring greater coherence among
macroeconomic, trade and social policies at all levels;
23. Stresses the resolve to eradicate extreme poverty for all people everywhere, currently measured as living
on less than 1.25 dollars a day, and the efforts to reduce at least by half the proportion of men, women and children
of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions, according to national definitions;
24. Recognizes that poverty is multidimensional, invites national Governments, supported by the
international community, to consider developing complementary measurements that better reflect this
multidimensionality, and emphasizes the importance of developing a common understanding among national
Governments and other stakeholders of the multidimensional nature of poverty;
25. Calls upon Member States to continue their ambitious efforts towards more inclusive, equitable,
balanced, stable and development-oriented sustainable socioeconomic approaches to overcoming poverty, and, in
view of the negative impact of inequality on poverty, emphasizes the importance of structural transformation that
leads to inclusive and sustainable industrialization for employment creation and poverty reduction, investment in
sustainable agriculture and resilient infrastructure development and achievement of access to energy, as well as the
promotion of decent rural employment, improved access to quality education and health care, the promotion of
gender equality and the empowerment of women, the expansion of social protection coverage, climate change
mitigation and the adaptation and combating of inequality and social exclusion;
26. Invites all relevant stakeholders, including organizations of the United Nations system and civil society
organizations, to share good practices relating to programmes and policies that address inequalities for the benefit of
those living in extreme poverty and promote the active participation of those living in extreme poverty in the design
and implementation of such programmes and policies, with the aim of achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
27. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, including the regional commissions,
as appropriate, to conduct activities to accelerate and review progress in the implementation of the Second Decade,
in consultation with Member States and other relevant stakeholders;
28. Notes with concern the continuing high levels of unemployment and underemployment, particularly
among young people, recognizes that decent work for all remains one of the best routes out of poverty, and in this
regard invites donor countries, multilateral organizations and other development partners to continue to assist
Member States, in particular developing countries, in adopting policies consistent with the Global Jobs Pact adopted
by the International Labour Conference at its ninety-eighth session as a general framework within which each
country can formulate policy packages specific to its situation and national priorities in order to promote a jobintensive recovery and sustainable development;
_______________
353

A/CONF.216/5, annex.

545

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

29. Urges Member States to address the global challenge of youth unemployment by developing and
implementing strategies that give young people everywhere a real chance to find decent and productive work, and in
this context stresses the need for the development of a global strategy on youth employment, building upon, inter
alia, the Global Jobs Pact and the call for action by the International Labour Organization;
30. Encourages the international community to support developing countries in their efforts to eradicate
poverty and promote the empowerment of women, the poor and people in vulnerable situations, with a view to
achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, as
established by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the unfinished business of the Millennium
Development Goals, improving access to finance, microfinance and credit, removing barriers to opportunity,
enhancing productive capacity, developing sustainable agriculture and promoting full and productive employment
and decent work for all, complemented by national efforts on effective social policies, including social protection
floors, and in this regard takes note of Social Protection Floors Recommendation of 2012 (No. 202) of the
International Labour Organization;
31. Stresses the importance of implementing nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures
for all, including social protection floors, and of achieving substantial coverage for the poor and the vulnerable, and
encourages Member States to continue to develop and implement social protection floors based on national
priorities, paying particular attention to women, children, older persons and persons with disabilities;
32. Emphasizes the reference in the Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
the need to ensure the significant mobilization of resources from a variety of sources, including through enhanced
development cooperation, in order to provide predictable means for developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, to implement programmes and policies to end poverty in all its dimensions;
33. Urges the international community, including the United Nations system, to implement the outcome
documents relating to the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,
as established by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the unfinished business of the Millennium
Development Goals, and the means of implementation, including the Addis Ababa Action Agenda;
34. Also urges the international community, including the United Nations system, to implement the
Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development354 in
support of the objectives of the Second Decade;
35. Stresses that the impacts of natural disasters and conflicts are severely hampering efforts to achieve
poverty eradication, in particular in developing countries, and calls upon the international community to give
priority to addressing them;
36. Calls upon the organizations of the United Nations development system, including the funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies, in accordance with their mandates, to assign the highest priority to
poverty eradication, and stresses that efforts in this area should be scaled up to address the root causes of extreme
poverty and hunger;
37. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to support Member States, at their request, in strengthening their macroeconomic policy capacity and
national development strategies so as to contribute to achieving the objectives of the Second Decade;
38. Encourages greater inter-agency convergence and collaboration within the United Nations system in
sharing knowledge, promoting policy dialogue, facilitating synergies, mobilizing funds, providing technical
assistance in the key policy areas underlying the decent work agenda and strengthening system-wide policy
coherence on employment issues, including by avoiding the duplication of efforts;
39. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
40. Recognizes the importance of addressing the diverse needs and challenges faced by countries in special
situations, in particular African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
_______________
354

546

Resolution 63/303, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

island developing States, as well as the specific challenges facing middle-income countries, and therefore requests
the United Nations development system, the international financial institutions, regional organizations and other
stakeholders to ensure that the diverse and specific development needs of middle-income countries are appropriately
considered and addressed, in a tailored fashion, in their relevant strategies and policies, with a view to promoting a
coherent and comprehensive approach towards individual countries;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report,
including a review of the progress made by the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations development
system in the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Eradication of poverty and other development issues”, the sub-item
entitled “Implementation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017)”, unless
otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/219
A/RE S/70 /219

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/476/Add.2, para. 8)355

70/219.

Women in development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/104 of 20 December 1995, 52/195 of 18 December 1997, 54/210 of 22 December
1999, 56/188 of 21 December 2001, 58/206 of 23 December 2003, 59/248 of 22 December 2004, 60/210 of
22 December 2005, 62/206 of 19 December 2007, 64/217 of 21 December 2009, 66/216 of 22 December 2011,
68/227 of 20 December 2013, 69/236 of 19 December 2014 and all its other resolutions on women in development,
and the resolutions and agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women, including the
declarations adopted at its forty-ninth356 and fifty-fourth sessions,357
Reaffirming the United Nations Millennium Declaration,358 which affirms that the equal rights and
opportunities of women and men must be assured and calls for, inter alia, the promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of women as being effective in and essential to eradicating poverty and hunger, combating diseases
and stimulating development that is truly sustainable,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the
Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming further its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,

_______________
355

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. A.
357
Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2010/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A.
358
Resolution 55/2.
356

547

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Welcoming and recalling the commitments made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, including through the Sustainable
Development Goal to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls and through commitments to
gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls made across the Sustainable Development Goals,
Welcoming the recognition in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda that gender equality, women’s empowerment
and women’s full and equal participation and leadership in the economy are vital to achieve sustainable
development and significantly enhance economic growth and productivity,
Reaffirming that the realization of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls will make a
crucial contribution to progress across all the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, that the achievement of
full human potential and of sustainable development is not possible if one half of humanity continues to be denied
its full human rights and opportunities, that women and girls must enjoy equal access to quality education,
economic resources and political participation, as well as equal opportunities with men and boys for employment,
leadership and decision-making at all levels, that it will work for a significant increase in investments to close the
gender gap and strengthen support for institutions in relation to gender equality and the empowerment of women at
the global, regional and national levels, that all forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls will be
eliminated, including through the engagement of men and boys, and that the systematic mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is crucial,
Reaffirming also the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action359 and the outcomes of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”,360 and the international commitments made at relevant United Nations summits and
conferences in the area of gender equality and the empowerment of women, including in the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and Development361 and the key actions for its further
implementation,
Welcoming the political declaration on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, adopted at the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on the Status of Women,362
Welcoming also the holding of the Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment:
A Commitment to Action, on 27 September 2015, and the pledges submitted by Governments in this regard,
Reaffirming the commitments to gender equality and the advancement of women made at the Millennium
Summit358 and at the 2005 World Summit,363 in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,364 and at other major United Nations summits,
conferences and special sessions, and reaffirming also that their full, effective and accelerated implementation is
integral to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recalling the outcomes of the International Conference on Financing for Development365 and the World
Summit on Sustainable Development,366 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document
of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus,367 the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its

_______________
359

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
360
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
361
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
362
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I, sect. C, resolution 59/1, annex.
363
Resolution 60/1.
364
Resolution 66/288, annex.
365
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
366
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex, and resolution 2, annex.
367
Resolution 63/239, annex.

548

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Impact on Development368 and the outcomes of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals,369 the high-level meeting on HIV and AIDS,370 the high-level meetings of the
General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,371 the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries,372 the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries,373 the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States,374 the high-level
meeting on Africa’s development needs,375 the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the
Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities:
the way forward, a disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond,376 the High-level Dialogue
on International Migration and Development,377 the Lima work programme on gender378 and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,379 adopted at the Third United Nations World Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction,
Looking forward to the convening in 2016 of a high-level meeting to conduct a comprehensive review of the
progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS380 and the political declarations on
HIV and AIDS,381
Reaffirming the importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as its 10-year plan of
action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next
50 years, and its continental programme, embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, and regional initiatives, which promote gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 67/226 of 21 December 2012 on the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system, which reaffirms that gender
equality is of fundamental importance for achieving sustained and inclusive economic growth, poverty eradication
and sustainable development, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Assembly and United Nations
conferences, and that investing in the development of women and girls has a multiplier effect, in particular on
productivity, efficiency and sustained and inclusive economic growth, in all sectors of the economy, especially in
key areas such as agriculture, industry and services,
Noting the importance of the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular its funds and
programmes, and the specialized agencies in facilitating the advancement and empowerment of women in
development, and in this context recalling the resolution on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system,
Reiterating the importance and value of the mandate of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), welcoming the leadership of UN-Women in providing a strong voice for
women and girls at all levels, and reaffirming its important role in leading, coordinating and promoting
accountability of the United Nations system in its work on gender equality and the empowerment of women,

_______________
368

Resolution 63/303, annex.
Resolution 65/1.
370
Resolution 65/277, annex.
371
Resolutions 66/2, annex, and 68/300.
372
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chaps. I and II.
373
Resolution 69/137, annexes I and II.
374
Resolution 69/15, annex.
375
Resolution 63/1.
376
Resolution 68/3.
377
Resolution 68/4.
378
FCCC/CP/2014/10/Add.3, decision 18/CP.20.
379
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
380
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
381
Resolution 60/262, annex, and resolution 65/277, annex.
369

549

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note with appreciation of the progress made by the United Nations development system in
implementing the mandates on gender equality and empowerment of women set out in resolution 67/226,
Expressing deep concern about the pervasiveness of violence against women and girls,
Expressing concern about the adverse impact of the consequences of the world financial and economic crisis,
including on development, and evidence of an uneven, fragile and slow recovery, cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and stability and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility
in global markets, excessive volatility of commodity prices, high unemployment, particularly among young people,
unsustainable debt in some countries and widespread fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic
recovery and reflect the need for additional progress towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and
stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen
the international financial system while implementing the reforms agreed upon to date,
Reaffirming the provisions concerning the pursuit of full and productive employment and access to decent
work and social protection for all in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, and calling upon States to adopt forward-looking macroeconomic policies that promote sustainable
development and lead to sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, increase productive employment
opportunities and promote agricultural and industrial development,
Recognizing that men and women workers should have equal access to education, skills training, health care,
social security, fundamental rights at work, social and legal protections, including occupational safety and health,
and decent work opportunities,
Recognizing also that achieving the highest attainable standard of health, through, inter alia, equitable and
universal access to affordable and quality health-care services and preventive health-care information, including in
the area of sexual and reproductive health, is critical to women’s economic advancement and empowerment, that a
lack of economic empowerment and independence increases women’s vulnerability to a range of negative
consequences, including the risk of contracting HIV/AIDS, and that the neglect of women’s full enjoyment of
human rights severely limits their opportunities in public and private life, including the opportunities for receiving
an education and for achieving economic and political empowerment,
Reaffirming that equal access to quality and inclusive education and training at all levels, in particular in
business, trade, administration, information and communications technology, science, technology, engineering and
mathematics and other new technologies, and fulfilment of the need to eliminate gender inequalities at all levels are
essential for gender equality, the empowerment of women and poverty eradication and to allowing women’s full and
equal contribution to, and equal opportunity to benefit from, development,
Reaffirming also that women are key contributors to the economy and to combating poverty and inequalities,
through both paid and unpaid work, at home, in the community and in the workplace and that the empowerment of
women is a critical factor in the eradication of poverty,
Recognizing that unremunerated work, including unpaid care and domestic work, plays an essential role in
improving well-being in the household and in the functioning of the economy as a whole, and acknowledging the
need to recognize and consider, where appropriate, policies and programmes that would contribute to reducing the
unequal burden of unremunerated work, including care work, for which women and girls continue to carry an
unequal level of responsibility, and to promote shared responsibility within the household,
Emphasizing the need to address disaster risk reduction and the building of resilience in the case of disasters
with a renewed sense of urgency in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication, and noting with
concern in this regard that women and girls are disproportionately affected by natural disasters,
Recognizing that women and girls are often disproportionately affected by desertification, deforestation,
natural disasters and climate change owing to gender inequalities and the dependence of many women on natural
resources for their livelihoods,
Reaffirming that nutrition and other related policies should pay special attention to women and empower
women and girls, thereby contributing to women’s full and equal access to social protection and resources, including
income, land, water, finance, education, training, science and technology and health-care services, thus promoting
food security and health,
550

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing that the difficult socioeconomic conditions that exist in many developing countries, in particular
the least developed countries, have contributed to the feminization of poverty,
Recognizing also, in this context, the importance of respect for all human rights, including the right to
development, and of a national and international environment that promotes, for women and girls, inter alia, justice,
gender equality, equity, civil and political participation and civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to achieve the advancement and empowerment of women,
Bearing in mind the challenges and obstacles to changing discriminatory attitudes and gender stereotypes,
which perpetuate discrimination against women and girls and stereotypical roles of men and women, and stressing
that challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation of international standards and norms to eliminate gender
inequality,
Recognizing that poverty eradication and the achievement and preservation of peace are mutually reinforcing,
and recognizing also that peace is inextricably linked to gender equality and the empowerment of women and to
development,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;382

2. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other international and regional
organizations, within their respective mandates, and all sectors of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, as well as all women and men, to fully commit themselves and to intensify their contributions to the
implementation and follow-up of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,359 the outcomes of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly360 and the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development;361
3. Recognizes that 2015 marked the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and
the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and in this regard welcomes the review activities
undertaken by Governments, notes the contributions of all other relevant stakeholders and the review outcomes, and
welcomes the central role that the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) played in supporting Member States, coordinating the United Nations system and mobilizing civil
society, the private sector and other relevant stakeholders, at all levels, in support of the review and appraisal of the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action;
4. Also recognizes the importance of the full engagement of men and boys for the achievement of gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls, and commits to taking measures to fully engage men and boys
in efforts to achieve the full, effective and accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action;
5. Further recognizes the mutually reinforcing links between gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls and poverty eradication, as well as the need to elaborate and implement, where appropriate, in
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, comprehensive gender-sensitive poverty eradication strategies that
address social, structural and macroeconomic issues;
6. Emphasizes the need to link policies on economic, social and environmental development to ensure that
all people, in particular women and children living in poverty and in vulnerable situations, benefit from inclusive
economic growth and development, in accordance with the goals of the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development,365 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome
document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation
of the Monterrey Consensus,367 and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development;383
_______________
382
383

A/70/256.
Resolution 69/313, annex.

551

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

7. Urges Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations to accelerate their efforts and provide adequate resources to increase the voice and full and equal
participation of women in all decision-making bodies at the highest levels of government and in the governance
structures of international organizations, including by eliminating gender stereotyping in appointments and
promotions, to build women’s capacity as agents of change and to empower them to participate actively and
effectively in the design, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of national sustainable development,
poverty eradication and environmental policies, strategies and programmes;
8. Recognizes the ongoing intergovernmental efforts to achieve gender equality and empowerment of
women, and urges the United Nations system to continue efforts to achieve gender balance in appointments to all
categories of staff, including the Professional and higher categories, within the United Nations system at the
Headquarters, regional and country levels, bearing in mind the principle of equitable geographical representation,
with due regard to the representation of women from developing countries, and convinced of the need to guarantee
equal opportunities for women and men in gaining access to senior decision-making positions, including to the post
of Secretary-General, bearing in mind the need to select the best candidate;
9. Encourages Member States to continue to increase, as appropriate, the participation of civil society,
including women’s organizations, in government decision-making processes in national policy areas, including
sustainable development;
10. Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to ensure systematic attention to, recognition
of and support for the crucial role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict, in mediation and
peacebuilding efforts and in the rebuilding of post-conflict societies, inter alia, by promoting women’s capacity,
leadership, participation and engagement in political and economic decision-making, and in this regard to promote
an active and visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective in all policies and programmes;
11. Urges Member States to promote the integration of a gender perspective into environmental and climate
change policies and to strengthen mechanisms and provide adequate resources to ensure the full and equal
participation of women in all levels of decision-making on environmental issues, and stresses the need to address the
challenges for women and girls posed by climate change;
12. Stresses the importance of the full and equal participation of women in decision-making and of gender
mainstreaming in developing and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness, response and recovery
strategies;
13. Also stresses the importance of the creation by Member States, international organizations, including the
United Nations, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other stakeholders of a
favourable and conducive national and international environment in all areas of life for the effective integration of
women and girls in development, and of their undertaking and disseminating a gender analysis of policies and
programmes related to macroeconomic stability, structural reform, taxation, investments, including foreign direct
investment, and all relevant sectors of the economy;
14. Urges the donor community, Member States, international organizations, including the United Nations,
the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other stakeholders to strengthen the focus and
impact of development assistance targeting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls through
gender mainstreaming, the funding of targeted activities and enhanced dialogue between donors and partners, and to
also strengthen the mechanisms needed to measure effectively the resources allocated to incorporating gender
perspectives in all areas of development assistance;
15. Urges Member States to incorporate a gender perspective, commensurate with gender-equality goals,
into the design, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of national development strategies, to ensure
alignment between national action plans on gender equality and national development strategies and to encourage
the involvement of men and boys in the promotion of gender equality, and in this regard calls upon the United
Nations system to support national efforts to develop methodologies and tools and to promote capacity-building and
evaluation;
16. Encourages Member States to ensure the inclusive and more effective participation of national
mechanisms for gender equality and women’s empowerment in the formulation of national development strategies,
552

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

including strategies aimed at eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities, and to strengthen capacities for gender
mainstreaming by allocating adequate financial and human resources to national women’s machineries, as well as
to, and within, line ministries, establishing and/or strengthening dedicated units for gender equality and the
empowerment of women, providing capacity development for technical staff and developing tools and guidelines,
and calls upon the United Nations system to support national efforts in this regard;
17. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and donor countries to strengthen genderresponsive planning and budgeting processes and to develop and strengthen methodologies and tools for this
purpose, as well as for the monitoring and evaluation of investments for gender-equality results, as appropriate, and
encourages donors to mainstream a gender perspective in their practices, including joint coordination and
accountability mechanisms;
18. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement legislation and policies, as appropriate, that are
designed to promote the reconciliation of work and family responsibilities, to recognize, value, reduce and
redistribute the disproportionate work burden of women engaged in unpaid work, including domestic and care
work, including through increased flexibility in working arrangements, such as part-time work, and the facilitation
of breastfeeding for working mothers, to provide support through the development of infrastructure and technology
and the provision of public services, including accessible and quality childcare and care facilities for children and
other dependants, and to ensure that both women and men have access to social protection and maternity or
paternity, parental and other forms of leave and allowances and are not discriminated against when availing
themselves of such benefits;
19. Reiterates the need to further intensify efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against
women and girls, and recognizes that violence against women and girls is one of the obstacles to the achievement of
the objectives of equality, development and peace and that women’s poverty and lack of political, social and
economic empowerment, as well as their marginalization, may result from their exclusion from social policies for
and the benefits of sustainable development and can place them at increased risk of violence;
20. Stresses the need to eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in public and private
spaces, and encourages Member States to adopt specific preventive measures to protect women, youth and children
from any abuse, including sexual abuse, exploitation, trafficking and violence;
21. Encourages Governments, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other
stakeholders to promote and protect the rights of women workers, to take action to remove structural and legal
barriers to, as well as eliminate stereotypical attitudes towards, gender equality at work and to initiate positive steps
towards promoting equal pay for equal work or for work of equal value and women’s full participation in the formal
economy, in particular in economic decision-making and resource allocation;
22. Encourages the United Nations system and donor countries to support Member States in increasing their
investments in policies and programmes with a gender perspective in order to promote women’s access to decent
work and in delivering gender-responsive social protection and social services;
23. Urges Governments to develop, adequately resource and implement active labour-market policies on
full and productive employment and decent work for all, including the full participation of women and men in both
rural and urban areas, as well as policies that encourage the full and equal participation of women and men,
including persons with disabilities, in the formal labour market;
24. Urges the United Nations system and other international organizations, upon the request of Member
States, to support and promote innovative programme responses to ensure women’s access to decent work, to
recognize, reduce and redistribute the unequal burden of care work, to promote social protection initiatives and
measures for women and girls with a gender perspective, and to support and encourage the scaling-up of existing
good-practice programmes and initiatives;
25. Recognizes that women and girls account for almost half of all international migrants at the global level,
and the need to address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and girls by, inter alia,
incorporating a gender perspective into policies and strengthening national laws, institutions and programmes to
prevent and combat gender-based violence, trafficking in persons and discrimination against women and girls, and
calls upon Governments to strengthen efforts to protect the rights of, and ensure decent work conditions for,
553

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

domestic workers, including migrant women and girls, in relation to, inter alia, working hours, working conditions
and wages, and to promote access to health-care services and other social and economic benefits;
26. Also recognizes the special needs of women and girls living in areas affected by complex humanitarian
emergencies and in areas affected by terrorism, and that global health threats, climate change, more frequent and
intense natural disasters, spiralling conflicts, violent extremism, terrorism and related humanitarian crises and forced
displacement of people threaten to reverse much of the development progress made in recent decades and have
particular negative impacts on women and girls that need to be comprehensively assessed and addressed;
27. Encourages Member States to adopt and/or review and to fully implement gender-sensitive legislation
and policies that reduce, through specifically targeted measures, horizontal and vertical occupational segregation
and gender-based wage gaps;
28. Stresses the importance of improving and systematizing the collection, analysis and dissemination of
high-quality, accessible, timely and reliable data, disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migration status,
disability, geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts, and of developing gender
indicators that are specific and relevant with respect to supporting policymaking and national systems for
monitoring and reporting on progress and impact, and in that regard encourages developed countries and relevant
entities of the United Nations system to provide support and assistance to developing countries, upon their request,
with respect to establishing, developing and strengthening their databases and information systems;
29. Encourages Governments to collect, analyse and disseminate sex-disaggregated data and statistics on
women’s access to decent work, unremunerated work and social protection and to assess the impact of associated
policy measures, in cooperation with the United Nations system and other international organizations, upon the
request of Governments;
30. Also encourages Governments to strengthen the collection of time-use data, time-use research on the
unpaid care burdens of women and girls and the construction of satellite accounts to determine the value of unpaid
care work and its contribution to the national economy, as appropriate, in cooperation with the United Nations
system and other international organizations, upon the request of Governments;
31. Urges all Member States to undertake a gender analysis of national labour laws and standards and to
establish gender-sensitive policies and guidelines for employment practices, including for transnational
corporations, with particular attention to export-processing zones, building in this regard on multilateral instruments,
including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women384 and conventions of
the International Labour Organization;
32. Stresses the importance of developing and implementing policies and programmes to support women’s
entrepreneurship, in particular opportunities for new women entrepreneurs and those that lead to business expansion
for existing women-owned microenterprises and small and medium-sized enterprises, and encourages Governments
to create a climate that is conducive to increasing the number of women entrepreneurs and the size of their
businesses by providing them with training and advisory services in business, administration and information and
communications technology, facilitating networking and information-sharing and increasing their participation on
advisory boards and in other forums so as to enable them to contribute to the formulation and review of policies and
programmes being developed, especially by financial institutions;
33. Encourages all Governments to work towards full and equal access to formal financial services for all
women, to adopt or review their financial inclusion strategies, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, and to
consider including financial inclusion as a policy objective in financial regulation, in accordance with national
priorities and legislation, encourages commercial banking systems to serve all, including those who currently face
barriers to accessing financial services and information, and to support microfinance institutions, development
banks, agricultural banks, mobile network operators, agent networks, cooperatives, postal banks and savings banks,
as appropriate, encourages the use of innovative tools, including mobile banking, payment platforms and digitalized
payments, and the expansion of peer learning and experience-sharing among countries and regions, including
_______________
384

554

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

through the Alliance for Financial Inclusion and regional organizations, commits itself to strengthening capacity
development for developing countries, including through the United Nations development system, and encourages
mutual cooperation and collaboration between financial inclusion initiatives;
34. Urges all Member States to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women
with regard to their access to all types of financial services and products, including bank loans, bank accounts,
mortgages and other forms of financial credit, regardless of their economic and social status, to support women’s
access to legal assistance and to encourage the financial sector to mainstream gender perspectives in their policies
and programmes;
35. Recognizes the role of microfinance, including microcredit, in the eradication of poverty, the
empowerment of women and the generation of employment, notes in this regard the importance of sound national
financial systems, and encourages the strengthening of existing and emerging microcredit institutions and their
capacities, including through the support of international financial institutions;
36. Urges Governments to ensure that microfinance programmes focus on developing savings products that
are safe, convenient and accessible to women and support women’s efforts to retain control over their savings;
37. Urges all Governments to eliminate discrimination against women and girls in the field of education and
to ensure their equal access to, and encourage their participation in, all levels of education, including technical,
vocational and tertiary education and training;
38. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement, as appropriate, legislation and policies protecting
women’s labour and human rights in the workplace, including with respect to minimum wages, social protection
and equal pay for equal work or for work of equal value, promoting collective bargaining and providing for
recruitment, retention and promotion policies targeting women;
39. Reaffirms the commitment to women’s equal rights and opportunities in political and economic
decision-making and resource allocation and to the removal of any barriers that prevent women from being full
participants in the economy, and the resolve to undertake legislative and administrative reforms to give women
equal rights with men to economic resources, including access to ownership and control over land and other forms
of property, credit, inheritance, natural resources and appropriate new technology, encourages the private sector to
contribute to advancing gender equality by striving to ensure women’s full and productive employment and decent
work, equal pay for equal work or for work of equal value, and equal opportunities, as well as protecting them
against discrimination and abuse in the workplace, including by supporting the women’s empowerment principles
established by UN-Women and the United Nations Global Compact, and encourages increased investment in
female-owned companies or businesses;
40. Urges Governments to take measures to facilitate women’s access to land and property rights by
providing training designed to make the judicial, legislative and administrative system gender-responsive, to provide
legal aid for women seeking to claim their rights, to support the efforts of women’s groups and networks and to
carry out awareness campaigns in order to draw attention to the need for women’s equal rights to land and property;
41. Recognizes the need to build dynamic, sustainable, innovative and people-centred economies, promoting
youth employment and women’s economic empowerment in particular and decent work for all, and to ensure that
labour-market regulations and social provisions create a more level playing field for women, including by enacting
and enforcing minimum wage legislation, eliminating discriminatory wage practices and promoting measures such
as public works programmes, in order to enable women to cope with recurrent crises and long-term unemployment;
42. Also recognizes the need to empower women, particularly poor women and girls, economically and
politically, and in this regard encourages Governments, with the support of their development partners, to invest in
appropriate infrastructure and other projects, including the provision of water and sanitation to rural areas and urban
slums, in order to increase health and well-being, relieve the workloads of women and girls and release their time
and energy for other productive activities, including entrepreneurship;
43. Expresses deep concern that the lack of adequate sanitation facilities disproportionately affects women
and girls, including their labour force and school participation rates, and increases their vulnerability to violence, and
in this regard calls for the strengthening of efforts to achieve sanitation for all and to end open defecation, paying
special attention to women and girls;
555

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

44. Recognizes the central role of agriculture in development, and stresses the importance of reviewing
agricultural policies and strategies to ensure that women’s critical role in food security and nutrition is recognized
and addressed as an integral part of both short- and long-term responses to food insecurity, malnutrition, excessive
price volatility and food crises in developing countries;
45. Reaffirms the need to end hunger and achieve food security as a matter of priority, and to end all forms
of malnutrition, and in this regard reaffirms the inclusive nature of the Committee on World Food Security,
welcomes the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action,385 and also reaffirms the commitment
to devote resources to developing rural areas and sustainable agriculture and fisheries, supporting smallholder
farmers, especially women farmers, herders and fishers in developing countries, particularly the least developed
countries;
46. Recognizes the critical role and contribution of rural women, including smallholders and women
farmers, and indigenous women and women in local communities, and their traditional knowledge in enhancing
agricultural and rural development, improving food security and eradicating rural poverty;
47. Also recognizes that health is a precondition for and an outcome of sustainable development, and urges
Governments to provide equal access to adequate health-care services for women and girls, in order to achieve the
realization of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of mental and physical health;
48. Expresses concern at the overall expansion of the HIV and AIDS epidemic and the fact that in some
regions women and girls are still the most affected by HIV and AIDS, that they are more easily infected, that they
bear a disproportionate share of the caregiving burden and that they are more vulnerable to violence, stigmatization
and discrimination, poverty and marginalization from their families and communities as a result of HIV and AIDS,
and, taking into account that despite substantial progress the goal of universal access to prevention, treatment care
and support has not been met, calls upon Governments and the international community to urgently scale up
responses towards achieving the goal of universal access to comprehensive HIV prevention, treatment, care and
support, and ending the HIV and AIDS epidemic by 2030;
49. Urges Governments and all sectors of society to promote and pursue gender-based approaches to the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases based on data disaggregated by sex and age in their effort to
address the critical differences in the rapidly growing magnitude of non-communicable diseases, including
cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes, which affect people of all ages, gender,
race and income levels, as noted in the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,386 and notes that people living in vulnerable situations, in
particular in developing countries, bear a disproportionate burden and that non-communicable diseases can affect
women and men differently, because, inter alia, women bear a disproportionate share of the burden of caregiving;
50. Encourages Governments and all sectors of society to take sustainable measures to ensure equal access
to full and productive employment and decent work on an equal basis and without discrimination against persons
with disabilities, including by promoting access to inclusive education systems, skills development and vocational
and entrepreneurial training, in order to enable persons with disabilities to attain and maintain maximum
independence, as noted in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities387 as well as in the outcome
document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development
Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities: the way forward, a
disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond,376 and notes the need to strengthen efforts aimed
at addressing the rights and needs of women and children with disabilities;
51. Expresses deep concern that maternal health remains one area constrained by some of the largest health
inequities in the world, and over the uneven progress in improving newborn, child and maternal health, in this
context calls upon States to implement their commitments to preventing and reducing newborn, child and maternal
mortality and morbidity, and in that regard takes note with appreciation of commitments in support of the Global
_______________
385

World Health Organization, document EB136/8, annexes I and II.
Resolution 66/2, annex.
387
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
386

556

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health (2016–2030), as well as national, regional and
international initiatives contributing to the reduction in the number of maternal deaths and deaths of the newborn
and children under 5 years of age;
52. Recognizes that there is a need for all donors to maintain and deliver on their existing bilateral and
multilateral official development assistance commitments and targets and that the full implementation of those
commitments will substantially boost resources available to push forward the international development agenda,
and urges countries to track and report resource allocations for gender equality and women’s empowerment;
53. Also recognizes the need to strengthen the capacity of Governments to incorporate a gender perspective
into policies and decision-making, and encourages all Governments, international organizations, including the
organizations of the United Nations system, and other relevant stakeholders to assist and support the efforts of
developing countries in integrating a gender perspective into all aspects of policymaking, including through the
provision of technical assistance and financial resources;
54. Encourages the international community, the United Nations system, the private sector and civil
society to continue to provide the financial resources necessary to assist Governments in their efforts to meet the
development targets and benchmarks agreed upon at the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World
Conference on Women, the International Conference on Population and Development, the Millennium Summit,
the International Conference on Financing for Development, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the
Second World Assembly on Ageing, the twenty-third and twenty-fourth special sessions of the General Assembly,
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the United Nations summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda, at which the outcome document entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”388 was adopted, and other relevant United Nations conferences and
summits;
55. Urges multilateral donors, and invites international financial institutions, within their respective
mandates, and regional development banks to review and implement policies that support national efforts to ensure
that a higher proportion of resources reach women and girls, in particular in rural and remote areas;
56. Calls upon all organizations of the United Nations system, within their organizational mandates, to
mainstream a gender perspective and to pursue gender equality in their country programmes, planning instruments,
investment frameworks and sector-wide programmes and to articulate specific country-level goals and targets in this
domain in accordance with national development strategies, welcomes the work of UN-Women with United
Nations country teams in assisting Member States, at their request, in integrating a gender perspective into national
development policies and strategies, including sustainable development policies and strategies, in accordance with
their national priorities, and stresses its important role in leading, coordinating and promoting the accountability of
the United Nations system so as to ensure that the commitment to gender equality and gender mainstreaming
translates into effective action throughout the world;
57. Calls upon organizations of the United Nations development system, within their organizational
mandates, to further improve their institutional accountability mechanisms and to include intergovernmentally
agreed gender equality results and gender-sensitive indicators in their strategic frameworks, as set out in its
resolution 67/226;
58. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
59. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventysecond session, under the item entitled “Eradication of poverty and other development issues”, the sub-item entitled
“Women in development”, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second
Committee.

_______________
388

Resolution 70/1.

557

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 70/220
A/RE S/70 /220

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/476/Add.3, para. 8)389

70/220.

Human resources development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/196 of 18 December 1997, 54/211 of 22 December 1999, 56/189 of 21 December
2001, 58/207 of 23 December 2003, 60/211 of 22 December 2005, 62/207 of 19 December 2007, 64/218 of
21 December 2009, 66/217 of 22 December 2011 and 68/228 of 20 December 2013,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Stressing that human resources development lies at the heart of economic, social and environmental
development and that health and education are at the core of human resources development,
Stressing also that human resources development is vital to the efforts to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, and to expand opportunities for people, in
particular for the most vulnerable groups of the population,
Welcoming the considerable efforts made over the years, yet recognizing that many countries continue to face
formidable challenges in developing a sufficient pool of human resources capable of meeting national economic and
social needs and that the formulation and implementation of effective human resources strategies often require
resources and capacities not always available in developing countries, and also recognizing the need for new ways
to address human resources development,
Stressing that human resources development is even more critical in view of the current global challenges,
including, despite evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on
development, of the world financial and economic crisis, in order to tackle the negative effects of the global crisis
and set the basis for sustained, inclusive and equitable growth and recovery,
Stressing also that climate change is a significant development challenge and that improving educational and
institutional capacities to tackle climate change is closely linked to human resources development efforts to ensure
that populations can lead healthy and prosperous lives,
Recognizing that the benefits of human resources development are best realized in national and international
environments that support equal opportunity, access to education and non-discrimination and maintain an enabling
environment for job creation,
Recognizing also that despite evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, the ongoing adverse impacts,
particularly on development, of the world financial and economic crisis continue to diminish the ability of many
_______________
389

558

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

countries, especially developing countries, to cope with and address human resources development challenges and
to formulate and implement effective strategies for poverty eradication and sustainable development,
Acknowledging the important nexus between international migration and development and the need to deal
with the challenges and opportunities that migration presents to countries of origin, transit and destination,
recognizing that migration brings benefits as well as challenges to the global community, and stressing that the brain
drain continues to be a severe problem in many developing and transitioning countries, undermining efforts in the
area of human resources development,
Recognizing the need to align science, technological knowledge and innovation systems with national
development objectives, fully integrated with national human resources development and poverty eradication
strategies and supported by appropriate institutional and policy frameworks, which can lead to positive
transformations in people’s lives,
Acknowledging that science, technological knowledge and innovation policies should take into account the
specific features of the economy in developing countries, including the size of the traditional sector, the importance
of indigenous knowledge, the limited access to skilled labour and capital, weak infrastructure and inadequate
institutional frameworks, in order to generate solutions that address the specific challenges of those countries and to
foster synergies between modern science and technology and indigenous and local knowledge,
Reaffirming that gender equality is of fundamental importance for achieving sustained economic growth,
poverty eradication and sustainable development, in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions and
United Nations conferences, and that investing in the development of women and girls has a multiplier effect, in
particular on productivity, efficiency and sustained economic growth, in all sectors of the economy, especially in key
areas such as agriculture, industry and services,
Recognizing that education is the key to promoting the development of human potential, equality and
understanding among peoples, as well as to sustaining economic growth and eradicating poverty, and recognizing
also that, to achieve those ends, it is essential that quality education be available to all, including indigenous peoples,
girls and women, rural inhabitants and persons with disabilities,
Stressing that Governments have the primary responsibility for defining and implementing appropriate
policies for human resources development, and the need for continued support from the international community for
the national efforts of developing countries,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;390

2. Calls upon Member States to place human resources development at the core of economic and social
development and to develop short-, medium- and long- term strategies to effectively enhance their human resources
capacities, as educated, skilled, healthy, capable, productive and flexible workforces are the foundation for
achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and development;
3. Stresses the need for Member States to emphasize and integrate human resources development into
national development strategies, including national development policies and strategies to eradicate poverty and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, in order to address structural and multidimensional challenges to
enhancing national productive capacities and to ensure that human resources development implications are taken
into account by all national development stakeholders;
4. Recognizes that comprehensive approaches to human resources development that address poverty
eradication and the creation of a skilled workforce are also critical in reducing unemployment and brain drain and in
promoting greater social inclusion;
5. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement comprehensive human resources development
strategies premised on national development objectives that ensure a strong link between education, training and
employment, help to maintain a productive and competitive workforce and are responsive to the needs of the
economy;
_______________
390

A/70/293.

559

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Stresses that human resources development policies should focus on supporting the emergence of a
sufficiently wide and flexible pool of skilled human resources, especially among women and youth, to support all
sectors of the economy and be matched with present and future workforce needs, which requires well-sequenced
investments in basic education, vocational training, on-the-job training and more advanced managerial, engineering
and scientific education to increase the supply of technological knowledge that can be absorbed by national
innovation systems;
7. Emphasizes the need for Member States to adopt cross-sectoral approaches and mechanisms to identify
human resources development needs in the medium and long term for all sectors of the economy and to formulate
and implement policies and programmes to address those needs;
8. Recognizes that comprehensive and flexible science, technological knowledge and innovation strategies
that encompass all sectors of the economy are critical to ensuring that skills are matched with labour market demand
and ready to adapt to and benefit from a constantly evolving technology landscape;
9. Emphasizes that when science, technological knowledge and innovation and human resources
development approaches are mutually reinforcing they can lead to a virtuous circle of economic growth, human
progress and sustainable development;
10. Stresses that investment in human resources development should be an integral part of national
development policies and strategies, and in this regard calls for the adoption of policies to facilitate investment
focused on physical and social infrastructure, including education, in particular skills upgrading and vocational
training in areas such as science and technology, including information and communications technology, as well as
in capacity development, health and sustainable development;
11. Encourages Member States, as appropriate, to continue to strengthen comprehensive social protection
systems, to adopt policies that strengthen existing safety nets and protect vulnerable groups and to take other
appropriate actions, including boosting domestic consumption and production, recognizes that social protection
floors, defined according to national priorities and the individual circumstances of Member States, can provide
systemic approaches to address poverty and vulnerability and can contribute significantly to successful human
resources development strategies, acknowledges, in this regard, that many developing countries lack the necessary
financial resources and capacity to implement such countercyclical measures, and in this regard recognizes the need
for continued mobilization of additional domestic and international resources, as appropriate;
12. Encourages Member States in a position to do so to consider implementing, and the States members of
the International Labour Organization to implement, policies consistent with the International Labour Organization
Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and their obligations under all relevant ratified
conventions of the International Labour Organization, and recalls the importance of promoting decent work for all
and of increasing quality jobs, including through measures aimed at ensuring occupational health and safety and
through working relationships based on effective social dialogue;
13. Stresses that human resources development strategies should include measures aimed at reducing
unemployment and underemployment among young men and women and the long-term unemployed, who have
been disproportionately affected by slow growth in jobs recovery, and to integrate underutilized human resources
into the labour market through policies that promote skills development and productivity and reduce barriers to
employment, including gender barriers, including by providing incentives as appropriate for recruiting, retaining and
retooling, assistance in job-finding and job-matching and vocational and on-the-job training, and by promoting, inter
alia, youth entrepreneurship, noting in this regard the call for action by the International Labour Conference in 2012;
14. Also stresses the need for Member States to retain and further enhance national human resources by
boosting job-rich recovery and promoting decent work, including by adopting policies and incentives that enhance
labour productivity and stimulate private investment and entrepreneurship and strengthen the role of labour
administration and institutions in order to foster job creation, address the gender wage gap, reduce occupational
segregation and increase the participation of vulnerable groups, including workers in the informal economy;
15. Emphasizes the need to address the interlinkages among human resources development, energy and
food security, agriculture and rural development, and encourages Member States to strengthen capacity in
agriculture and rural development;
560

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement human resources development policies that create
dynamic capabilities and core skills so as to develop, facilitate access to and apply environmentally sound
technologies, and welcomes the launch of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism established in the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda,391 based on a multi-stakeholder collaboration among Member States, civil society, the private
sector, the scientific community, United Nations entities and other stakeholders, in order to support the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals;
17. Stresses that sustainable development is dependent, inter alia, on healthy human resources, calls upon
Member States to continue their efforts to strengthen national health systems, urges the further strengthening of
international cooperation in the area of health, inter alia, by considering promoting universal health coverage and
through the exchange of best practices in the areas of strengthening health systems, access to medicines, training of
health personnel, transfer of technology and production of affordable, safe, effective and good-quality medicine, and
in this regard stresses that international cooperation and assistance, in particular external funding, need to become
more predictable and to be better aligned with national priorities and channelled to recipient countries in ways that
strengthen national health systems;
18. Calls upon the international community, including the entities of the United Nations system, to support
the efforts of developing countries to address the adverse effects of HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other
infectious diseases, in particular in Africa, as well as the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
which is a challenge of epidemic proportions, and their effects on human resources;
19. Calls upon relevant United Nations entities to support national efforts to build institutional capacities to
address long-term national human resources development needs in addition to providing training to individuals;
20. Calls upon the international community to assist developing countries in the implementation of national
human resources development strategies, and encourages the international community, including the private sector
and relevant civil society actors, to provide and mobilize financial resources, capacity-building, technical assistance
and technology transfer on mutually agreed terms and to supply expertise from all sources, as available;
21. Calls for steps to integrate gender perspectives into human resources development, including through
policies, strategies and targeted actions aimed at promoting women’s capacities and access to productive activities,
and in this regard emphasizes the need to ensure the full participation of women in the formulation and
implementation of such policies, strategies and actions;
22. Stresses the important contributions of the public and private sectors, respectively, in meeting national
training and education needs to support the efficient functioning of enterprises and matching the needs of a rapidly
changing economy, and encourages the integration of those contributions, including through the greater use of
public-private partnerships and incentives;
23. Calls for actions at the national, regional and international levels that will give high priority to improving
and expanding literacy, as well as science proficiency, including by providing tertiary, technical vocational and adult
education, and stresses the need to ensure that, by 2030, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to
complete a full course of primary schooling and will have equal access to all levels of education;
24. Encourages Governments to consider appropriate measures at the national level, such as upgrading
human skills, better aligning educational and training systems to labour market needs and strengthening labour
institutions and regulations to respond to economic downturns;
25. Encourages countries in a position to do so to maintain or consider enhancing measures to boost job-rich
recovery, such as policies and incentives to enhance labour productivity and stimulate private investment, in
addition to efforts to reduce budget deficits in the long term, as appropriate;
26. Encourages efforts by Member States and the international community to promote a balanced, coherent
and comprehensive approach to international migration and development, in particular by building partnerships and
ensuring coordinated action to develop capacities, including for the management of migration, and in this regard
reiterates the need to consider innovative measures to maximize the benefits of migration while minimizing the
negative effects of the migration of both highly skilled and low-skilled workers from developing countries;
_______________
391

Resolution 69/313, annex, para. 123.

561

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

27. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to human resources development strategies in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;392
28. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventysecond session, under the item entitled “Eradication of poverty and other development issues” the sub-item entitled
“Human resources development”, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second
Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/221
A/RE S/70 /221

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/477/Add.1, para. 7)393

70/221.

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 67/226 of 21 December 2012, 68/229 of 20 December 2013 and 69/238 of
19 December 2014, and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2014/14 of 14 July 2014 and 2015/15 of
29 June 2015,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals and
its outcome document394 and the outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals,395
Reaffirming the importance of the comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development,
through which the General Assembly establishes key system-wide policy orientations for development cooperation
and country-level modalities of the United Nations system,
Recalling the role of the Economic and Social Council in providing coordination and guidance to the United
Nations system in order to ensure that policy orientations established by the General Assembly are implemented on
a system-wide basis, in accordance with all relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Reaffirming that the fundamental characteristics of the operational activities for development of the United
Nations system should be, inter alia, their universal, voluntary and grant nature, their neutrality and their
_______________
392

Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
394
Resolution 65/1.
395
Resolution 68/6.
393

562

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

multilateralism, as well as their ability to respond to the development needs of programme countries in a flexible
manner, and that the operational activities are carried out for the benefit of programme countries, at the request of
those countries and in accordance with their policies and priorities for development,
Affirming that the operational activities for development of the United Nations system should provide a key
contribution to the implementation of the ambitious and transformational objectives of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and should therefore be improved, including the ability of the United Nations
development system, in line with its mandate, to assist countries in responding to the challenges of sustainable
development,
Stressing the importance of system-wide strategic planning, implementation and reporting in order to ensure
coherent and integrated support for the implementation of the new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by
the United Nations development system,
Acknowledging the efforts of the United Nations development system to provide quality inputs and
appropriate updates to the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of its resolution 67/226 with a
view to continuing to improve evidence-based, high-quality analytical reporting on the operational activities for
development, address challenges, facilitate the decision-making processes of Member States and contribute to
enhancing the implementation of system-wide mandates, while stressing the need to minimize transaction costs
associated with reporting,
Recognizing the importance and catalytic role of predictable official development assistance for international
development and the importance of mobilizing all available resources, from all sources, as reflected in, inter alia, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
Introduction
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 67/226 on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system;396
2. Also takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on an analysis of the resource mobilization function within the United Nations system397 and the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination thereon,398 and decides to postpone the consideration of these documents to its seventy-first session,
in 2016;
3. Further takes note of the reports of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation on its
eighteenth session399 and on its intersessional meeting held on 8 September 2015,400 and welcomes the decisions
adopted at those meetings;401
4. Recalls Economic and Social Council resolution 2015/15 on operational activities for development, and
expresses appreciation for the guidance provided by the Council on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 67/226;
5. Reaffirms the request by the Economic and Social Council that the United Nations funds and
programmes make every effort to continue to improve monitoring and data-collection methods, with a view to
contributing to the further enhancement of the analytical quality of the report of the Secretary-General on
operational activities for development of the United Nations system;
_______________
396

A/70/62-E/2015/4.
A/69/737.
398
A/69/737/Add.1.
399
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/69/39).
400
SSC/18/IM/2.
401
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/69/39), chap. I, and SSC/18/IM/2, chap. I.
397

563

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Urges the organizations of the United Nations development system with responsibility for operational
activities for development that have not done so to fully align their strategic plans and their strategic planning and
budgeting cycles with the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, taking into account their respective mandates;
7. Recognizes the importance of continuing to strengthen and improve the results-focused delivery of
operational activities for development of the funds and programmes of the United Nations system in order to
maximize their support towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, which build upon the achievements
of the Millennium Development Goals and seek to address their unfinished business, also recognizes in this regard
that the most vulnerable countries, in particular African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States, deserve special attention, as do countries in situations of
conflict and post-conflict countries, and further recognizes that there are also serious challenges within many
middle-income countries;
8. Calls upon the organizations of the United Nations development system at Headquarters, regional and
country levels to improve coordination among organizations working on common themes;
Funding of operational activities for development of the United Nations system
9. Reiterates that core resources, because of their untied nature, continue to be the bedrock of the
operational activities for development of the United Nations system, and in this regard recognizes the need for the
organizations of the United Nations development system to address, on a continuous basis, the imbalance between
core and non-core resources and to report to the Economic and Social Council in 2016, as part of their regular
reporting, on the measures taken to address this imbalance;
10. Emphasizes that international public finance plays an important role in complementing the efforts of
countries to mobilize public resources domestically, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable countries with
limited domestic resources, notes that an important use of international public finance, including official
development assistance, is to catalyse additional resource mobilization from other sources, public and private, also
notes that providers of official development assistance have reaffirmed their respective commitments, including the
commitment by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official
development assistance to developing countries and 0.15 per cent to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for
official development assistance to the least developed countries;
11. Reiterates the call for donor countries and other countries in a position to do so to maintain and
substantially increase their voluntary contributions, in a manner consistent with their capacities, to the core or
regular budgets of the organizations of the United Nations development system, in particular its funds, programmes
and the specialized agencies, and to contribute on a multi-year basis in a sustained and predictable manner;
12. Notes that the majority of the increase in funding for the United Nations development system between
1998 and 2013 was in the form of non-core resources, resulting in an imbalance between core and non-core
resources, and notes with concern that the percentage of core resources in the overall funding for operational
activities continued to decline, representing only 25 per cent in 2013;
13. Stresses that funding for operational activities should be aligned with the national priorities and plans of the
programme countries as well as the strategic plans, mandates, resource frameworks and priorities of the United Nations
funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, and underscores in that regard the need to further strengthen the
delivery of results and the results-based frameworks of the funds, programmes and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations development system and to improve their reporting on outputs and nationally owned outcomes;
14. Notes that non-core resources represent an important contribution to the overall resource base of the
United Nations development system and that they complement core resources in supporting operational activities
for development, thereby contributing to an increase in total resources, while noting the need to make non-core
resources more flexible, more predictable and better aligned with strategic plans and national priorities, and
recognizes that non-core resources are not a substitute for core resources;
15. Recognizes that non-core resources pose challenges, in particular the use of restricted earmarked funding
such as single-donor project-specific funding, by potentially increasing transaction costs, demand for additional
reporting, fragmentation, competition and overlap among entities and providing disincentives for pursuing an
Organization-wide focus, strategic positioning and coherence, and that they may also potentially distort programme
priorities regulated by intergovernmental bodies and processes;
564

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Notes with concern in this regard that contributions to pooled-funding arrangements, such as thematic
funds of entities and United Nations multi-partner trust funds and joint programmes, accounted for only 10 per cent
of non-core resource flows to development-related activities in 2013, and encourages all contributors of non-core
resources to expand the use of less-restricted earmarked funding arrangements;
17. Notes the initiatives launched by the United Nations development system through the United Nations
Development Group, in line with General Assembly resolution 67/226, aimed at further strengthening the use and
management of joint funding mechanisms and approaches in order to improve the quality of non-core resources,
and urges the United Nations development system to ensure that non-core resources are fully aligned with national
needs and priorities and with the United Nations Development Assistance Framework process;
18. Welcomes the progress made by the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies
in ensuring that available and projected core and non-core resources are consolidated within an integrated budgetary
framework, based on the priorities of their respective strategic plans, and encourages all entities that have not
already done so to develop such integrated frameworks in their next budget cycle;
19. Recalls the mandate contained in its resolution 67/226 with respect to taking concrete measures to
broaden the donor base, and reiterates its requests to the United Nations funds and programmes, and encourages the
specialized agencies, to report annually as part of their regular reporting to their governing bodies on concrete
measures taken to broaden the donor base and increase the number of countries and other partners making
contributions to the United Nations development system in order to reduce the reliance of the system on a limited
number of donors;
20. Notes with concern that the mandate contained in its resolution 67/226 with respect to the development
and operationalization of the concept of “critical mass” of core resources was not fulfilled as originally foreseen,
notes the adoption in 2014 by the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for Project Services of decisions 2014/24 and 2014/25 and
the adoption by the Executive Board of the United Nations Children’s Fund of decision 2014/17, in which they
noted common principles for the concept of critical mass of resources and core resources, requests the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Children’s Fund to
consult further with Member States on ways to ensure a critical mass of core resources, for consideration and action
during the quadrennial comprehensive policy review in 2016, and reiterates the request to the United Nations funds
and programmes that have not yet done so to define common principles for the concept of critical mass of core
resources, which may include the level of resources adequate to respond to the needs of programme countries and to
produce the results expected in the strategic plans, including administrative, management and programme costs, in
consultation with Member States, with a view to a decision being taken by their respective governing bodies
in 2016;
21. Stresses the need to avoid the use of core or regular resources to subsidize activities financed by noncore or extrabudgetary resources, reaffirms that the guiding principle governing the financing of all non-programme
costs should be based on full cost recovery from core and non-core funding sources, proportionally, and in this
regard notes the timelines agreed by the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) for an independent and external assessment, to be
performed in 2016, of the consistency and alignment of the cost-recovery methodology with the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review;
22. Takes note of decisions 2015/16 and 2015/18 adopted by the Executive Boards of the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for Project Services,
decision 2015/14 adopted by the Executive Board of the United Nations Children’s Fund and decision 2015/5
adopted by the Executive Board of UN-Women on the organization of structured dialogues with Member States on
ways to finance the development results agreed in the strategic planning cycles of the respective entities, and in this
regard notes the progress made and requests the Executive Boards of the United Nations funds and programmes and
the governing bodies of the specialized agencies, as appropriate, to continue to organize such structured dialogues
on an annual basis, while ensuring adequate preparation, including through informal dialogues and exchanges of
information and analysis throughout the year, as part of their regular schedule of meetings, with a view to making
non-core resources more predictable and less restricted/earmarked, broadening the donor base and improving the
adequacy and predictability of resource flows;
565

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

23. Calls upon United Nations country teams to adopt as a practice the use of common budgetary
frameworks as soon as possible, which would not constitute a legal constraint on resource spending authority, and
requests United Nations funds and programmes, and encourages the specialized agencies, to continue to provide the
necessary information on contributions to the resident coordinators, upon agreement with programme countries,
improve the timeliness and quality of information provided and ensure that the common budgetary framework is a
useful and effective instrument for strengthening the quality of system-wide resource planning in support of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework process;
Contribution of the operational activities of the United Nations to national capacity development and
development effectiveness
24. Reaffirms the importance of the contribution of operational activities for development to the national
capacity development and the development effectiveness of the United Nations development system in addressing
the key areas identified in the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, recalls in this regard its request to the
organizations of the United Nations development system to develop, for the consideration of Member States, a
common approach for measuring progress in capacity development, including measures to ensure sustainability, as
well as to develop, in a manner consistent with their mandates, specific frameworks aimed at enabling programme
countries, upon their request, to design, monitor and evaluate results in the development of their capacity to achieve
national development goals and strategies, and invites the Secretary-General to provide comprehensive and
evidence-based updates on measures taken in this regard in his 2016 annual report on the implementation of its
resolution 67/226;
25. Requests the funds and programmes of the United Nations development system, and invites the
specialized agencies, to consider the findings and observations related to national capacity gaps repeatedly
highlighted by programme countries to be addressed through the work of the operational activities for development
of the United Nations system, including through the strengthening and use of national capacities, and to report to
their governing bodies in 2016 with recommendations for implementation in this regard;
26. Notes that national monitoring and reporting systems and national procurement, financial and evaluation
capacities have been underused, and in this regard reiterates the mandate contained in its resolution 67/226 that the
United Nations development system make increased use of national public and private systems for support services
as a means of strengthening national capacities and reducing transaction costs;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his report on the implementation of its resolution 67/226 to
the Economic and Social Council in 2016, in consultation with Member States, information on steps taken by the
organizations of the United Nations development system to strengthen and use national capacities, including
ensuring the long-term impact of capacities built, and to make proposals to address any obstacles and challenges;
Poverty eradication
28. Welcomes the integration of poverty eradication, as the overarching priority, into the strategic plans of
some organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with their mandates;
29. Underlines the need to better reflect the multidimensional nature of development and poverty, as well as
the importance of developing a common understanding among Member States and other stakeholders of that
multidimensionality, looks forward to a discussion of this matter in the context of the ongoing dialogues of the
Economic and Social Council and the quadrennial comprehensive policy review in 2016, and in the context of the
implementation and follow-up of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development402 and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda,403 and in this regard invites Member States, supported by the international community, to consider
developing complementary measurements, including methodologies and indicators for measuring human
development, that better reflect that multidimensionality;
30. Reaffirms that the eradication of poverty is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement
for sustainable development in developing countries, particularly in Africa, and underlines the importance of
_______________
402
403

566

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

accelerating sustainable, broad-based, inclusive and equitable economic growth for the benefit of all people and the
achievement of internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals;
31. Also reaffirms its call in its resolution 67/226 for the organizations of the United Nations development
system to assign the highest priority to the eradication of poverty, and in this regard acknowledges the request by the
Economic and Social Council to the United Nations funds and programmes to include in their regular reporting to
the Council information on steps taken, in accordance with their mandates, on the scaling up of efforts to address the
root causes of extreme poverty and hunger, the sharing of good practices, lessons learned, strategies, programmes
and policies, including capacity-building, employment generation, education, vocational training, rural development
and the mobilization of resources, which are aimed at achieving poverty eradication and promoting the active
participation of those living in poverty in the design and implementation of such programmes and policies;
South-South cooperation
32. Stresses that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South
cooperation;
33. Notes the continued demand of programme countries for United Nations support for South-South
cooperation, reiterates in this regard its request to the heads of the specialized agencies, United Nations funds and
programmes and regional commissions to pay special attention to the implementation of projects related to SouthSouth cooperation, including those managed or supported by the United Nations Office for South-South
Cooperation, and requests the Secretary-General, as part of his regular reporting to the Economic and Social
Council, to provide an update on progress in this regard;
34. Recalls the requests contained in its resolution 67/226 on strengthening South-South cooperation, notes
in this regard the progress made by some organizations of the United Nations development system in
mainstreaming South-South and triangular cooperation into their key policies, strategic frameworks, operational
activities and budgets, and welcomes the recommendations and measures, as set out in decisions 18/1 and SSC/18/3
of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation,401 to strengthen South-South and triangular cooperation,
including through the improved allocation of resources across the United Nations development system, including
the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation;
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
35. Notes with appreciation the progress of organizations of the United Nations development system in
implementing mandates contained in its resolution 67/226 on gender equality and women’s empowerment,
including on the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
and requests those organizations of the development system that have not already done so to accelerate efforts to
implement the Action Plan, with a view to meeting its performance standards by 2017;
36. Reaffirms the requests contained in its resolution 67/226 to the organizations of the United Nations
development system to enhance gender mainstreaming within the United Nations system and expand the use of the
United Nations country team performance indicators for gender equality and the empowerment of women (the
“scorecard”) as a planning and reporting tool for use by country teams in the context of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework process, and welcomes the global review of the gender scorecard tool being
undertaken by the United Nations development system;
Transition from relief to development
37. Notes the importance of transparency and consultation with Member States in the context of operational
activities for development on the implementation of the policy on integrated assessment and planning and the policy
on United Nations transitions in the context of mission drawdown or withdrawal, as approved by the SecretaryGeneral and the Integration Steering Group, stresses the need in this regard for transitional activities from relief to
sustainable development to be undertaken under national ownership, and requests the Secretary-General to share
information with and seek the views of Member States on the interlinkages between operational activities for
development of the United Nations development system and the implementation and review of the elements of
these policies that relate to operational activities for development of the United Nations development system;
567

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

38. Urges the United Nations development system to ensure that its support to recovery serves to bridge
short-term emergency response and long-term development efforts by paying due attention to the social, economic
and environmental dimensions of development needed for full recovery and for strengthening resilience leading to
sustainable development, inter alia, by prioritizing tools, including, but not limited to, local procurement, cash
transfers and social safety nets, where appropriate;
39. Recognizes the need for the United Nations development system, as requested, to support inclusive
country-level and country-owned transition from relief to development in countries affected by natural disasters or
conflict, based on country-led assessments, while giving adequate attention to resilience, and underlines the
importance of building strong partnerships by providing aid and managing resources more effectively and aligning
these resources for results, in line with country priorities, and by enhancing transparency, risk management and the
use of country systems, strengthening national capacities and the timeliness of aid and improving the speed and
predictability of funding to achieve better results, while underlining the importance of thorough planning and
coordination between the United Nations funds and programmes, the specialized agencies and the Secretariat,
within their respective mandates, to better respond to the needs and priorities of the affected States;
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
40. Stresses the importance of regular reporting from the United Nations development system at the country
level, in this regard requests United Nations country teams to comply strictly with existing reporting requirements,
namely, those regarding the once per cycle progress report on the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework and the evaluation report on the Development Assistance Framework in all programme countries, and,
in addition, annual country results reports and evaluation reports in “Delivering as one” countries to programme
country Governments, also requests United Nations country teams to share with programme country Governments,
where available, all country progress reports, reviews and evaluations, and further requests that information on
compliance be included in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of its resolution 67/226;
41. Requests the United Nations development system to ensure that reports to the Governments of
programme countries are structured around the United Nations Development Assistance Framework or common
planning framework outcomes, are linked to national development results and inform the Governments of the
results achieved by the United Nations country team as a whole, and requests the Secretary-General, as part of his
regular reporting to the Economic and Social Council, to provide an update on progress in this regard;
Resident coordinator system
42. Acknowledges that the resident coordinator system, encompassing all organizations of the United
Nations development system dealing with operational activities for development, aims at improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of operational activities for development at the country level through the promotion of more
strategic support for national plans and priorities, makes operations more efficient and reduces costs for
Governments;
43. Reaffirms the mandate contained in its resolution 67/226 with respect to the resident coordinator system,
also reaffirms the importance of achieving diversification in the composition of the resident coordinator system in
terms of geographical distribution and gender, further reaffirms the importance of the participation of all agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations system on an equal footing in the resident coordinator system,
requests the Secretary-General to make every effort in this regard to ensure the full application of these principles in
the appointment of resident coordinators, notes the establishment in May 2014 of the new Resident Coordinator
Assessment Centre, encourages all agencies in this regard to nominate qualified candidates for the Resident
Coordinator Assessment Centre, and requests the United Nations development system to continue to identify
solutions in order to strengthen its ability to efficiently recruit and deploy experienced resident coordinators at the
appropriate level of seniority who meet the highest standards of integrity;
44. Reiterates the importance of the cost-sharing agreement for the resident coordinator system, notes in this
regard the progress achieved in implementing the cost-sharing agreement for the resident coordinator system, notes
the anticipated funding gap for the resident coordinator system for 2015, in this regard strongly requests the
organizations of the United Nations development system that have not already done so to take appropriate actions to
implement the agreement, subject to the approval of their governing bodies and without impacting programme
568

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

delivery, including by paying their contributions in full, noting that the General Assembly has yet to approve the
contribution of the Secretariat to the agreement, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to include in his
regular reporting to the Economic and Social Council updates on agency-specific progress in this regard;
45. Requests the Secretary-General, with a view to addressing the funding gap expected for the resident
coordinator system, and in consultation with all organizations of the United Nations development system, to make
proposals to the Economic and Social Council at the operational activities segment of its substantive session of 2016
on ways to further develop the cost-sharing agreement in order to address the effective needs of the system, as part
of his regular reporting;
“Delivering as one”
46. Reaffirms that the “no one size fits all” approach and the principle of the voluntary adoption of the
“Delivering as one” approach should be maintained so that the United Nations system can tailor its approach to
partnership with the individual programme countries in a way that best suits their national needs, realities, priorities
and planning modalities;
47. Recognizes that pooled funding mechanisms are important tools in advancing “Delivering as one” in
countries that have chosen to implement this approach, and encourages donor countries and other countries in a
position to do so to prioritize the use of such mechanisms in order to maximize the impact of the “Delivering as
one” reforms in those countries;
48. Notes that the concept of “operating as one” has progressed in some areas, and urges the SecretaryGeneral to take appropriate measures through the United Nations Development Group and the High-level
Committee on Management of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination to accelerate
progress in fully operationalizing the concept of “operating as one”, including by bringing to scale common services
based on successful field practices;
Regional dimensions
49. Also notes the improvements in collaboration between regional United Nations Development Group
teams and regional coordination mechanisms, and in this regard requests regional teams and regional coordination
mechanisms to continue to strengthen their support to United Nations country teams, including in the formulation of
United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks and on priority regional or subregional issues of relevance, in
line with national Government priorities;
Simplification and harmonization of business practices
50. Requests the United Nations funds and programmes to accelerate the implementation of the systemwide action plans of the United Nations Development Group and the High-level Committee on Management for the
simplification and harmonization of business practices and to report on progress made to their respective Executive
Boards in 2016;
51. Encourages all United Nations country teams to develop country-level business operation strategies, and
recognizes that it is essential to ensure that United Nations country teams, as well as the specialized agencies, are
made accountable for ensuring that the design and the implementation of such strategies, including by United
Nations common service centres or units, are harmonized, cost-efficient and tailored to their country-specific
requirements and that they enhance programme quality;
Results-based management
52. Requests the United Nations development system to ensure that its results-based management systems
are not developed in isolation from national systems, and in this regard requests the United Nations development
system to engage closely with national Governments on results-based management and with respect to the ways in
which the results achieved by United Nations development assistance activities at the national level are defined,
measured and reported on and, upon request, to provide support to those Governments and partner institutions that
wish to introduce or adapt results-based management as part of their monitoring and statistical systems;
569

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Evaluation of operational activities for development
53. Recalls its decision in its resolution 68/229 to conduct two pilot independent system-wide evaluations on
the themes set out therein, expresses appreciation to those Member States and United Nations agencies that
contributed extrabudgetary resources for these evaluations, reiterates its invitation to countries in a position to do so
to contribute extrabudgetary resources for the effective and accelerated implementation of these evaluations, and
looks forward to updates to the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council on progress in the
implementation of the evaluations and to the completion of the evaluations in time for consideration by the Member
States during the quadrennial comprehensive policy review in 2016;
Follow-up
54. Requests all organizations of the United Nations development system to ensure consistency and alignment
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in the context of midterm reviews and the elaboration of strategic
plans and frameworks, and in this regard looks forward to a discussion of system-wide strategic planning,
implementation and reporting in the context of the ongoing dialogues of the Economic and Social Council, the
midterm reviews of strategic plans and frameworks and the quadrennial comprehensive policy review in 2016;
55. Recognizes the importance of United Nations operational activities for development in supporting
Member States, upon their request, in mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda into their national plans, in full alignment with their national priorities and in support of
national ownership of the Sustainable Development Goals;
56. Welcomes the ongoing dialogue of the Economic and Social Council on the longer-term positioning of
the United Nations development system in 2015 and 2016, involving Member States and all relevant stakeholders,
including the proposed workshops and retreats, which considers the interlinkages between the alignment of
functions, funding practices, governance structures, including proposals for the reform of their composition and
functioning, the capacity and impact of the United Nations development system, partnership approaches and
organizational arrangements, and looks forward to this dialogue being reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review in 2016, which is to be submitted to the General Assembly
for consideration and action by Member States during its seventy-first session;
57. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
58. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first
session, under the item entitled “Operational activities for development”, the sub-item entitled “Operational
activities for development of the United Nations system”, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the
revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/222
A/RE S/70 /222

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/477/Add.2, para. 8)404

70/222.

South-South cooperation

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 64/222 of 21 December 2009, in which it endorsed the Nairobi outcome document
of the High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation,
Reaffirming also its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of
Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,405
_______________
404

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires,
30 August–12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and corrigendum), chap. I.
405

570

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling its resolutions 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 60/212 of 22 December 2005, 62/209 of 19 December
2007, 63/233 of 19 December 2008, 64/1 of 6 October 2009, 66/219 of 22 December 2011, 67/227 of 21 December
2012, 68/230 of 20 December 2013 and other resolutions relevant to South-South cooperation,
Recalling also its resolution 69/239 of 19 December 2014,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recognizing that South-South cooperation is increasingly critical to bolstering the productive capacities of
developing countries and has positive impacts on trade and financial flows, technological capabilities and economic
growth, and reiterating the importance of global partnerships involving Governments, civil society, academia,
international financial institutions, foundations and the private sector,
Noting that 2018 will mark the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Buenos Aires
Plan of Action,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1. Takes note of the decision adopted by the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation at its
special intersessional meeting held on 8, 14 and 15 September 2015;406
2.

Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of South-South cooperation;407

3. Recognizes that the Joint Inspection Unit, in its report on South-South and triangular cooperation in the
United Nations system,408 provided recommendations to the United Nations development system on implementing
measures to further strengthen the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation, and takes note of the
accompanying note by the Secretary-General;409
4. Also recognizes the importance and unique history and particularities of South-South cooperation,
reaffirms its view of South-South cooperation as a manifestation of solidarity among peoples and countries of the
South that contributes to their national well-being, national and collective self-reliance and the attainment of the
Sustainable Development Goals, which build upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and
seek to address their unfinished business, and also reaffirms that South-South cooperation and its agenda have to be
set by countries of the South and should continue to be guided by the principles of respect for national sovereignty,
national ownership and independence, equality, non-conditionality, non-interference in domestic affairs and mutual
benefit;
5. Stresses that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South
cooperation;
_______________
406

SSC/18/IM/2, chap. I.
A/70/344.
408
A/66/717.
409
A/66/717/Add.1.
407

571

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Welcomes the increased contributions of South-South cooperation to poverty eradication and sustainable
development, encourages developing countries to voluntarily step up their efforts to strengthen South-South
cooperation and to further improve its development effectiveness, in accordance with the provisions of the Nairobi
outcome document of the High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation,410 and welcomes
commitments to strengthen triangular cooperation as a means of bringing relevant experience and expertise to bear
in development cooperation;
7. Requests continued integration of South-South and triangular cooperation into the policies and strategic
frameworks of the funds, programmes and the specialized agencies of the United Nations system, as appropriate
and consistent with their respective mandates, in the context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;411
8. Reiterates its request to the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, as Chair of
the United Nations Development Group, to make specific recommendations on additional support that United
Nations system organizations and all States could provide to South-South and triangular cooperation, which could
include the voluntary secondment of staff and the appointment of Junior Professional Officers to the United Nations
Office for South-South Cooperation, as well as measures to strengthen the system-wide efficiency and impact of the
Office;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to make necessary adjustments, as appropriate, to the framework of
operational guidelines on United Nations support to South-South and triangular cooperation,412 in consultation with
all States and organizations of the United Nations development system;
10. Reaffirms the mandate and the central role of the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation as
the focal point for promoting and facilitating South-South and triangular cooperation for development on a global
and United Nations system-wide basis, and requests the Secretary-General, noting that further deliberation by all
States on the options presented in his report on measures to further strengthen the United Nations Office for SouthSouth Cooperation413 will be required before a decision is taken on the idea of separating the Office for South-South
Cooperation as operationally autonomous from the United Nations Development Programme, to present, as part of
his comprehensive report to the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation at its nineteenth session, to be
held in 2016, in consultation with all States, the Office for South-South Cooperation and the United Nations
Development Programme, a comprehensive proposal on concrete ways to enhance the role of and improve the
impact of the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation under the auspices of the United Nations
Development Programme, including in the areas of financial, human and budgetary resources, including through the
potential appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General on South-South Cooperation, and at the
same time recommending specific contributions of the United Nations Development Programme under such a
change, with a view to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
11. Reiterates the request to the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, as Chair of
the United Nations Development Group, to establish a more formalized and strengthened inter-agency mechanism,
coordinated by the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation, with a view to encouraging joint support to
South-South and triangular initiatives and sharing information on development activities and results achieved by
various organizations through their respective business models in support of South-South and triangular
cooperation, calls upon the United Nations development system to designate representational focal points to join the
mechanism, and requests the Administrator to give the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation the
opportunity to be represented more regularly in strategic and coordination mechanisms of the United Nations
Development Group when matters affecting South-South and triangular cooperation are being discussed;
12. Welcomes with satisfaction the progress made by the South-South and Triangular Cooperation Task
Team of the United Nations Development Group in establishing a more formalized and strengthened inter-agency
mechanism coordinated by the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation and in designating United
_______________
410

Resolution 64/222, annex.
See resolution 70/1.
412
SSC/17/3.
413
See SSC/18/3.
411

572

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations development system focal points to join the mechanism, and in this regard requests the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, as Chair of the United Nations Development Group, to include, as part of
the regular reporting, an update on the progress of the work of the Task Team for the consideration of Member
States by the end of 2016;
13. Calls upon the United Nations Development Programme and other relevant organizations of the United
Nations development system to assist developing countries in implementing projects of South-South cooperation,
including sharing best practices and experiences from the South, especially with the least developed countries, upon
request and in a manner consistent with their mandates and strategic plans;
14. Invites the United Nations development system to encourage the transfer of technologies on mutually
agreed terms for the benefit of developing countries to address poverty eradication and sustainable development;
15. Welcomes the launch, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, of the Technology Facilitation
Mechanism, and looks forward to its expeditious operationalization;
16. Recognizes the important role of South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation, and in this context
requests the Secretary-General, with the support of the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation, to take
steps, within existing resources, to update and to create appropriate new policy tools in order that the United Nations
system may effectively support Member States, upon request, in using South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation to assist in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
17. Acknowledges the positive efforts made by United Nations organizations to develop thematic strategies
for the implementation of South-South cooperation, and in that regard requests the United Nations development
system, in consultation with Member States, to strive to increasingly leverage, as appropriate, South-South
cooperation to bolster its impact in the context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
18. Requests the United Nations system to intensify its cooperation and improve its support in areas where
South-South cooperation has proven effective, including policy coordination, regional integration, interregional
linkages, infrastructure interconnectivity and the development of national productive capacities through exchanges
of knowledge and technological innovations;
19. Welcomes the support of some developing countries to South-South and triangular initiatives aimed at
improving nutrition and food security, and invites the replication of this approach in other areas of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, drawing on the technical expertise of various United Nations organizations;
20. Notes that, in response to the growing demand for support to South-South cooperation at the regional
and subregional levels, the regional commissions have advanced South-South cooperation by undertaking policy
research and analysis on issues of importance to their member States, convening high-level policy dialogues,
forging strategic partnerships and promoting specific capacity-development and other initiatives, and in that regard
invites the regional commissions to support developing countries, upon request, in integrating the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development into their nationally owned sustainable development strategies, in areas such as regional
development planning and fiscal frameworks, and to help promote policy coherence and coordination and the
enhancement of the data and statistical capacities of Member States for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
21. Urges the United Nations system to continue its support to regional and subregional organizations,
enabling their member States to build more partnerships and cross-border frameworks, with a view to promoting
and scaling up best practices in South-South and triangular cooperation with the potential to benefit a large number
of developing countries;
22. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide in his report to the High-level Committee on
South-South Cooperation at its nineteenth session an update on the concrete steps taken to further strengthen SouthSouth cooperation within the United Nations development system;
23. Recognizes the need to mobilize adequate resources for enhancing South-South and triangular
cooperation, and in this context invites all countries in a position to do so to contribute, in support of such
cooperation, to the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation and to the Pérez-Guerrero Trust Fund for
573

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

South-South Cooperation, in accordance with its resolution 57/263 of 20 December 2002, and to support other
initiatives for all developing countries, including technology transfers among developing countries;
24. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the state of South-South cooperation, including an assessment of the concrete measures taken by the United Nations
development system to improve its support to South-South cooperation, and on the implementation of the present
resolution, and decides to include the sub-item entitled “South-South cooperation for development” under the item
entitled “Operational activities for development” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session, unless
otherwise agreed in the discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/223
A/RE S/70 /223

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/478, para. 13)414

70/223.

Agriculture development, food security and nutrition

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 65/178 of 20 December 2010, 66/220 of 22 December 2011, 67/228 of 21 December
2012, 68/233 of 20 December 2013 and 69/240 of 19 December 2014,
Recalling also the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security,415 particularly the Five Rome
Principles for Sustainable Global Food Security, and noting the Rome Declaration on Nutrition,416 as well as the
Framework for Action,417 which provides a set of voluntary policy options and strategies for use by Governments,
as appropriate, adopted at the Second International Conference on Nutrition, held in Rome from 19 to
21 November 2014,
Recalling further the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,418 Agenda 21,419 the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,420 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development421 and the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),422 the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,423
the 2005 World Summit Outcome,424 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of
the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus,425 the outcome document of the 2010 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
on the Millennium Development Goals,426 the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
_______________
414

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
416
World Health Organization, document EB 136/8, annex I.
417
World Health Organization, document EB 136/8, annex II.
418
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
419
Ibid., annex II.
420
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
421
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
422
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
423
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
424
Resolution 60/1.
425
Resolution 63/239, annex.
426
Resolution 65/1.
415

574

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Decade 2011–2020,427 the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway428 and the outcome
document of the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013,429
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,430
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Expressing concern that the multiple and complex causes of the food crises that occur in different regions of
the world, affecting developing countries, especially net food importers, and their consequences for food security
and nutrition require a comprehensive and coordinated response in the short, medium and long term by national
Governments, civil society and the international community, reiterating that the root causes of food insecurity and
malnutrition are poverty and inequity, and remaining concerned that excessively volatile food prices pose a serious
challenge to the fight against poverty and hunger and to the efforts of developing countries to attain food security
and improved nutrition and to achieve internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable
Development Goals, particularly those related to ending hunger and malnutrition,
Reaffirming the importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as its 10-year plan of
action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next
50 years and its continental programme embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development and regional initiatives, such as the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme,
Welcoming the outcome of the forty-second session of the Committee on World Food Security, held in Rome
from 12 to 15 October 2015,431 taking note of the Committee’s endorsement of the voluntary Principles for
Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems in 2014,432 and recalling its Voluntary Guidelines on the
Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security,433
Noting with appreciation the work undertaken by relevant international bodies and organizations, including
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development,
the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) on agricultural development
and on enhancing food security and improving nutrition outcomes,
_______________
427

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
428
Resolution 69/15, annex.
429
Resolution 68/6.
430
Resolution 66/288, annex.
431
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2017/19.
432
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/20, appendix D.
433
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.

575

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Welcoming the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for Shared
Prosperity and Improved Livelihoods, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union at its twenty-third ordinary session, and welcoming also the African Union strategy and road map for
facilitating the realization of the 2014 Malabo Commitments on Agriculture, launched during the twenty-fourth
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, in January 2015,
Reaffirming that agriculture remains a fundamental and key sector for developing countries, and noting the
importance of working towards eliminating all forms of protectionism and of the commitments to comprehensive
negotiations aimed at substantial improvement in market access, substantial reduction in trade-distorting national
support and the parallel elimination of all forms of export subsidies and disciplines on all export measures with
equivalent effect, as provided in the mandate from the Doha Work Programme,434 the framework adopted by the
General Council of the World Trade Organization on 1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration
adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005,
Reaffirming also the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food, consistent with the
right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, so that they may be able to
fully develop and maintain their physical and mental capacities, and underlining the need to make special efforts to
meet nutritional needs, especially of women, children, older persons, indigenous peoples and persons with
disabilities, as well as of those living in vulnerable situations,
Remaining deeply concerned that, according to the most recent estimates of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, about 793 million people, or one in nine people in the world, suffer from
chronic hunger and that 98 per cent of all hungry people live in developing countries, noting with concern that this
number remains particularly high, and noting also that stunting is an important challenge to be addressed by
Member States,
Remaining deeply concerned also about the continuing food insecurity and malnutrition being faced by
millions of people, in particular in sub-Saharan Africa,
Reiterating the urgent need for action to address the adverse effects of climate change on food security, as well
as the root causes of food insecurity and malnutrition,
Reiterating also the importance, inter alia, of empowering rural women, youth and smallholder and family
farmers as critical agents for enhancing agricultural and rural development and food security and improving
nutrition outcomes,
Welcoming the implementation of the International Year of Soils, 2015, and World Soil Day, 5 December, to
increase awareness and understanding of the importance of soil for food security and essential ecosystem functions,
and looking forward to the implementation of the International Year of Pulses, 2016, to increase awareness of the
nutritional benefits of pulses as part of sustainable food production aimed towards food security and nutrition,
Welcoming also the holding of Expo Milan 2015, the theme of which was “Feeding the Planet, Energy for
Life”, and the efforts of participants to draw the attention of the general public to the importance of global food
security and nutrition,
Taking note with appreciation of the publication entitled Achieving Zero Hunger: the Critical Role of
Investments in Social Protection and Agriculture, issued by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the International Fund for Agriculture Development and the World Food Programme in July 2015, and the
publication entitled The State of Food and Agriculture 2015: Social Protection and Agriculture: Breaking the Cycle
of Rural Poverty, issued by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and noting that the theme
of World Food Day 2015 is “Social protection and agriculture: breaking the cycle of rural poverty”,
Recognizing the need to increase public and private investment in the agriculture sector, inter alia, to fight
hunger and malnutrition and to promote rural and urban sustainable development,
Taking note of the reports of the High-level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee
on World Food Security on water for food security and nutrition, food losses and waste in the context of sustainable
food systems and sustainable fisheries and aquaculture for food security and nutrition,
_______________
434

576

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 and its guiding principles,435 and
recalling also its promotion of regular disaster preparedness, response and recovery exercises, at the national and
local levels, with a view to ensuring rapid and effective response to disasters and related displacement, including
access to essential food and non-food relief supplies, as appropriate to local needs,
Recalling also that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible and balance
the three dimensions of sustainable development, and acknowledging that reaching Goal 2 and the interlinked
targets of the other Sustainable Development Goals will be critical, inter alia, in ending hunger and all forms of
malnutrition,
Welcoming the launch, at Expo Milan on 22 October 2015, of the Sustainable Food Systems Programme
under the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns,436 which aims to
accelerate the shift towards more sustainable food systems,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and that no country
is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;437

2. Stresses the importance of continued consideration of the issue of agriculture, development, food
security and nutrition, and encourages Member States and all stakeholders to give due consideration to this issue
while implementing the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals;438
3. Reiterates the importance of developing countries determining their own food security strategies, that
improving food security and nutrition is a global challenge and a national policy responsibility and that any plans for
addressing this challenge in the context of eradicating poverty must be nationally articulated, designed, owned, led
and built in consultation, as an inclusive process, with all key stakeholders at the national level, as appropriate, and
urges Member States, especially those affected, to make food security and nutrition a high priority and to reflect this
in their national programmes and budgets;
4. Calls upon the international community to continue to support the Comprehensive African Agriculture
Development Programme and its results framework, which is an integral component of the Programme that
provides guidance on planning and implementing investment programmes;
5. Welcomes the increased political commitment by Member States to tackle hunger and all forms of
malnutrition, in this regard welcomes the Scaling Up Nutrition movement, and encourages Member States to
engage in the movement at the global and country levels to further reduce global hunger and all forms of
malnutrition, in particular in women, especially pregnant and lactating women, and children under age 2;
6. Also welcomes the six global nutrition targets set by the World Health Assembly to address global
malnutrition;439
7. Takes note of the Global Nutrition for Growth Compact, signed by more than 100 countries, companies
and civil society organizations, to reduce the number of stunted children by 20 million by 2020 and the financial
commitments made to support this goal, as well as the second Nutrition for Growth event, which will be held
in 2016;
8. Welcomes the Secretary-General’s Zero Hunger Challenge and the aim of a world free from hunger, and
takes note of the progress made in improving cooperation, coordination and coherence by all stakeholders to
overcome the challenges of hunger and malnutrition;
9. Stresses the need to increase sustainable agricultural production and productivity globally, noting the
diversity of agricultural conditions and systems, including by improving and aiming to ensure the functioning of
_______________
435

Resolution 69/283, annex II.
A/CONF.216/5, annex.
437
A/70/333.
438
Resolution 70/1.
439
World Health Organization, document WHA65/2012/REC/1, annex 2.
436

577

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

markets and trading systems and strengthening international cooperation, particularly for developing countries,
and by increasing public and private investment in sustainable agriculture, land management and rural
development, and notes that the benefit of such public and private investment and engagement should also benefit,
where appropriate, local smallholders with regard to promoting food security, improving nutrition outcomes and
reducing inequality;
10. Recognizes the need to increase the resilience of food and agricultural production to climate change, and
encourages efforts at all levels to support climate-sensitive agricultural practices, including agroforestry,
conservation agriculture, water management schemes, drought- and flood-resistant seeds and sustainable livestock
management, and measures to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable groups and food systems, which can also have
a wider positive impact, emphasizing adaptation to climate change as a major concern and objective for all farmers
and food producers, especially small-scale and family-farm producers;
11. Also recognizes the outcome of the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015, noting
the adverse impact of climate change on food security;
12. Reaffirms the necessity of promoting, enhancing and supporting more sustainable agriculture, including
crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture, that improves food security, eradicates hunger and is
economically viable, while conserving land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, biodiversity and ecosystems
and enhancing resilience to climate change and natural disasters, and recognizes the need to maintain natural
ecological processes that support sustainable and efficient food production systems and ensure food security;
13. Welcomes the Rome Declaration on Nutrition,416 as well as the Framework for Action,417 which provides
a set of voluntary policy options and strategies for use by Governments, as appropriate;
14. Recognizes that food systems have a fundamental role to play in promoting healthy diets and improving
nutrition, and welcomes the establishment of national policies aimed at eradicating malnutrition in all its forms and
transforming food systems so as to make nutritious diets available to all, while reaffirming that health, water and
sanitation systems must be strengthened simultaneously to end malnutrition;
15. Reaffirms the crucial role of healthy marine ecosystems, sustainable agriculture, sustainable fisheries and
sustainable aquaculture for enhancing food security and access to adequate, safe and nutritious food and in
providing for the livelihoods of millions of people, particularly inhabitants of small island developing States;
16. Acknowledges that social protection programmes and measures are effective in reducing poverty
and hunger;
17. Encourages and recognizes the efforts at all levels to establish and strengthen social protection measures
and programmes, including national safety nets and protection programmes for the needy and vulnerable, such as
food and cash-for-work, cash transfer and voucher programmes, school-feeding programmes and mother-and-child
nutrition programmes, and in this regard underlines the importance of increasing investment, capacity-building and
systems development;
18. Calls for closing the gender gap in access to productive resources in agriculture, noting with concern that
the gender gap persists with regard to many assets, inputs and services, and stresses the need to invest in and
strengthen efforts to empower women, in particular rural women, to address their own food and nutritional needs
and those of their families, to promote adequate standards of living for them, as well as decent conditions of work,
and to guarantee their personal security, full access to land and natural resources and access to local, regional and
global markets;
19. Remains deeply concerned about the recurring food insecurity and malnutrition in different regions of
the world and their ongoing negative impact on health and nutrition, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, and in this
regard underlines the urgent need for joint efforts at all levels to respond to the situation in a coherent and effective
manner;
20. Recognizes the important role of indigenous peoples and small-scale farmers and their traditional
knowledge and seed supply systems in the conservation of biodiversity and in aiming to ensure food security and
improved nutrition;
578

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

21. Takes note of the report of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations on its thirty-ninth session440 as well as the report of the Committee on Agriculture on its twenty-fourth
session,441 which expressed support for the Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems concept and
recognized the contribution of the Heritage Systems to cultural heritage, biological diversity and sustainable
development;
22. Emphasizes the need to revitalize the agriculture sector, promote rural development and aim for ensuring
food security and nutrition, notably in developing countries, in a sustainable manner, which will lead to rich payoffs
across the Sustainable Development Goals, and underlines the importance of taking the necessary actions to better
address the needs of rural communities by, inter alia, enhancing access for agricultural producers, in particular small
producers, women, youth, indigenous peoples and people living in vulnerable situations, to credit and other financial
services, markets, secure land tenure, health care, social services, education, training, knowledge and appropriate
and affordable technologies, including for efficient irrigation, reuse of treated wastewater and water harvesting and
storage;
23. Recognizes the growing need to take action to fight hunger and malnutrition among the urban poor;
24. Reaffirms the need to strive for a comprehensive twin-track approach to food security and nutrition that
consists of direct action to immediately tackle hunger for the most vulnerable and medium- and long-term
sustainable agriculture, food security and nutrition and rural development programmes to eliminate the root causes
of hunger and poverty, including through the progressive realization of the right to adequate food in the context of
national food security;
25. Also reaffirms the need to promote a significant expansion of research on food, nutrition and agriculture,
extension services, training and education, and of funding for such research from all sources, to improve agricultural
productivity and sustainability in order to strengthen agriculture as a key sector to promote development and to build
up resilience to support better recovery from crisis and shock, including by strengthening the work of the reformed
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research so as to enhance its development impact, supporting
national research systems, public universities and research institutions and promoting technology transfer on
mutually agreed terms, the voluntary sharing of knowledge and practices and research to adapt to and mitigate
climate change and improve equitable access to research results and technologies on mutually agreed terms at the
national, regional and international levels, while giving due consideration to the preservation of genetic resources;
26. Stresses that a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system
will promote agriculture and rural development in developing countries and contribute to world food security and
nutrition, and urges national, regional and international strategies to promote the inclusive participation of farmers,
especially smallholder farmers, including women, in community, national, regional and international markets;
27. Also stresses the need to continue to strengthen cooperation among the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food
Programme, the regional commissions and all other relevant entities of the United Nations system and other
intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions and international trade and economic
institutions, including with the support of the Secretary-General’s High-level Task Force on Global Food and
Nutrition Security, in accordance with their respective mandates, in order to increase their effectiveness, as well as to
strengthen cooperation with non-governmental organizations and the public and private sectors in promoting and
strengthening efforts towards sustainable agriculture development, food security and nutrition;
28. Recognizes the contribution made thus far by early warning systems, and underlines that the reliability
and timeliness of such systems should be strengthened at the national, regional and international levels, with a focus
on countries that are particularly vulnerable to price shocks and food emergencies;
29. Stresses the need to significantly reduce post-harvest and other food losses and waste throughout the
food supply chain through, inter alia, increased promotion of appropriate harvesting practices, agrofood processing,
appropriate facilities for the storage and packaging of food and by encouraging sustainable consumption patterns;
_______________
440
441

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/REP.
See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/21.

579

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

30. Reaffirms the important role and inclusive nature of the Committee on World Food Security as a key
organ in addressing the issue of global food security and nutrition, and notes the role that the Committee could play
in support of the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly those related to ending hunger
and malnutrition;
31. Encourages countries to give due consideration to the dissemination, promotion and implementation of
the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of
National Food Security,433 as well as the voluntary Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food
Systems,432 as endorsed by the Committee on World Food Security in 2012 and 2014, respectively;
32. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates and
resources, to ensure that no country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first
session the item entitled “Agriculture development, food security and nutrition”, unless otherwise agreed in the
discussions on the revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/224
A/RE S/70 /224

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/479, para. 10)442

70/224.

Towards global partnerships: a principle-based approach to enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations and all relevant partners

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/215 of 21 December 2000, 56/76 of 11 December 2001, 58/129 of 19 December
2003, 60/215 of 22 December 2005, 62/211 of 19 December 2007, 64/223 of 21 December 2009, 66/223 of
22 December 2011 and 68/234 of 20 December 2013,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Recalling these objectives, particularly with regard to developing partnerships through the provision of greater
opportunities to the private sector, non-governmental organizations and civil society in general so as to enable them
to contribute to the realization of the goals and programmes of the Organization, in particular in the pursuit of
sustainable development and the eradication of poverty,
_______________
442

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

580

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Underlining the fact that cooperation between the United Nations and all relevant partners, including the
private sector, and all partnerships using the United Nations name or emblem shall serve the purposes and principles
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and shall be undertaken in a manner that maintains and promotes the
integrity, impartiality and independence of the Organization,
Welcoming the contribution of all relevant partners, including the private sector, non-governmental
organizations, philanthropic organizations, academia and civil society, which respect and support, as appropriate, the
core values and principles of the United Nations, to the implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations
conferences and summits and their reviews in the economic, social, environmental and related fields, as well as the
realization of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Emphasizing that cooperation between the United Nations and all relevant partners, in particular the private
sector, can contribute to addressing the obstacles confronted by developing countries through responsible business
practices, such as respecting the principles of the United Nations Global Compact and taking action, including by
mobilizing the resources needed to finance their sustainable development, and to realizing the internationally agreed
development goals in developing countries,
Welcoming, in the context of enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and all its relevant partners,
including through multi-stakeholder partnerships, efforts to step up international cooperation and collaboration in
science, research, technology and innovation on the basis of common interest and mutual benefit, focusing on the
needs of developing countries and the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Welcoming also the efforts and encouraging further efforts by all relevant partners, including the private sector,
to engage as reliable and consistent partners in the development process and to take into account not only the
economic and financial but also the developmental, social, human rights, gender and environmental implications of
their undertakings, and, in general, towards implementing corporate social and environmental responsibility, that is,
bringing such values and responsibilities to bear on their conduct and policies premised on profit incentives, in
conformity with national laws and regulations,
Noting the principles and initiatives of the United Nations Global Compact, such as the Business for the Rule
of Law Framework,
Recalling that multi-stakeholder partnerships and the resources, knowledge and ingenuity of the relevant
stakeholders will be important in mobilizing and sharing knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources,
complementing the efforts of Governments and supporting the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
in particular in developing countries,
Recalling also the update of the Guidelines on a Principle-based Approach to the Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Business Sector, undertaken in order to ensure their full alignment with the Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy”
Framework,443
Recalling further that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development acknowledges the roles and
contributions of civil society, the scientific and technological community and non-governmental organizations, as
well as other relevant international organizations, including international financial institutions and multilateral
development banks, in advancing sustainable development,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development also acknowledges that the implementation of
sustainable development will depend on the active engagement of both the public and private sectors, and
recognizing that the active participation of the private sector can contribute to the achievement of sustainable
development,
Recalling also that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development supported national regulatory
and policy frameworks that enable business and industry to advance sustainable development initiatives, including
the important tool of public-private partnerships,
_______________
443

A/HRC/17/31, annex.

581

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing the contributions of all relevant partners, including the private sector, in fostering stability and
supporting recovery by creating job opportunities, advancing economic development, as well as infrastructure
development, and, as appropriate, contributing to trust, reconciliation and security,
Noting that the financial and economic crisis, inter alia, has demonstrated the need for values and principles in
business, including for sustainable business practices, social protection floors and the promotion of full and
productive employment and decent work for all,
Reaffirming the principles of sustainable development, and underlining the global consensus reached on the
key values and principles that will promote sustainable, fair, equitable and sustained economic development and that
corporate social and environmental responsibility are important elements of that consensus,
Encouraging the private sector in the context of enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and all its
relevant partners to enhance its involvement in combating climate change,
Recognizing that a socially responsible private sector can contribute to the promotion of children’s rights and
education through relevant initiatives such as the Children’s Rights and Business Principles and the Framework for
Business Engagement in Education,
Recognizing also the unique position of the United Nations as a builder of bridges among countries and all
stakeholders, and the progress achieved in the work of the United Nations on partnerships, notably in the framework
of various United Nations organizations, agencies, funds, programmes, task forces, commissions and initiatives, and
noting the establishment of partnerships at the field level entered into by various United Nations agencies, nonpublic partners and Member States, as well as multi-stakeholder partnerships,
Recalling that the high-level political forum on sustainable development will have a central role in overseeing
follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level,
Stressing the importance of the high-level political forum on sustainable development in supporting the
participation in follow-up and review processes by the major groups and other relevant stakeholders pursuant to
resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013, and calling on those actors to report on their contribution to the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recognizing the vital role that the United Nations Global Compact Office continues to play with regard to
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to partner strategically with the private sector, in accordance with
its mandate from the General Assembly, to advance United Nations values and responsible business practices within
the United Nations system and among the global business community,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on enhanced cooperation between the United Nations
and all relevant partners, in particular the private sector;444
2. Stresses that partnerships are voluntary and collaborative relationships between various parties, both
public and non-public, in which all participants agree to work together to achieve a common purpose or undertake a
specific task and, as mutually agreed, to share risks and responsibilities, resources and benefits;
3. Also stresses the importance of the contribution of voluntary partnerships to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals, while reiterating that they are a complement to, but not intended to substitute for,
the commitment made by Governments with a view to achieving those Goals;
4. Further stresses that partnerships should be consistent with national laws and national development
strategies and plans, as well as the priorities of countries where they are implemented, bearing in mind the relevant
guidance provided by Governments;
5. Emphasizes the vital role played by Governments in promoting responsible business practices, including
providing and ensuring enforcement of the necessary legal and regulatory frameworks in accordance with national
legislation and development priorities, and invites them to continue to provide support to United Nations efforts to
engage with the private sector, as appropriate;
_______________
444

582

A/70/296.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Recognizes the vital role that the private sector plays in development, including through engaging in
various partnership models and by generating decent employment and investment, giving access to and developing
new technologies, offering technical vocational training activities and stimulating sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth, with due consideration for non-discrimination, gender equality and women’s empowerment,
while bearing in mind the need to ensure that their activities conform fully with the principle of national ownership
of development strategies;
7. Welcomes the growing number of businesses that embrace a core business model that takes account of
the environmental, social and governance impacts of their activities, encourages and urges all businesses to adopt
principles for responsible business and investing, and supports the work of the United Nations Global Compact in
this regard;
8. Recognizes the importance of the various contributions of all relevant stakeholders, including the private
sector, to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,445 and in this regard takes note of the important role that
the Global Compact Local Networks will play in supporting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and promoting
poverty eradication and sustainable development through, inter alia, the exercise of corporate social responsibility;
9. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to improve collaboration of the United Nations with all
relevant partners, including the private sector, and to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations system, with a
view to enhancing the results achieved through partnerships, and acknowledges the importance of continued
consultations with Member States;
10. Also welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to continuing to retain the integrity and unique
role of the United Nations Global Compact;
11. Notes with appreciation the initiatives of the Secretary-General, including the Sustainable Energy for All
initiative, the Every Woman, Every Child initiative, the Global Education First Initiative, the Zero Hunger
Challenge initiative and the Global Pulse initiative, while stressing the principles of transparency, coherence, impact,
accountability and due diligence;
12. Invites the United Nations system, when considering partnerships, to seek to engage in a more coherent
manner with private sector entities, including small and medium-sized enterprises, that support the core values of
the United Nations, as reflected in the Charter of the United Nations and other relevant conventions and treaties, and
that commit to the principles of the United Nations Global Compact by translating them into operational corporate
policies, codes of conduct and management, monitoring and reporting systems;
13. Stresses the need for the United Nations system to develop, for those partnerships in which it
participates, a common and systemic approach which places greater emphasis on transparency, coherence, impact,
accountability and due diligence, without imposing undue rigidity in partnership agreements;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, in collaboration with funds and programmes, the
specialized agencies and other relevant United Nations entities and mechanisms:
(a) To implement the Guidelines on a Principle-based Approach to the Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Business Sector, including from a gender perspective;
(b) To disclose the partners, contributions and matching funds for all relevant partnerships, including at the
country level;
(c) To strengthen due diligence and risk management measures that can safeguard the reputation of the
Organization and ensure confidence-building;
(d) To ensure that these elements are coherently reflected in the reporting of partnership activities by the
United Nations funds, programmes and, as appropriate, agencies to their respective governing bodies;
(e) To ensure that these elements are reflected in system-wide reports and in the reports on initiatives of the
Secretary-General to be submitted for the consideration of Member States;
_______________
445

Resolution 70/1.

583

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

15. Recognizes the contribution of partnerships to the realization of the goals and programmes of the
Organization, and in this regard requests the Economic and Social Council to hold, during its partnership forum in
2016, a discussion on the best practices and ways to improve, inter alia, transparency, accountability and the sharing
of experiences of multi-stakeholder partnerships and on the review and monitoring of these partnerships, including
the role of Member States in the review and monitoring process;
16. Underlines, in this context, the importance of integrity measures as taken and advocated by the United
Nations Global Compact;
17. Encourages the United Nations funds and programmes to continue to actively engage with other
stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector and foundations, with a view to diversifying potential sources
of funding, especially core funding, for their operational activities for development, in alignment with the core
principles of the United Nations development system and with full respect for the national priorities of programme
countries;
18. Recognizes that these partnerships should give priority to core resources, while noting the need to make
non-core resources from partners flexible and aligned with strategic plans and national priorities;
19. Requests the United Nations Global Compact to promote the Women’s Empowerment Principles and to
encourage the Global Compact Local Networks to create awareness of the many ways in which business can
promote gender equality in the workplace, marketplace and community, and encourages the private sector to
contribute to advancing gender equality;
20. Acknowledges the importance of corporate sustainability reporting, encourages companies, where
appropriate, especially publicly listed and large companies, to consider integrating sustainability information into
their reporting cycle, encourages industry, interested Governments and relevant stakeholders, with the support of the
United Nations system, as appropriate, to develop models for best practice and to facilitate action for the integration
of sustainability reporting, taking into account experiences from already existing frameworks and paying particular
attention to the needs of developing countries, including for capacity-building, and welcomes in this context the
collaboration of the United Nations Global Compact with the Global Reporting Initiative and the World Business
Council for Sustainable Development;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote effective implementation of the Guidelines on a
Principle-based Approach to the Cooperation between the United Nations and the Business Sector;
22. Encourages the international community to strengthen global partnerships for the integration and
implementation in partnerships of the Global Jobs Pact of the International Labour Organization and the call for
action on youth employment, in accordance with national plans and priorities;
23. Invites the academic, research and scientific communities to contribute to the realization of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in this regard recognizes the important role of the United Nations
Academic Impact, among other initiatives, and encourages it to play an important and growing role in fostering
global citizenship, filling knowledge gaps and facilitating better understanding of the core principles and activities of
the United Nations;
24. Stresses the importance of developing national strategies for the promotion of sustainable and productive
entrepreneurial activities through partnerships, and encourages Governments to create a climate that is conducive to
increasing the number of women entrepreneurs and the size of their businesses;
25. Notes with appreciation the convening of the annual United Nations Private Sector Forum, which, in
2015, focused on the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals;
26. Encourages the private sector and the Global Compact Local Networks to join the United Nations
Global Compact “Business for Peace” platform and to seek to maximize the beneficial contributions to peace and
development while minimizing the risks of negative impacts on both business and society in conflict-affected
countries;
27. Recognizes the work of the Global Compact Local Networks, as well as the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations system at the local level and the Global Compact Local Networks, to support, as
appropriate and in a manner complementary to existing networks, the coordination and application of global
partnerships locally;
584

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

28. Also recognizes that the Global Compact Local Networks provide an avenue for diffusing United
Nations values and principles and facilitating partnerships with business on a broad scale;
29. Acknowledges the establishment of the United Nations private sector focal points network, promoting
greater coherence and capacity-building within the Organization on activities involving business and disseminating
innovations in engagement across the system, as well as the holding of annual meetings of United Nations system
private sector focal points, which remain important forums for the exchange of best practices, lessons learned and
innovations in partnerships with the private sector;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventysecond session the item entitled “Towards global partnerships”, unless otherwise agreed in the discussions on the
revitalization of the Second Committee.
RESOLUTION 70/225
A/RE S/70 /225

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/480,
para. 12),446 by a recorded vote of 164 to 5, with 10 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Honduras, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga,
Vanuatu

70/225.

A/RES/70/

Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 69/241 of 19 December 2014, and taking note of Economic and Social Council
resolution 2015/17 of 20 July 2015,
Recalling also its resolutions 58/292 of 6 May 2004 and 59/251 of 22 December 2004,
Reaffirming the principle of the permanent sovereignty of peoples under foreign occupation over their natural
resources,
Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, affirming the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by force, and recalling relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967, 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980 and 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
_______________
446

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by South Africa (on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Turkey.

585

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949,447 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
Recalling, in this regard, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights448 and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,448 and affirming that these human rights instruments must be
respected in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, as well as in the occupied Syrian Golan,
Recalling also the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,449 and recalling further its
resolutions ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Recalling further its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Taking note of the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law
treaties, as well as to other international treaties,
Expressing its concern about the exploitation by Israel, the occupying Power, of the natural resources of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
Expressing its grave concern about the extensive destruction by Israel, the occupying Power, of agricultural
land and orchards in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including the uprooting of a vast number of fruit-bearing
trees and the destruction of farms and greenhouses, and the grave environmental and economic impact in
this regard,
Expressing its grave concern also about the widespread destruction caused by Israel, the occupying Power, to
vital infrastructure, including water pipelines, sewage networks and electricity networks, in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, in particular in the Gaza Strip during the military operations of July and August 2014, which, inter alia, has
polluted the environment and which negatively affects the functioning of water and sanitation systems and the water
supply and other natural resources of the Palestinian people, and stressing the urgency of the reconstruction and
development of water and other vital civilian infrastructure, including the project for the desalination facility for the
Gaza Strip,
Expressing its grave concern further about the negative impact on the environment and on reconstruction and
development efforts of the thousands of items of unexploded ordnance that remain in the Gaza Strip as a result of
the conflict in July and August 2014,
Recalling the 2009 report by the United Nations Environment Programme regarding the grave environmental
situation in the Gaza Strip, and the 2012 report, “Gaza in 2020: A liveable place?”, by the United Nations country
team in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, and stressing the need for follow-up to the recommendations contained
therein,
Deploring the detrimental impact of the Israeli settlements on Palestinian and other Arab natural resources,
especially as a result of the confiscation of land and the forced diversion of water resources, including the
destruction of orchards and crops and the seizure of water wells by Israeli settlers, and of the dire socioeconomic
consequences in this regard,
Recalling the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the implications of the
Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people throughout the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,450

_______________
447

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
449
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
450
A/HRC/22/63.
448

586

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Aware of the detrimental impact on Palestinian natural resources being caused by the unlawful construction of
the wall by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem, and of its grave effect as well on the economic and social conditions of the Palestinian people,
Stressing the urgency of achieving without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace settlement on all tracks, on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 and 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative451 and the Quartet performance-based road map to a permanent two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,452 as endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 1515 (2003) of
19 November 2003 and supported by the Council in its resolution 1850 (2008) of 16 December 2008,
Stressing also, in this regard, the need for respect for the obligation upon Israel under the road map to freeze
settlement activity, including so-called “natural growth”, and to dismantle all settlement outposts erected since
March 2001,
Stressing further the need for respect and preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Recalling the need to end all acts of violence, including acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction,
Taking note of the report prepared by the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on the economic
and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan, as
transmitted by the Secretary-General,453
1. Reaffirms the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and of the population of the occupied Syrian
Golan over their natural resources, including land, water and energy resources;
2. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease the exploitation, damage, cause of loss or depletion
and endangerment of the natural resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in
the occupied Syrian Golan;
3. Recognizes the right of the Palestinian people to claim restitution as a result of any exploitation, damage,
loss or depletion or endangerment of their natural resources resulting from illegal measures taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, and Israeli settlers in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and expresses
the hope that this issue will be dealt with within the framework of the final status negotiations between the
Palestinian and Israeli sides;
4. Stresses that the wall and settlements being constructed by Israel in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, are contrary to international law and are seriously depriving the Palestinian
people of their natural resources, and calls in this regard for full compliance with the legal obligations affirmed in
the 9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice449 and in relevant United Nations resolutions,
including General Assembly resolution ES-10/15;
5. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply strictly with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law, and to cease immediately and completely all policies and measures aimed
at the alteration of the character and status of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
6. Also calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to bring a halt to all actions, including those perpetrated by
Israeli settlers, harming the environment, including the dumping of all kinds of waste materials, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan, which gravely threaten their
natural resources, namely water and land resources, and which pose an environmental, sanitation and health threat to
the civilian populations;
_______________
451

A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
S/2003/529, annex.
453
A/70/82-E/2015/13.
452

587

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

7. Further calls upon Israel to cease its destruction of vital infrastructure, including water pipelines, sewage
networks and electricity networks, which, inter alia, has a negative impact on the natural resources of the Palestinian
people, stresses the urgent need to advance reconstruction and development projects in this regard, including in the
Gaza Strip, and calls for support for the necessary efforts in this regard, in line with the commitments made at, inter
alia, the Cairo International Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, held on 12 October 2014;
8. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to remove all obstacles to the implementation of critical
environmental projects, including sewage treatment plants in the Gaza Strip and the reconstruction and development
of water infrastructure, including the project for the desalination facility for the Gaza Strip;
9. Calls for the immediate and safe removal of all unexploded ordnance in the Gaza Strip and for support
for the efforts of the United Nations Mine Action Service in this regard, and welcomes the efforts exerted by the
Mine Action Service to date;
10. Encourages all States and international organizations to continue to actively pursue policies to ensure
respect for their obligations under international law with regard to all illegal Israeli practices and measures in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly Israeli settlement activities and the
exploitation of natural resources;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including with regard to the cumulative impact of the exploitation,
damage and depletion by Israel of natural resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and in the occupied Syrian Golan, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the
item entitled “Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources”.
RESOLUTION 70/226
A/RE S/70 /226

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 22 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/472/Add.9, para. 6)454

70/226.

United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

The General Assembly,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,455
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
_______________
454

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Angola, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, Comoros, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and Vanuatu.
455
Resolution 66/288, annex.

588

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further that the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals will depend upon a
revitalized and enhanced Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, bringing together Governments, civil
society, the private sector, the United Nations system and other actors, and noting in this regard the interest
expressed in holding future conferences or events at a high level that would complement but not duplicate existing
efforts and activities to support the implementation of and to maintain political momentum to achieve Sustainable
Development Goal 14,
Recognizing the central role of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, and the highlevel political forum on sustainable development held under their auspices, as well as the role of the United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea and the important contribution of all
relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations in the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 14,
1. Decides to convene the high-level United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development in Fiji, from 5 to 9 June 2017, coinciding with World Oceans Day, to support the
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14;
2. Also decides that all costs relating to the Conference and its preparation shall be financed through
extrabudgetary resources;
3. Welcomes the generous offer by the Governments of Fiji and Sweden to co-host and assume the costs of
the Conference;
4. Decides to consider, before the end of the seventieth session of the General Assembly, the modalities of
the Conference in the most efficient and effective manner possible;
5. Expresses its intention to consider further opportunities to actively involve Governments, civil society,
the private sector, the United Nations system and other actors in driving progress and supporting the implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14.

589

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/126.

Promoting social integration through social inclusion .............................................................................................. 593

70/127.

Policies and programmes involving youth .............................................................................................................. 596

70/128.

Cooperatives in social development ....................................................................................................................... 600

70/129.

Integrating volunteering into peace and development: the plan of action for the next decade and beyond.................... 602

70/130.

Violence against women migrant workers .............................................................................................................. 604

70/131.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women ....................................................... 612

70/132.

Improvement of the situation of women and girls in rural areas................................................................................ 613

70/133.

Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly....................... 617

70/134.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa............................................................................. 624

70/135.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ............................................................................... 629

70/136.

Report of the Human Rights Council ..................................................................................................................... 634

70/137.

Rights of the child................................................................................................................................................. 635

70/138.

The girl child ........................................................................................................................................................ 647

70/139.

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance ............................................................... 655

70/140.

A global call for concrete action for the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action ........................................................................................................................................... 661

70/141.

The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.......................................................................................... 666

70/142.

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination ............................................................................................................................................. 667

70/143.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination ............................................................................ 671

70/144.

International Covenants on Human Rights ............................................................................................................. 672

70/145.

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto ........................................... 673

70/146.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .................................................................. 675

70/147.

Protection of migrants ........................................................................................................................................... 681

70/148.

Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism .................................................... 688

70/149.

Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order .................................................................................... 695

70/150.

Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity ......................................................... 700

70/151.

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures....................................................................................................... 701

70/152.

Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights treaty bodies ...................... 706

70/153.

Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights ..................................................................... 708

70/154.

The right to food ................................................................................................................................................... 711

591

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/155.

The right to development ...................................................................................................................................... 717

70/156.

Human rights and cultural diversity........................................................................................................................ 725

70/157.

Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or belief ......................................................................................... 729

70/158.

Freedom of religion or belief ................................................................................................................................. 733

70/159.

Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights ..................................................................... 738

70/160.

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance ......................................... 742

70/161.

Human rights defenders in the context of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals,
Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms ......................................................................................................................................... 744

70/162.

The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity .................................................................................................. 750

70/163.

National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights ..................................................................... 753

70/164.

Measures to enhance the promotion and protection of the human rights and dignity of older persons ......................... 757

70/165.

Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons ..................................................................................... 760

70/166.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious
and Linguistic Minorities ...................................................................................................................................... 767

70/167.

Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa.................................................................. 772

70/168.

Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and genuine elections and the promotion
of democratization ................................................................................................................................................ 774

70/169.

The human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation ........................................................................................... 778

70/170.

Towards the full realization of an inclusive and accessible United Nations for persons with disabilities ...................... 782

70/171.

United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region.......... 784

70/172.

Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea ................................................................. 785

70/173.

Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran......................................................................................... 791

70/174.

Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice........................................................ 795

70/175.

United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules) .......................... 806

70/176.

Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls .............................................................................. 832

70/177.

Technical assistance for implementing the international conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism.......... 835

70/178.

Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity ............................................................................................................................................. 839

70/179.

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons ......................................................................... 850

70/180.

United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders.................................... 855

70/181.

Special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem to be held in 2016 ............................................ 858

70/182.

International cooperation against the world drug problem........................................................................................ 860

70/229.

Persons with albinism ........................................................................................................................................... 872

70/232.

Rights of indigenous peoples ................................................................................................................................. 873

70/233.

Situation of human rights in Myanmar ................................................................................................................... 877

70/234.

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic ............................................................................................ 880

592

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/126
A/RE S/70 /126

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/481, para. 40)1

70/126. Promoting social integration through social inclusion
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that, in order to leave no one behind and bring everyone forward, actions are needed to promote
equality of opportunity so that no person is denied basic economic opportunities and the enjoyment of all
human rights,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March 1995, and
the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly entitled “World Summit for Social Development and
beyond: achieving social development for all in a globalizing world”, held in Geneva from 26 June to
1 July 2000,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2010/12 of 22 July 2010 on promoting social
integration and General Assembly resolutions 66/122 of 19 December 2011 and 68/131 of 18 December 2013 on
promoting social integration through social inclusion,
Welcoming the fact that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development2 reflects the cross-cutting nature and
importance of social inclusion, through the relevant Sustainable Development Goals and associated targets, and
acknowledging that its promotion is required to achieve sustainable development in all of its dimensions,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development includes, among the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals, which are integrated and indivisible, a goal to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
at all levels,
Recognizing the great importance of promoting comprehensive systems of social protection that provide
universal access to essential social services, consistent with national priorities and circumstances, in order to help
meet the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Taking note with appreciation of the commitment of several United Nations entities to mainstream social
inclusion in their work, and encouraging others to do the same,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for everyone, as necessary, to eradicate poverty
in all its forms, including extreme poverty, which should be complemented, as appropriate, by effective social
protection policies, including social inclusion policies,
Reaffirming also the importance of reducing inequalities within and among countries through the
empowerment of all and the promotion of social, economic and political inclusion, especially for those in vulnerable
or marginalized groups or situations,

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
2
Resolution 70/1.

593

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing that the gains of economic growth should also benefit those in vulnerable or marginalized groups
or situations,
Recognizing also that social inclusion and equality are intrinsically linked and that focusing on and investing
in the most disadvantaged and excluded populations, such as women, children and persons with disabilities, is
critically important for the effective implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recognizing further that social inclusion policies and systems play a critical role in promoting an inclusive
society and are also crucial for fostering stable, safe, harmonious, peaceful and just societies and for improving
social cohesion and inclusion so as to create an environment for development and progress,
Reaffirming the important role of corporate social responsibility and accountability in contributing to an
enabling environment to promote inclusive economic growth and social integration,
Recognizing that social inclusion policies also strengthen the democratic process and play a critical role in
progressively realizing economic, social and cultural rights for all,
Stressing that social inclusion policies should promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls and equal access to opportunities and social protection for all, in particular for those in vulnerable or
marginalized groups or situations, including women who experience multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination and violence,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring the social integration of older persons and the promotion and
protection of their rights, as an integral part of development policies at all levels, and recognizing the essential
contribution that older persons can make to development,
Recognizing the important role played by civil society, including non-governmental organizations, in
promoting social integration, inter alia, through social programmes and support for the development of socially
inclusive policies,
Acknowledging that the participation of persons in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations is crucial to
formulating and implementing social inclusion policies that effectively achieve social integration, as appropriate,
Recognizing that each country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development, and
reaffirming the essential role of national policies and strategies in promoting sustainable development in all of its
forms, particularly the promotion of social inclusion,
Recognizing also the importance of an enabling international environment, and stressing the importance of
enhanced international cooperation to support national efforts towards promoting social integration through social
inclusion in every country, including the fulfilment of all commitments on official development assistance, debt
relief, market access, financial and technical support and capacity-building,
Expressing concern that, in times of economic and financial crisis and ongoing concern about energy and food
insecurity, social exclusion can be exacerbated, and stressing in this regard that sustainable and reliable social
inclusion policies and programmes can play a positive role,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;3

2. Stresses that Member States, which bear the main responsibility for social integration and social
inclusion, should prioritize the creation of a “society for all” based on respect for all human rights and the principles
of equality among individuals, non-discrimination, access to basic social services and promotion of the active
participation of every member of society, in particular those in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations, in all
aspects of life, including civic, social, economic, cultural and political activities, as well as participation in decisionmaking processes;

_______________
3

594

A/70/179.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Reaffirms that social integration policies should seek to reduce inequalities and that equity and social
inclusion are important for achieving sustainable development, ensuring that individuals can participate without
discrimination and contribute to its social, economic and environmental dimensions;
4. Stresses the importance of ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting lifelong
learning opportunities for all, especially for older persons and persons with disabilities, and of skills development
and quality training, as essential means for inclusive participation and integration in society;
5. Calls upon Member States to promote a more equitable participation in and access to economic growth
gains, through, inter alia, policies that ensure inclusive labour markets and by implementing socially responsive
macroeconomic policies, in which employment has a key role, and social inclusion strategies that promote social
integration, ensuring social protection floors, particularly for those who are in vulnerable or marginalized groups or
situations, as defined by each country in accordance with its individual circumstances, including on a demanddriven basis, and the promotion and protection of their social and economic rights;
6. Encourages Member States to consider, when appropriate, the creation or the strengthening of national
institutions or agencies for promoting, implementing and evaluating social inclusion programmes and mechanisms,
at the national and local levels, in order to help ensure that nobody is left behind;
7. Also encourages Member States to ensure inclusive participatory and representative decision-making
processes at all levels and to review existing legal frameworks, as appropriate, with a view to removing
discriminatory provisions so as to reduce inequalities;
8. Further encourages Member States to promote social inclusion as a matter of social justice in order to
build the resilience of vulnerable populations and to help them to adapt to the negative impact of economic crises,
humanitarian emergencies and climate change, and in this regard invites relevant United Nations entities and
international institutions to support such efforts;
9. Invites Member States, and encourages regional organizations, to support national efforts to achieve
inclusive societies, in particular in developing countries, upon their request, by providing, inter alia, financial and
technical cooperation for the design and implementation of sound social inclusion policies;
10. Encourages Member States to mainstream social integration objectives into social inclusion policies,
promoting the participation of persons in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations in planning, implementing
and monitoring processes, in collaboration, as appropriate, with relevant organizations of the United Nations
development system, regional organizations, international and regional financial institutions, development and
social partners, the private sector and civil society organizations;
11. Invites Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, regional organizations,
international and regional financial institutions, development and social partners, the private sector and civil society
organizations to continue to share their experience in respect of practical initiatives to promote economic, civil and
political participation and anti-discrimination measures and other measures for advancing social integration;
12. Invites Member States to consider a systematic exchange of good practices in social integration at the
regional and international levels so that policymakers and other stakeholders can apply them to their national
circumstances and step up progress towards achieving a “society for all”;
13. Encourages Member States to improve the collection and use of data disaggregated by age, sex and
other relevant criteria for the formulation of policies and programmes aimed at achieving social inclusion, and
stresses the importance of international cooperation in this regard;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report, taking into account the information provided by
Member States and relevant actors of the United Nations system, on the implementation of the present resolution to
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session;
15. Decides to consider the question further at its seventy-second session under the item entitled “Social
development”.
595

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/127
RES/70/127

A/

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/481, para. 40)4

70/127. Policies and programmes involving youth
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Programme of Action for Youth, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolutions
50/81 of 14 December 1995 and 62/126 of 18 December 2007,
Welcoming the participation of youth representatives in national delegations at the General Assembly,
Affirming that generating decent work and quality employment for youth is one of the biggest challenges that
needs to be tackled, as well as emphasizing the priority areas of the World Programme of Action for Youth linked to
the employability of youth, including education, health and access to information and technology, and bearing in
mind that over 73 million young people are unemployed,
Recalling that Member States have an important role in meeting the needs and aspirations of youth, including
youth with disabilities, and recognizing that the ways in which young people are able to fulfil their potential will
influence social and economic conditions and the well-being and livelihood of future generations,
Acknowledging that the current generation of youth is the largest one ever, and in this context reaffirming the
importance of involving youth, and youth-led and youth-focused organizations, in the work of the United Nations at
the national, regional and international levels, in all matters of concern to them, including in the implementation of
the World Programme of Action for Youth and of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,5
Recalling the adoption of the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,
by Heads of State and Government on 25 September 2015,5 and recognizing that the 2030 Agenda includes
important goals and targets pertaining to youth,
Welcoming the high-level event held by the General Assembly on 29 May 2015 to mark the twentieth
anniversary of the World Programme of Action for Youth, which offered an important opportunity for Member
States and other relevant stakeholders to take stock of progress made in its implementation, as well as to identify
gaps and challenges and the way forward for its full, effective and accelerated implementation,
Welcoming also the role of the Envoy of the Secretary-General on Youth and his work in addressing the needs
of youth, as well as, inter alia, as a harmonizer with different United Nations entities, Governments, civil society,
youth organizations, academia and media towards enhancing, empowering and strengthening the position of young
people within and outside of the United Nations system,
Noting the convening of the World Conference on Youth, held in Sri Lanka in May 2014, the first Global
Forum on Youth Policies, held in Azerbaijan in October 2014, and the Global Forum on Youth, Peace and Security,
held in Jordan in August 2015,

_______________
4

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Estonia, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Hungary, India, Ireland,
Italy, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe.
5
Resolution 70/1.

596

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming its designation of 15 July as World Youth Skills Day by its resolution 69/145 of
18 December 2014,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on ways to promote effective,
structured and sustainable youth participation;6
2. Reaffirms the World Programme of Action for Youth,7 and emphasizes that all 15 priority areas of the
Programme of Action are interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
3. Also reaffirms the commitment of Heads of State and Government, reflected in the outcome document
of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our
world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,5 to leave no one behind, including youth, and to develop
and implement strategies that give young people everywhere real opportunities for full, effective and constructive
participation in society;
4. Reiterates that the primary responsibility for implementing the World Programme of Action for Youth
lies with Member States, and urges Governments, in consultation with youth, youth-led and youth-focused
organizations and other relevant stakeholders, to develop holistic and integrated youth policies and programmes
based on the Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and to evaluate them
regularly as part of the follow-up action on and implementation of the Programme of Action at all levels;
5. Calls upon Member States to consider, on a voluntary basis, the indicators proposed in the report of the
Secretary-General8 for their selection and adaptation in monitoring and assessing the implementation of the World
Programme of Action for Youth, giving particular attention to young women, marginalized groups and young
people belonging to vulnerable groups or in vulnerable situations, taking into account the national social and
economic circumstances in each country;
6. Urges Member States to promote equal opportunities for all, to eliminate all forms of discrimination
against young people, including that based on race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, property, birth or other status, and to foster social integration for social groups such as
young persons with disabilities, young migrants and indigenous youth on an equal basis with others;
7. Reiterates that the eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition, particularly as they affect children
and youth, is crucial for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, recalls the
commitment to eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development and global
prosperity for all, including the strengthening of international cooperation through the fulfilment of all official
development assistance commitments and the transfer of appropriate technology and capacity-building with regard
to youth, and the need for urgent action on all sides, including more ambitious national development strategies,
efforts and investment in youth, backed by increased international support and, inter alia, by providing youth with a
nurturing environment for the full realization of their human rights and capabilities, in order to realize the
opportunity of the demographic dividend offered by the largest number of young people ever in the history of
humankind, and calls for the increased participation of youth, youth-led and youth-focused organizations in the
development of such national development strategies;
8. Emphasizes the role of education and health literacy in improving health outcomes over a lifetime, and
in this regard encourages Member States to promote health education and health literacy among young people,
including through evidence-based education and information strategies and programmes, both in and out of school,
and through public campaigns, and to increase the access of youth to affordable, safe, effective, sustainable and
youth-friendly health-care services and social services, safe drinking water and adequate and equitable sanitation
and hygiene by paying special attention to, and raising awareness regarding, nutrition, including eating disorders,
obesity and mental health, the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, the prevention of adolescent
_______________
6

A/70/156.
Resolution 50/81, annex, and resolution 62/126, annex.
8
E/CN.5/2013/8.
7

597

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

pregnancies, the effects of non-communicable and communicable diseases, and sexual and reproductive health
care, and recognizes the need to develop safe and youth-friendly counselling and substance abuse prevention
programmes;
9. Also emphasizes that addressing the specific needs of young people in the response to HIV and AIDS is
a key element in efforts to achieve an AIDS-free generation, and urges Member States to develop accessible,
available and affordable primary health-care services of high quality, including sexual and reproductive health care,
as well as education programmes, including those related to sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV and AIDS,
and to strengthen efforts in this regard, including by ensuring the active involvement of young people living with or
affected by HIV in the response;
10. Reiterates that access to quality formal and non-formal education, at all levels, including, as appropriate,
catch-up and literacy education, including in information and communications technologies for those who did not
receive formal education, information and communications technologies and volunteerism are important factors that
enable young people to acquire the relevant skills and to build their capacities, including for employability and
entrepreneurial development, and to gain decent and productive work, and calls upon Member States to take the
actions necessary to ensure that young people have access to such services and opportunities;
11. Urges Member States to address the challenges faced by girls and young women, as well as to address
gender stereotypes that perpetuate discrimination and violence against girls and young women and the stereotypical
roles of men and women that are preclusive of social development, by reaffirming the commitment to the
empowerment of women and gender equality and the human rights of all women and girls, and to engage, educate,
encourage and support men and boys to take responsibility for their behaviour in this regard, including their sexual
and reproductive behaviour;
12. Also urges Member States to mainstream a gender perspective into all development efforts, recognizing
that these are critical for achieving sustainable development and for efforts to combat hunger, poverty and disease,
and to strengthen policies and programmes that improve, ensure and broaden the full participation of young women
in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life, as equal partners, and to improve their access to all
resources needed for the full exercise of all their human rights and fundamental freedoms by removing persistent
barriers, including ensuring equal access to full and productive employment and decent work, as well as
strengthening their economic independence;
13. Further urges Member States to address high rates of youth unemployment, underemployment,
vulnerable employment and informal employment by developing and implementing targeted and integrated local
and national youth employment policies for inclusive, sustainable and innovative job creation, improved
employability, skills development and vocational training to improve the chances of integrating youth in the
sustainable labour market and increased entrepreneurship, including the development of networks of young
entrepreneurs at the local, national, regional and global levels that foster knowledge among young people about their
rights and responsibilities in society, and in this regard reaffirms the commitment of Heads of State and Government
to develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment by 2020, and encourages Member States to
invest in education, support lifelong learning and provide social protection for all youth and request donors,
specialized United Nations entities and the private sector to continue to provide assistance to Member States,
including technical and funding support, as appropriate;
14. Emphasizes the importance of the impact of a fair globalization, and encourages Member States to take
measures that minimize the negative effects of globalization and maximize its benefits, such as offering relevant
education and training for young people in order that they may reach their full personal development, that enable
their access to decent jobs and better employment opportunities, in order to meet the needs of changing labour
markets, and that enable young migrants to enjoy their human rights;
15. Recognizes that youth participation is important for development, and urges Member States and United
Nations entities, in consultation with youth, and youth-led and youth-focused organizations, to explore and promote
new avenues for the full, effective, structured and sustainable participation of young people and youth-led
organizations in relevant decision-making processes and monitoring, including in designing and implementing
policies, programmes and initiatives, while implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
16. Also recognizes the role of the Envoy of the Secretary-General on Youth and his task of bringing the
voices of young people to the United Nations system in the areas of participation, advocacy, partnerships and
598

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

harmonization identified in his workplan, and encourages the Envoy to continue to work closely with Governments,
United Nations entities, civil society, youth organizations, academia and media, by empowering and strengthening
the position of young people within and outside of the United Nations system, including by conducting country
visits, upon the request of the Member States concerned;
17. Further recognizes that the international community faces increasing challenges posed by climate
change and the loss of biodiversity, which have increased vulnerabilities and inequalities with direct and indirect
implications for the well-being of youth, and which could make youth, particularly in developing countries and
small island developing States, vulnerable to their adverse impacts, including through suffering disproportionately in
labour markets in times of crisis created by climate change, and calls for the enhanced cooperation of and concerted
action by Member States with youth in order to address those challenges, taking into account the positive role that
the education of youth can play in that respect;
18. Calls upon Member States to take concrete measures to further assist youth in armed conflict situations,
in accordance with the World Programme of Action for Youth, and to encourage the involvement of young people,
where appropriate, in activities concerning the protection of children and youth affected by armed conflict situations,
including in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and post-conflict processes, and recognizes the importance of
protecting schools and universities from military use in contravention of applicable international law during armed
conflicts;
19. Urges Member States to take concerted action, in conformity with international law, to remove obstacles
to the full realization of the rights of young people living under foreign occupation, colonial rule and in other areas
of conflict or post-conflict situations in order to promote the achievement of the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
20. Also urges Member States to take effective measures, in conformity with international law, to protect
young people, including youth in marginalized groups affected or exploited by terrorism and incitement;
21. Further urges Member States to consider including youth delegates in their delegations at all relevant
discussions in the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions and relevant
United Nations conferences, as appropriate, bearing in mind the principles of gender balance and nondiscrimination, and emphasizes that such youth representatives should be selected through a transparent process that
ensures that they have a suitable mandate to represent young people in their countries;
22. Acknowledges the increased collaboration through the Inter-Agency Network on Youth Development in
developing the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Youth, and requests the United Nations entities, within
existing resources, to continue their coordination towards a more coherent, comprehensive and integrated approach
to youth development, calls upon the United Nations entities and relevant partners to support national, regional and
international efforts in addressing challenges hindering youth development, and in this regard encourages close
collaboration with Member States as well as other relevant stakeholders, including civil society;
23. Calls upon the United Nations Programme on Youth to continue to act as the focal point within the
United Nations system for promoting further collaboration and coordination on youth-related matters;
24. Calls upon donors, including Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to actively contribute to the United Nations Youth Fund in order to facilitate the participation of youth
representatives from developing countries in the activities of the United Nations, taking into account the need for
greater geographical balance in terms of youth representation, as well as to accelerate the implementation of the
World Programme of Action for Youth and to support the production of the World Youth Report, and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action to encourage contributions to the Fund;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session
on the implementation of the present resolution, including on the linkages and complementarities on youth issues
between the World Programme of Action for Youth and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to be
prepared in consultation with Member States as well as the relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes
and regional commissions, taking into account the work done by the United Nations system, and also encourages
the Secretariat to consult, as appropriate, with youth-led and youth-focused organizations.
599

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/128
A/RE S/70 /128

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/481, para. 40)9

70/128. Cooperatives in social development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/90 of 16 December 1992, 49/155 of 23 December 1994, 51/58 of 12 December
1996, 54/123 of 17 December 1999, 56/114 of 19 December 2001, 58/131 of 22 December 2003, 60/132 of
16 December 2005, 62/128 of 18 December 2007, 64/136 of 18 December 2009, 65/184 of 21 December 2010,
66/123 of 19 December 2011 and 68/133 of 18 December 2013 concerning cooperatives in social development,
Recognizing that cooperatives, in their various forms, promote the fullest possible participation in the
economic and social development of all people, including women, youth, older persons, persons with disabilities
and indigenous peoples, are becoming a significant factor of economic and social development and contribute to the
eradication of poverty and hunger,
Recognizing also the important contribution and potential of all forms of cooperatives to the follow-up to the
World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on Women and the second United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), including their five-year reviews, the World Food Summit, the
Second World Assembly on Ageing, the International Conference on Financing for Development, the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda,
Welcoming the adoption of the outcome document of the United Nations summit, entitled “Transforming our
world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,10 and the Addis Abаba Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development,11 and noting the acknowledgement therein of the role of
cooperatives in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and in relation to financing for development,
Noting with appreciation the potential role of cooperative development in the improvement of the social and
economic conditions of indigenous peoples and rural communities,
Welcoming the efforts of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to showcase the role of
agricultural cooperatives, including in improving food security and nutrition, particularly in rural areas, promoting
sustainable agricultural practices, improving the agricultural productivity of farmers and facilitating access to
markets, savings, credit, insurance and technology,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;12

2.

Notes with appreciation the celebration of the International Year of Cooperatives, in 2012;

_______________
9

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liberia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Yemen.
10
Resolution 70/1.
11
Resolution 69/313, annex.
12
A/70/161.

600

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Encourages all Member States, as well as the United Nations and all other relevant stakeholders, to
share best practices identified through activities implemented during the International Year of Cooperatives and to
continue those activities, as appropriate;
4. Recalls the draft plan of action on cooperatives for 2012 and beyond, based on the outcome document of
the expert group meeting held in Ulaanbaatar in 2011 for the promotion of cooperatives for sustainable
socioeconomic development, to promote focused and effective follow-up to the activities of the International Year,
within existing resources;
5. Draws the attention of Governments to the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral to focus support on cooperatives as sustainable and successful business enterprises that contribute directly
to employment generation, poverty and hunger eradication, education and social protection, across a variety of
economic sectors in urban and rural areas, to review existing legislation concerning cooperatives, to identify
opportunities to make the legal environment more supportive of cooperatives and to take action to improve existing
legislation or to pass new laws, especially in the areas of access to capital, competitiveness and fair taxation, to
enable the growth of cooperatives;
6. Invites Governments and international organizations, in partnership with cooperatives and cooperative
organizations, to strengthen and build the capacity of all forms of cooperatives, especially those run by the poor,
young people, women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups, so that they can empower people to
transform their lives and communities positively and build inclusive societies;
7. Invites Governments to strengthen efforts to enhance food security and nutrition and to focus efforts on
smallholders and women farmers, as well as on agricultural cooperatives and farmers’ networks, supported by
measures to improve access to markets, enable domestic and international environments and strengthen
collaboration across the many initiatives in this area, including regional initiatives;
8. Encourages Governments to promote access to information and communications technologies as a vital
channel for collaboration and the expansion of cooperatives, especially in rural areas;
9. Also encourages Governments to intensify and expand the availability and accessibility of research on
the operations and contribution of cooperatives and to establish methodologies for the collection and dissemination
of comparable global data on and the best practices of cooperative enterprises, in collaboration with all stakeholders,
and to raise public awareness of the linkages between cooperatives and sustainable development, especially in the
areas of social inclusion, employment creation, poverty eradication and peacebuilding;
10. Invites Governments, relevant international organizations, the specialized agencies and local, national
and international cooperative organizations to continue to observe the International Day of Cooperatives annually,
on the first Saturday of July, as proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/90;
11. Invites Governments, in collaboration with the cooperative movement, to develop programmes aimed at
enhancing the capacity-building of cooperatives, including by strengthening the organizational, management and
financial skills of their members, while respecting the principles of gender equality and the empowerment of
women, and to introduce and support programmes to improve the access of cooperatives to new technologies;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the relevant United Nations and other international
organizations and national, regional and international cooperative organizations, to continue rendering support to
Member States, as appropriate, in their efforts to create a supportive environment for the development of
cooperatives, integrating cooperative values, principles and business models into educational programming,
including school curricula, as appropriate, providing assistance for human resources development, technical advice
and training and promoting an exchange of experience and best practices through, inter alia, conferences, workshops
and seminars at the national and regional levels, within existing resources;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution.
601

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/129
A/RE S/70 /129

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/481, para. 40)13

70/129. Integrating volunteering into peace and development: the plan of action for the next decade
and beyond
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/138 of 20 December 2012 on integrating volunteering in the next decade,
Recognizing that volunteerism is an important component of any strategy aimed at such areas as poverty
reduction, sustainable development, health, education, youth empowerment, climate change, disaster risk reduction,
social integration, social welfare, humanitarian action, peacebuilding and, in particular, overcoming social exclusion
and discrimination,
Recognizing also that an approach to volunteering may consider drawing on the notion of human security in
accordance with all the provisions of General Assembly resolution 66/290 of 10 September 2012,
Acknowledging the existing contribution of the organizations of the United Nations system in support of
volunteering, especially the work of the United Nations Volunteers programme around the world, acknowledging
also the efforts of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to promote volunteerism
throughout its global network, and taking note of the work of other volunteer-involving organizations at the local,
national, regional and global levels, such as the International Forum for Volunteering in Development and the
International Association for Volunteer Effort,
Welcoming the publication by the United Nations Volunteers programme of the State of the World’s
Volunteerism Report 2015: Transforming Governance, which highlights that volunteerism provides a key channel
for enhanced civic engagement from the local to the national and global contexts through local capacity-building,
fostering social inclusion and promoting voice, participation, accountability and responsiveness,
Welcoming also the integration of volunteerism into all relevant issues considered at the United Nations, in
particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,14 as well as the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development,15 in which it is acknowledged that volunteers and other
stakeholders will be important to mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources,
complement the efforts of Governments and support the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, in
particular in developing countries,
Recognizing that volunteerism can be a powerful and cross-cutting means of implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, that it can help to expand and mobilize constituencies and engage people in
the national planning and implementation of the 2030 Agenda, and that volunteer groups can help to localize the
Agenda by providing new areas of interaction between Governments and people for concrete and scalable actions,

_______________
13

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America and Uruguay.
14
Resolution 70/1.
15
Resolution 69/313, annex.

602

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Acknowledging that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development creates unprecedented global and national
urgency to accelerate progress in the recognition, promotion, facilitation, networking and integration of volunteer
action by Governments, civil society, the private sector, academia, the media and international actors, including the
United Nations system,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on integrating volunteering in the next decade,16 including
the plan of action to integrate volunteering into peace and development policies and programmes for the next
decade and beyond, and recognizes that it could be considered in a flexible and adaptable manner;
2. Recognizes the importance of integrating volunteerism, as appropriate, into the planning for the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,14 and encourages the United Nations system,
civil society and the private sector, in partnership with Member States, to support such efforts and promote a
conducive environment for volunteerism and volunteers to enhance the sustainability of development results;
3. Encourages Governments, in partnership with United Nations entities, volunteer-involving
organizations, the private sector, civil society, including academia, and other stakeholders, to integrate volunteerism
into national development strategies, plans and policies, United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks and
“One United Nations” plans, and also encourages the meaningful participation and integration of volunteers into
programmes and projects through the provision of adequate means for volunteer action to promote the inclusion of
all people, including youth, older persons, women, migrants, refugees, persons with disabilities, minorities and other
marginalized groups, to leverage the full potential of volunteerism;
4. Emphasizes that volunteerism offers valuable opportunities for youth engagement, leadership and
participation to contribute to the development of peaceful and inclusive societies, while also allowing young people
to acquire skills, build their capacities and increase their employability;
5. Commends the positive contributions of national and international volunteers in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, and reaffirms the importance of integrating volunteering into peacebuilding and conflict-prevention
activities, as appropriate, to build social cohesion and solidarity;
6. Also commends the contributions of volunteers to community resilience for environmental and disaster
risk reduction, and calls upon all stakeholders to recognize and integrate the role of volunteers into disaster risk
management, as appropriate;
7. Urges Governments and all other stakeholders to facilitate volunteer action in poverty eradication and
the promotion of sustainable livelihoods, recognizing the role that volunteers can play in improving access to
employment, education, health care, social protection and public goods through engagement in participatory
planning, implementation and monitoring, as appropriate;
8. Urges Governments and all related stakeholders to incorporate volunteerism into gender mainstreaming
strategies, recognizing that peer-to-peer informal volunteering can help to reduce violence against women and girls,
contribute to the achievement of gender equality, empower women and girls and strengthen their civic and political
participation and leadership;
9. Invites Member States to mobilize and support the research community globally to carry out more
studies on the subject of volunteerism, including collecting data disaggregated by gender, age and disability, in
partnership with civil society, in order to provide sound knowledge as a foundation for policies and programmes;
10. Encourages Member States to support intergenerational solidarity and knowledge transmission through
volunteering programmes;
11. Recognizes the importance of information and communications technologies in expanding innovative
forms of volunteering, and encourages Governments, the private sector and other stakeholders to support United
Nations online volunteering that provides inclusive technology-enabled global platforms, especially for those who
are marginalized or in remote locations;
_______________
16

A/70/118 and Corr.1.

603

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Requests Member States and the United Nations system to work together with volunteer-involving
organizations to support efforts to enhance the protection, security and well-being of volunteers, calls upon States to
create and maintain, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment for volunteers, and encourages the
adoption of good practices in the promotion, facilitation and, where applicable, management of volunteerism;
13. Requests Member States to give full consideration to the plan of action to integrate volunteering into
peace and development policies and programmes for the next decade and beyond, and calls upon Governments, the
United Nations system, multilateral organizations, civil society, the private sector, academia and volunteer-involving
organizations to support, as appropriate, the institutional and resource arrangements set out therein, while
recognizing that in the case of the United Nations system this will be done through voluntary contributions;
14. Invites the collaboration of the United Nations Volunteers programme and other organizations, such as
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, in jointly organizing a global technical
meeting in 2020 to further strengthen the engagement and contributions of volunteers with regard to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development;
15. Recognizes the United Nations Volunteers programme as the appropriate United Nations entity to
support the implementation of the plan of action, and expects the programme to coordinate the work to consolidate
and disseminate good practices and lessons learned, promote successful volunteer actions and ensure that the
differentiated impact of volunteers on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
documented as part of regular national policy, planning and implementation practices;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including the plan of action to integrate volunteering into peace and
development policies and programmes for the next decade and beyond, under the item entitled “Social
development”.
RESOLUTION 70/130
A/RE S/70 /130

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/482, para. 26)17

70/130. Violence against women migrant workers
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on violence against women migrant workers and those adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women, the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice, and also recalling the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women,18
Reaffirming the provisions concerning women migrant workers contained in the outcome documents of the
World Conference on Human Rights,19 the International Conference on Population and Development,20 the Fourth
World Conference on Women21 and the World Summit for Social Development22 and their reviews,
_______________
17

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia,
Madagascar, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Uganda,
United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
18
Resolution 48/104.
19
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
20
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
21
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
22
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

604

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also the provisions concerning women migrants contained in the outcome document of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,23 and calling upon States to promote and protect
effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants regardless of migration status, especially
those of women and children, and to encourage their active participation, as appropriate, in processes that contribute
to decision-making, planning and implementation of policies and programmes for sustainable development at
all levels,
Reaffirming further that the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women24
and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,25 and the Optional Protocols thereto,26 as well as other relevant
conventions and treaties, provide an international legal framework and a comprehensive set of measures for the
elimination and prevention of all forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls and for the
promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of women,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,27 and acknowledging that the 2030
Agenda covers the achievement of gender equality and empowerment of all women and girls and the protection of
labour rights and promotion of safe and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in
particular women migrants, and those in precarious employment, and also acknowledging the need, inter alia, to end
all violence and discrimination against them,
Acknowledging the role of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), including in supporting national efforts, to increase women’s access to economic opportunities,
including for women migrant workers, and to end violence against them, in the light of the UN-Women strategic
plan, 2014–2017,28 which has among its six goals increasing women’s access to economic opportunities, and
preventing violence against women and girls and expanding access to services for survivors, and acknowledging the
policy and programmatic work of UN-Women on empowering women migrant workers,
Reaffirming the outcomes of the Fourth World Conference on Women, the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action,21 and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”,29 and their reviews,
Welcoming the political declaration adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-ninth
session on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women,30 and taking note,
in particular, of the pledge to take further concrete action to ensure the full, effective and accelerated implementation
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome documents of the twenty-third special session of
the General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women
at its fifty-seventh session,31 and taking note, in particular, of the commitment, as appropriate, to further adopt and
implement measures to ensure the social and legal inclusion and protection of women migrants, including women
migrant workers in countries of origin, transit and destination, promote and protect the full realization of their
human rights and their protection against violence and exploitation, implement gender-sensitive policies and
programmes for women migrant workers and provide safe and legal channels that recognize their skills and
education, provide fair labour conditions and, as appropriate, facilitate their productive employment and decent
work as well as integration into the labour force,

_______________
23

Resolution 66/288, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
25
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
26
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378; and vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
27
Resolution 70/1.
28
UNW/2013/6.
29
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
30
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I, sect. C, resolution 59/1, annex.
31
Ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
24

605

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling the declaration of the United Nations High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development,32 held on 3 and 4 October 2013, which reaffirmed the need to promote and protect effectively the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of
women and children, and to address international migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation
and dialogue and through a comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of
countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding
approaches that might aggravate their vulnerability,
Recalling also that the declaration recognized that women and girls account for almost half of all international
migrants at the global level and the need to address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and
girls by, inter alia, incorporating a gender perspective into policies and strengthening national laws, institutions and
programmes to combat gender-based violence, including trafficking in persons and discrimination against them, and
emphasized in this regard the need to establish appropriate measures for the protection of women migrant workers
in all sectors, including those involved in domestic work,
Taking note with appreciation of the adoption by the International Labour Conference on 16 June 2011, at its
100th session, of the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189) and Recommendation No. 201 on decent work
for domestic workers, of the International Labour Organization, and the entry into force of the Convention on
5 September 2013, and inviting States to consider ratifying it, encouraging States parties to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women to take note of and consider general recommendation
No. 26 on women migrant workers adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
in November 2008,33 and encouraging States parties to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families34 to take note of and consider general comment No. 1 on
migrant domestic workers adopted by the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families in December 2010,35 acknowledging that they are complementary and mutually
reinforcing,
Recognizing the urgency of combating trafficking in persons in all its forms, including for the purposes of
forced or compulsory labour, particularly of women migrant workers, and in this regard taking note of the adoption
by the International Labour Conference on 11 June 2014, at its 103rd session, of the Protocol to the Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and of Recommendation No. 203 on supplementary measures for the effective
suppression of forced labour, of the International Labour Organization,
Recognizing also the increasing participation of women of all skill levels in international migration, driven in
large part by socioeconomic factors, and that this feminization of migration requires greater gender sensitivity in all
policies and efforts related to the subject of international migration,
Recognizing further that the demand for migrant care work appears to be rising, where the failure to resolve
care deficits and secure public provision of care has increased the demand for care work, particularly in the private
sphere, and that some migrant workers engaged in informal care work, particularly women, face serious human
rights abuses owing to the invisible nature of their workplace, while many benefit from the economic opportunities
offered by care work,
Recognizing the roles and responsibilities of and need for cooperation among all stakeholders, in particular
countries of origin, transit and destination, relevant regional and international organizations, the private sector and
civil society, in promoting an environment that prevents and addresses violence against women migrant workers,
including in the context of discrimination, through targeted measures, and in this regard recognizing the
importance of joint and collaborative approaches and strategies at the national, bilateral, regional and international
levels,
_______________
32

Resolution 68/4.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/64/38), part one, annex I, decision 42/I.
34
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
35
CMW/C/GC/1.
33

606

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that women migrant workers have the potential to foster equitable, inclusive and sustainable
growth and human development through the economic and social impacts, as a result of their work, on countries of
origin and destination, and underlining the value and dignity of their labour, including the labour of domestic and
care workers,
Recognizing further the particular vulnerability and needs of women and their children at all stages of the
migration process, extending from the moment of deciding to migrate, and including transit, engagement in formal
and informal employment and integration into the host society, as well as during their return to and reintegration in
their countries of origin,
Expressing deep concern at the continuing reports of grave abuses and violence committed against migrant
women and girls, including gender-based violence, sexual violence, domestic and family violence, racist and
xenophobic acts, discrimination, abusive labour practices, exploitative conditions of work and contemporary forms
of slavery, inter alia, all forms of forced labour and trafficking in persons,
Recognizing that one of the key causes of the labour exploitation suffered by migrants, including women
migrant workers, is linked to the unscrupulous practices of some recruitment agencies and informal brokers that
charge high recruitment fees, and noting with concern the reports of abuse committed by some recruitment agencies
and employers,
Recognizing also that the intersection of, inter alia, gender, age, class, race and ethnic discrimination and
stereotypes can compound the discrimination faced by women migrant workers and that gender-based violence is a
form of discrimination,
Reaffirming the commitment to respect, protect and promote the human rights of all women, including,
without discrimination, indigenous women who migrate for work, and in this regard noting the attention paid in the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples36 to the elimination of all forms of violence and
discrimination against indigenous women, as appropriate,
Noting that the priority theme of the sixtieth session of the Commission on the Status of Women will be
“Women’s empowerment and its link to sustainable development” and that migration can enable equitable, inclusive
and sustainable growth and human development for countries of origin and destination, migrants and their families,
and in this regard recognizing the potential role of women migrant workers in contributing to the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Concerned that many migrant women who are employed in the informal economy and in less skilled work are
especially vulnerable to abuse and exploitation, underlining in this regard the obligation of States to protect the
human rights of migrants so as to prevent and address abuse and exploitation, observing with concern that many
women migrant workers take on jobs for which they may be overqualified and in which, at the same time, they may
be more vulnerable because of poor pay and inadequate social protection, and in this regard taking note of the
adoption by the International Labour Conference on 12 June 2015, at its 104th session, of Recommendation
No. 204 concerning the transition from the informal to the formal economy,
Emphasizing the need for objective, comprehensive and broad-based information, including sex- and agedisaggregated data and statistics, and gender- sensitive indicators for research and analysis, and a wide exchange of
experience and lessons learned by individual Member States and civil society in the formulation of targeted policies
and concrete strategies to specifically address violence against women migrant workers, including in the context of
discrimination,
Realizing that the movement of a significant number of women migrant workers may be facilitated and made
possible by means of fraudulent or irregular documentation and sham marriages with the object of migration, that
this may be facilitated through, inter alia, the Internet and that those women migrant workers are more vulnerable to
abuse and exploitation,
Recognizing the importance of exploring the link between migration and trafficking in persons in order to
further efforts towards protecting women migrant workers from violence, discrimination, exploitation and abuse,
_______________
36

Resolution 61/295, annex.

607

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that the vulnerabilities documented for women migrant workers highlight increasingly
complex migration contexts and channels, where migrant workers may find themselves in life-threatening situations
when entering other countries,
Encouraged by some measures adopted by some countries of destination to alleviate the plight of women
migrant workers residing in their areas of jurisdiction and to promote access to justice, such as the establishment of
gender-sensitive protection mechanisms for migrant workers, facilitating their access to mechanisms for reporting
complaints or providing assistance during legal proceedings,
Underlining the important role of relevant United Nations treaty bodies in monitoring the implementation of
human rights conventions and of the relevant special procedures, as well as of the supervisory mechanisms of the
International Labour Organization in monitoring the implementation of labour rights instruments, within their
respective mandates, in addressing the problem of violence against women migrant workers and in protecting and
promoting their human rights and welfare,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on violence against women migrant
workers;37
2. Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the review and appraisal of
the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcomes of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly,38 which highlights, inter alia, that overall progress in the implementation of the
Platform for Action has been particularly slow for women and girls who experience multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination and that marginalized groups of women, including migrant women, are at particular risk of
discrimination and violence;
3. Invites Member States to consider ratifying relevant International Labour Organization conventions,
including the Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97),39 the Migrant Workers
(Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143),40 the Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997
(No. 181)41 and the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), and to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families,34 the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,42 the Protocol
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime,43 the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons44 and the 1961
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness,45 as well as all other human rights treaties that contribute to the
protection of the rights of women migrant workers, calls upon States parties to comply with their relevant
obligations under international law, and also encourages Member States to implement the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons;46
4. Takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights of
migrants submitted to the Council at its seventeenth and twentieth sessions,47 in particular their elaboration of the
vulnerabilities and challenges faced by irregular migrants, including negative public perceptions and limited access
to protection, assistance and justice, and of the report of the Special Rapporteur submitted to the Council at its
_______________
37

A/70/205.
E/CN.6/2015/3.
39
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 120, No. 1616.
40
Ibid., vol. 1120, No. 17426.
41
Ibid., vol. 2115, No. 36794.
42
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
43
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
44
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
45
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
46
Resolution 64/293.
47
A/HRC/17/33 and A/HRC/20/24.
38

608

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

twenty-sixth session,48 in particular the focus of its thematic part on labour exploitation of migrants, covering some
of the most common manifestations of labour exploitation affecting migrants;
5. Encourages all United Nations agencies and special rapporteurs on human rights whose mandates touch
on the issues of violence against women migrant workers to improve the collection of information on and analysis
of those areas within their mandates relating to the current challenges facing women migrant workers, including in
supply chains, and also encourages Governments to cooperate with the agencies and special rapporteurs in
this regard;
6. Calls upon all Governments to incorporate a human rights, gender-sensitive and people-centred
perspective in legislation, policies and programmes on international migration and on labour and employment,
consistent with their human rights obligations and commitments under human rights instruments, for the prevention
of and protection of migrant women against violence and discrimination, exploitation and abuse, to take effective
measures to ensure that such migration and labour policies do not reinforce discrimination, and, where necessary, to
conduct impact assessment studies of such legislation, policies and programmes in order to identify the impact of
measures taken and the results achieved in regard to women migrant workers;
7. Calls upon Governments to adopt or strengthen measures to protect the human rights of women migrant
workers, including domestic workers, regardless of their immigration status, including in policies that regulate the
recruitment and deployment of women migrant workers, to consider expanding dialogue among States on devising
innovative methods to promote legal channels of migration, inter alia, in order to deter irregular migration, to
consider incorporating a gender perspective into immigration laws in order to prevent discrimination and violence
against women, including in independent, circular and temporary migration, and to consider permitting, in
accordance with national legislation, women migrant workers who are victims of violence to apply for residency
permits independently of abusive employers or spouses, and to eliminate abusive sponsorship systems;
8. Encourages Governments to seek to address the push and pull factors surrounding women’s irregular
migration, including the need to resolve care deficits in labour-importing countries and to regulate, formalize,
professionalize and protect the terms and conditions of employment in care work, in line with national law and
applicable obligations under international law;
9. Urges Governments to enhance bilateral, regional, interregional and international cooperation to address
violence against women migrant workers, fully respecting international law, including international human rights
law, as well as to strengthen efforts to reduce the vulnerability of women migrant workers by promoting decent
work, by, inter alia, adopting minimum wage policies and employment contracts in accordance with applicable laws
and regulations, facilitating effective access to justice and effective action in the areas of law enforcement,
prosecution, prevention, capacity-building and victim protection and support, exchanging information and good
practices in combating violence and discrimination against women migrant workers and fostering sustainable
development alternatives to migration in countries of origin;
10. Also urges Governments to take into account the best interests of the child by adopting or strengthening
measures to respect, promote and protect the human rights of migrant children, especially girls, including
unaccompanied girls, regardless of their immigration status, so as to prevent labour and economic exploitation,
discrimination, commercial sexual exploitation, sexual harassment, violence and sexual abuse in the workplace,
including in domestic work;
11. Further urges Governments to strongly encourage all stakeholders, especially the private sector,
including employment agencies involved in recruiting women migrant workers, to strengthen the focus on and
funding support for the prevention of violence against women migrant workers, in particular by promoting the
access of women to meaningful and gender-sensitive information and education on, inter alia, the costs and benefits
of migration, rights and benefits to which they are entitled in the countries of origin and employment, overall
conditions in countries of employment and procedures for legal migration, as well as to ensure that laws and policies
governing recruiters, employers and intermediaries promote adherence to and respect for the human rights and,
where applicable, labour rights of migrant workers, particularly women;
_______________
48

A/HRC/26/35.

609

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Encourages all States to remove obstacles that may prevent the transparent, safe, unrestricted and
expeditious transfer of remittances of migrants to their countries of origin or to any other countries, including, where
appropriate, by reducing transaction costs and implementing woman-friendly remittance transfer, savings and
investment schemes, including diaspora investment schemes, in conformity with applicable national legislation, and
to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems that may impede women migrant workers’ access to
and management of their economic resources;
13. Encourages States to consider designing and implementing financial literacy training programmes for
women migrant workers and, where appropriate, their families, and other programmes that may contribute to the
full development impact of migration;
14. Calls upon States to address the structural and underlying causes of violence against women migrant
workers through education, dissemination of information and awareness-raising, by promoting their empowerment
and access to decent work and, where relevant, their integration into the formal economy, in particular in economic
decision-making, and by promoting their participation in public life, as appropriate;
15. Calls upon Governments to promote access to adequate health-care services for women migrant workers
and their accompanying children;
16. Also calls upon Governments to recognize the right of women migrant workers and their accompanying
children, regardless of their immigration status, to have access without discrimination to emergency health care,
including in times of humanitarian crises, natural disasters and other emergency situations, and in this regard to
ensure that women migrant workers are not discriminated against on the grounds of pregnancy and childbirth and,
in accordance with national legislation, to address the vulnerabilities to HIV experienced by migrant populations
and support their access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support;
17. Encourages Governments to ensure the appropriate use of voluntary and confidential HIV testing and
pregnancy testing to prevent unwarranted barriers prior to and during migration;
18. Urges States that have not yet done so to adopt and implement legislation and policies that protect all
women migrant workers, including those in domestic work, to include therein, and improve where necessary,
relevant monitoring and inspection measures in line with applicable International Labour Organization conventions
and other instruments to ensure compliance with international obligations and to grant women migrant workers in
domestic service access to gender-sensitive, transparent mechanisms for bringing complaints against recruitment
agencies and employers, including terminating their contracts in case of labour and economic exploitation,
discrimination, sexual harassment, violence and sexual abuse in the workplace, while stressing that such instruments
should not punish women migrant workers, and calls upon States to promptly investigate and punish all violations
of their rights;
19. Calls upon Governments, in cooperation with international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and other stakeholders, to provide women migrant workers who are victims of
violence, irrespective of their immigration status, in line with domestic legislation, with the full range of emergency
assistance and protection and, to the extent possible, gender-sensitive services that are culturally and linguistically
appropriate, in accordance with relevant international human rights instruments and applicable conventions;
20. Also calls upon Governments to ensure that legislative provisions and judicial processes are in place for
women migrant workers’ access to justice, to enhance, develop or maintain legal frameworks and specific gendersensitive policies to explicitly meet their needs and rights and, where necessary, to take appropriate steps to reform
existing legislation and policies to capture their needs and protect their rights;
21. Further calls upon Governments, in particular those of the countries of origin and destination, to put in
place penal and criminal sanctions, in order to punish perpetrators of violence against women migrant workers and
intermediaries, and gender-sensitive redress and justice mechanisms that victims can access effectively and that
allow their views and concerns to be presented and considered at appropriate stages of proceedings, including other
measures that will allow victims to be present during the judicial process, when possible, and to protect women
migrant workers who are victims of violence from revictimization, including by authorities;
610

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

22. Urges all States to adopt and implement effective measures to put an end to the arbitrary arrest and
detention of women migrant workers and to take action to prevent and punish any form of illegal deprivation of the
liberty of women migrant workers by individuals or groups;
23. Encourages Governments to formulate, implement and refine training programmes for their law
enforcement officials, immigration officers and border officials, diplomatic and consular officials, judiciary,
prosecutors, public sector medical staff and other service providers, with a view to sensitizing those public sector
workers to the issue of violence against women migrant workers and imparting to them the necessary skills and
attitude to ensure the delivery of proper, professional and gender-sensitive interventions;
24. Also encourages Governments to promote coherence between migration, labour and anti-trafficking
policies and programmes concerning women migrant workers, based on a human rights, gender-sensitive and
people-centred perspective, to ensure that the human rights of women migrant workers are protected throughout the
migration process and to enhance efforts to prevent violence against women migrant workers, prosecute perpetrators
and protect and support victims and their families;
25. Calls upon States, in accordance with the provisions of article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations,49 to ensure that, if a woman migrant worker is arrested or committed to prison or custody pending trial, or
is detained in any other manner, the competent authorities respect her freedom to communicate with and have
access to the consular officials of the country of her nationality and, in this regard, to inform without delay, if that
woman migrant worker so requests, the consular post of her State of nationality;
26. Invites the United Nations system and other concerned intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to cooperate with Governments, within existing resources, towards a better understanding of the
issues concerning women and international migration, and to improve the collection, dissemination and analysis of
sex- and age-disaggregated data and information in order to assist in the formulation of migration and labour
policies that are, inter alia, gender-sensitive and that protect human rights, as well as to aid in policy assessment and
to continue to support national efforts to address violence against women migrant workers in a coordinated way that
ensures effective implementation, enhances their impact and strengthens positive outcomes for women migrant
workers;
27. Encourages Governments, in accordance with their applicable legal obligations, to formulate national
policies concerning women migrant workers that are based on up-to-date, relevant sex-disaggregated data and
analysis, in close consultation with women migrant workers and relevant stakeholders throughout the policy
process, and also encourages Governments to ensure that this process is adequately resourced and that the resulting
policies have measurable targets and indicators, timetables and monitoring and accountability measures, in
particular for employment agencies, employers and public officials, and provide for impact assessments and ensure
multi-sector coordination within and between countries of origin, transit and destination through appropriate
mechanisms;
28. Encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of the countries of origin, transit and
destination, to avail themselves of the expertise of the United Nations, including the Statistics Division of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the International Labour Organization and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), to develop and enhance
appropriate sex-disaggregated national data collection, analysis and dissemination methodologies that will generate
comparable data, and tracking and reporting systems on violence against women migrant workers and, wherever
possible, on violations of their rights at all stages of the migration process, and:
(a) To further study the costs of violence against women, including migrant workers, to the women
themselves, their families and their communities;
(b)

To analyse the opportunities available to women migrant workers and their impact on development;

_______________
49

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

611

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(c) To support the improvement of macrodata on migration costs and on remittances, for appropriate policy
formulation and implementation;
29. Requests Governments and international organizations to take appropriate measures to give due
consideration to the declaration of the United Nations High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development,32 held in New York on 3 and 4 October 2013, in order to ensure that the human rights and human
development aspects of women’s migration are adequately integrated into national, regional and international
development policy and practice, such as poverty reduction strategies and strategies aimed at implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
30. Encourages the United Nations system and related entities to continue and step up their efforts and
promote partnerships with all stakeholders, including civil society organizations, and to coordinate their work in
support, as appropriate, of effective implementation of relevant international and regional instruments in order to
enhance their impact through concrete positive outcomes for the advancement of women migrant workers’ rights;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a comprehensive, analytical and thematic report to the
General Assembly at its seventy-second session on the problem of violence against women migrant workers and on
the implementation of the present resolution, taking into account updated information from the organizations of the
United Nations system, in particular the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Development
Programme, UN-Women and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well as the reports of special
rapporteurs that refer to the situation of women migrant workers and other relevant sources, such as the International
Organization for Migration, including non-governmental organizations.
RESOLUTION 70/131
A/RE S/70 /131

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/482, para. 26)50

70/131. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/138 of 18 December 2013,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women;51
2. Also welcomes the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its
fifty-eighth to sixtieth sessions;52
3. Invites the Chair of the Committee to address and to engage in an interactive dialogue with the General
Assembly at its seventy-first and seventy-second sessions under the item on the advancement of women;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the status of the Convention.
_______________
50

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
51
A/70/124.
52
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/70/38).

612

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/132
A/RE S/70 /132

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/482, para. 26)53

70/132. Improvement of the situation of women and girls in rural areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/129 of 19 December 2001, 58/146 of 22 December 2003, 60/138 of 16 December
2005, 62/136 of 18 December 2007, 64/140 of 18 December 2009, 66/129 of 19 December 2011 and 68/139 of
18 December 2013,
Affirming the obligation of all States to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
also that all forms of discrimination, including discrimination against women and girls, are contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,54 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,55 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,55 the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,56 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,57 the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities58 and other human rights instruments,
Taking note of the provisions pertaining to women and girls in rural areas contained in the outcome documents
of relevant international conferences and summits, in particular the Beijing Declaration59 and Platform for Action60
adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women, the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”61 and the
outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples,62 and recalling other instruments, as appropriate, such as the United Nations Declaration on the
Right to Development,63
Welcoming the adoption of the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of
the post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”,64 and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development,65

_______________
53

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia and
Zimbabwe.
54
Resolution 217 A (III).
55
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
56
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
57
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
58
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
59
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
60
Ibid., annex II.
61
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
62
Resolution 69/2.
63
Resolution 41/128, annex.
64
Resolution 70/1.
65
Resolution 69/313, annex.

613

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development addresses the need to achieve gender equality
and the empowerment of all women and girls, in order to ensure that no one is left behind,
Recognizing that rural women are critical agents in poverty reduction, that they are crucial to the achievement
of food security and nutrition in poor and vulnerable households and to environmental sustainability and that, in
other ways, they are also critical to the achievement of all of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Expressing concern that rural women continue to be economically and socially disadvantaged because of their
limited access to economic resources and opportunities, their limited or lack of access to quality education, healthcare services, justice, land, water and sanitation and other resources, as well as to credit, extension services and
agricultural inputs, and expressing concern also about their exclusion from planning and decision-making and their
disproportionate burden of unpaid care work,
Recognizing the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and
Forests in the Context of National Food Security66 and the Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and
Food Systems,67 endorsed by the Committee on World Food Security, which embrace gender equality as one of the
main guiding principles of implementation in order to help address the ongoing disparities with regard to access to
and control of land and other natural resources,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;68

2. Urges Member States, in collaboration with the organizations of the United Nations system and civil
society, as appropriate, to continue their efforts to implement the outcome of and to ensure an integrated and
coordinated follow-up to the relevant United Nations conferences and summits, including their reviews, and to
attach greater importance to the improvement of the situation of rural women and girls, in their national, regional
and global development strategies by, inter alia:
(a) Creating an enabling environment for improving their situation and ensuring systematic attention to their
needs, priorities and contributions, including through enhanced cooperation and a gender perspective, and their full
and equal participation in the development, implementation and follow-up of macroeconomic policies, including
development policies and programmes and poverty eradication strategies, including poverty reduction strategy
papers, where they exist, aimed at implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;64
(b) Pursuing the political and socioeconomic empowerment of rural women and supporting their full and
equal participation in decision-making at all levels, including through affirmative action, where appropriate,
including by promoting and protecting the right to vote and to be elected and the right to freedom of expression,
peaceful assembly and association, and through support for women’s and farmers’ organizations in which
subsistence and smallholder women farmers are members, labour unions or other associations and civil society
groups promoting rural women’s rights;
(c) Promoting consultation with and the participation of rural women, including indigenous women, women
with disabilities and older women, through their organizations and networks, in the design, development and
implementation of and follow-up to programmes and strategies for gender equality, the empowerment of women
and rural development;
(d) Ensuring that the perspectives of rural women are taken into account and that they participate in the
design, implementation, follow-up and evaluation of policies and activities related to conflict prevention, the
mitigation of post-conflict situations, peace mediation, the impacts of climate change and emergencies, including
natural disasters, humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction, and taking appropriate
measures to eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against rural women and girls in this regard;
(e) Integrating a gender perspective into the design, implementation and evaluation of and follow-up to
development policies, plans and programmes, including budget policies, where lacking, ensuring coordination
between line ministries, gender policymakers, gender machineries and other relevant government organizations and
_______________
66

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/20, appendix D.
68
A/70/204.
67

614

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

institutions with gender expertise, and paying increased attention to the needs of rural women to ensure that they
benefit from policies and programmes adopted in all spheres and that the disproportionate number of rural women
living in poverty is reduced;
(f) Mainstreaming a gender perspective in decision-making processes and the governance of natural
resources, leveraging the participation and influence of women in managing the sustainable use of natural resources,
and enhancing the capacities of Governments, civil society and development partners to better understand and
address gender issues in the management and governance of natural resources;
(g) Strengthening measures, including resource generation, to improve women’s health, including maternal
health, by addressing the specific health, nutrition and basic needs of rural women and taking concrete measures to
enhance and provide access to the highest attainable standards of physical and mental health for women of all ages
in rural areas, as well as quality, affordable and universally accessible primary health care and support services,
including prenatal and postnatal health care, emergency obstetric care, family planning, information and education,
increasing knowledge, awareness and support for the elimination of harmful practices and the prevention, treatment
and care of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, and ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive
health and reproductive rights in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development,69 the Beijing Platform for Action60 and the outcome documents of their review
conferences;
(h) Promoting sustainable infrastructure, access to safe drinking water and sanitation and safe cooking and
heating practices to improve the health and nutrition of rural women and girls;
(i) Investing in and strengthening efforts to meet the basic needs of rural women, including needs relating to
their food security and nutrition and that of their families, and to promote adequate standards of living for them, as
well as decent conditions for work and access to local, regional and global markets through improved availability,
access to and use of critical rural infrastructure, such as energy and transport, science and technology, local services,
capacity-building and human resources development measures and the provision of a safe and reliable water supply
and sanitation, nutritional programmes, affordable housing programmes, education and literacy programmes, social
support measures and health care, including HIV prevention, treatment, care, including psychosocial aspects, and
support services;
(j) Designing and implementing national policies and legal frameworks that promote and protect the full
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms by rural women and girls, and creating an environment that
does not tolerate violations or abuses of their rights, including domestic violence, sexual violence and all other forms
of gender-based violence and discrimination;
(k) Ensuring that the rights of older women in rural areas are taken into account with regard to their equal
access to basic social services, appropriate social protection and/or social security measures, equal access to and
control of economic resources and their empowerment through access to financial and infrastructure services, with
special focus on the provision of support to older women, including indigenous women, who often have access to
few resources and are more vulnerable;
(l) Valuing and supporting the critical role and contribution of rural women, including indigenous women
in rural areas, in the conservation and sustainable use of traditional crops and biodiversity for present and future
generations as an essential contribution to food security and nutrition;
(m) Promoting the rights of women and girls with disabilities in rural areas, including by ensuring access on
an equal basis to productive employment and decent work, economic and financial resources and disabilitysensitive infrastructure and services, in particular in relation to health and education, as well as by ensuring that their
priorities and needs are fully incorporated into policies and programmes, inter alia, through their participation in
decision-making processes;
(n) Developing specific assistance programmes and advisory services to promote economic skills of
rural women in banking, modern trading and financial procedures and providing microcredit and other financial
_______________
69

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

615

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and business services to a greater number of women in rural areas, in particular female heads of households,
for their economic empowerment;
(o) Supporting women entrepreneurs and women smallholder farmers, including those in subsistence
farming, by continuing to provide public investment and to encourage private investment in rural women to close
the gender gap in agriculture, and facilitating their access to extension and financial services, agricultural inputs and
land, water sanitation and irrigation, markets and innovative technologies;
(p) Mobilizing resources, including at the national level and through official development assistance, for
increasing women’s access to existing savings and credit schemes, as well as targeted programmes that provide
women with capital, knowledge and tools that enhance their economic capacities;
(q) Seeking to ensure and improve equal access for rural women to decent work in agricultural and nonagricultural sectors, supporting and promoting opportunities in small enterprises, sustainable social enterprises and
cooperatives and improving working conditions;
(r) Investing in infrastructure and in time- and labour-saving technologies, especially in rural areas,
benefiting women and girls by reducing their burden of domestic activities, affording the opportunity for girls to
attend school and for women to engage in self-employment or to participate in the labour market;
(s) Taking steps to ensure that women’s and girls’ unpaid work and contributions to on-farm and off-farm
production are recognized, and promoting shared responsibility within the household with a view to reducing and
equitably distributing the burden of such unpaid work;
(t) Supporting remunerative non-agricultural employment for rural women, including in the informal
sector, including measures to improve working conditions, increase access to productive resources, invest in
relevant infrastructure, public services and time- and labour-saving technologies, promote rural women’s paid
employment in the formal economy and address the structural and underlying causes of the difficult conditions
faced by rural women;
(u) Promoting programmes and services to enable rural women and men to reconcile their work and family
responsibilities and to encourage men to share, equally with women, household, childcare and other care
responsibilities;
(v) Developing strategies to decrease women’s vulnerability to environmental factors and the impact of
climate change while promoting rural women’s full and equal participation in protecting the environment;
(w) Considering the adoption, where appropriate, of national legislation to protect the knowledge,
innovations and practices of women in indigenous and local communities relating to traditional medicines,
biodiversity and indigenous technologies;
(x) Addressing the lack of quality, accessible, timely and reliable data disaggregated by sex and age and
statistical information on disabilities, to help with the measurement of progress and to ensure that no one is left
behind, including by intensifying efforts to include women’s unpaid work in official statistics, and developing a
systematic and comparative research base on rural women that will inform policy and programme decisions;
(y) Strengthening the capacity of national statistical offices and other relevant government institutions to
collect, analyse and disseminate data, disaggregated by sex and age, and gender statistics on time use, unpaid work,
land tenure, energy, water and sanitation, among other things, to support policies and actions to improve the
situation of rural women and girls;
(z) Designing, revising and implementing laws to ensure that rural women are accorded full and equal
rights to own and lease land and other property, including through the equal rights to economic resources, access to
basic services, ownership and control over land and other forms of property, inheritance, natural resources,
appropriate new technology and financial services, including microfinancing, and undertaking administrative
reforms and all necessary measures to give women the same right as men to credit, capital, appropriate technologies
and access to markets and information, and to ensure their equal access to justice and legal support;
(aa) Supporting a gender-sensitive education system, including through approaches that attract and retain
female students and teachers and that consider the specific needs of rural women and girls in order to eliminate
616

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

gender stereotypes and discriminatory tendencies affecting them, including through community-based dialogue
involving women and men and girls and boys;
(bb) Promoting education, training and relevant information programmes for rural and farming women
through the use of affordable and appropriate technologies and the mass media, and taking concrete measures to
improve rural women’s skills, productivity and employment opportunities through technical, agricultural and
vocational education and training;
3. Encourages Member States, United Nations entities and all other relevant stakeholders to promote
access to social protection for female-headed rural households;
4. Requests the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular those dealing
with issues of development, to address and support the empowerment of rural women and their specific needs in
their programmes and strategies;
5. Stresses the need to identify the best practices for ensuring that rural women have access to and full and
equal participation in the area of information and communications technology, to address the priorities and needs of
rural women and girls as active users of information and to ensure their participation in developing and
implementing global, regional and national information and communications technology strategies, taking
appropriate educational measures to eliminate gender stereotypes regarding women in the field of technology;
6. Encourages Member States to consider the concluding observations and recommendations of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and of the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights concerning their reports to those Committees when formulating policies and designing programmes
focused on the improvement of the situation of rural women, including those to be developed and implemented in
cooperation with relevant international organizations;
7. Invites Governments to promote the economic empowerment of rural women, including through
entrepreneurship training, and to adopt gender-responsive and climate-sensitive rural development strategies and
agricultural production, including budget frameworks and relevant assessment measures, as well as to ensure that
the needs and priorities of rural women and girls are systematically addressed and that they can effectively
contribute to poverty alleviation, hunger eradication and food security and nutrition;
8. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to give consideration to the issue of the empowerment
of rural women in a timely and appropriate manner;
9. Invites Governments, relevant international organizations and the specialized agencies to continue to
observe the International Day of Rural Women annually, on 15 October, as proclaimed by the General Assembly in
its resolution 62/136;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/133
A/RE S/70 /133

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/482, para. 26)70

70/133. Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of
the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question, including resolution 69/151 of 18 December 2014, and
recalling also the section of resolution 64/289 of 2 July 2010 entitled “Strengthening the institutional arrangements
for support of gender equality and the empowerment of women”,
_______________
70

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee.

617

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Deeply convinced that the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action71 and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”,72 are important contributions to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of
women and must be translated into effective action by all States, the United Nations system and other organizations
concerned,
Reaffirming the commitments to gender equality and the advancement of women made at the Millennium
Summit,73 the 2005 World Summit,74 the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium
Development Goals,75 the special event of the General Assembly to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals,76 the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda77 and other major United Nations summits, conferences and special sessions, and reaffirming also that their
full, effective and accelerated implementation is integral to achieving the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Welcoming progress made towards achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women, but stressing
that challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session,
Noting that 2015 marked the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the
adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, welcoming in this regard the review activities
undertaken by Governments, and noting the contributions of all other relevant stakeholders and the review
outcomes,
Welcoming the holding, on 27 September 2015, of the Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment: A Commitment to Action, and the pledges submitted by Governments in that regard,
Recognizing that the responsibility for the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session rests primarily at the national level and that strengthened efforts
are necessary in this respect, and reiterating that enhanced international cooperation is essential for full, effective and
accelerated implementation,
Welcoming the work of the Commission on the Status of Women in reviewing the implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, taking note with appreciation of all its agreed conclusions, and
acknowledging the need for their implementation,
Welcoming also the strengthening of the capacity of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and its experience in achieving its mandate,
Commending UN-Women for the continued support provided to intergovernmental processes, including on
the linkages between sustainable development, financing for development and the achievement of gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls,
Recalling its resolution 64/289, in which it decided that the resources required to service the normative
intergovernmental processes should be funded from the regular budget,
Taking note of the activities carried out by the Fund for Gender Equality and the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women,

_______________
71

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
72
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
73
See resolution 55/2.
74
See resolution 60/1.
75
See resolution 65/1.
76
See resolution 68/6.
77
See resolution 70/1.

618

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing that the participation and contribution of civil society, in particular women’s groups and
organizations and other non-governmental organizations, are important to the successful implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, in particular in the
context of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Platform for Action,
Reaffirming that gender mainstreaming is a globally accepted strategy for promoting the empowerment of
women and achieving gender equality by transforming structures of inequality, which is relevant to all issues
considered by its Main Committees and subsidiary bodies, including in resolutions dealing with issues beyond
social, humanitarian, cultural, economic and financial matters,
Reaffirming also the commitment to actively promote the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into the
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programmes in all political, economic and social
spheres, as well as the commitment to strengthen the capabilities of the United Nations system in the area of gender
equality,
Reaffirming further the commitments in regard to gender equality and the empowerment of women in the
Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus78 and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,79
Bearing in mind the challenges and obstacles to changing discriminatory attitudes and gender stereotypes,
which perpetuate discrimination against women and girls and stereotypical roles of boys and girls, men and women,
and stressing that challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation of international standards and norms to
address inequality between men and women,
Reaffirming the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS80 and the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS:
Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS, adopted at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
AIDS, held on 10 June 2011,81 in which, inter alia, the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of
women were recognized as fundamental for reducing the vulnerability of women to HIV and AIDS,
Expressing serious concern that the urgent goal of 50/50 gender balance in the United Nations system,
especially at senior and policymaking levels, with full respect for the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, in conformity with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, remains unmet, and
that the representation of women in the United Nations system has remained almost static, with negligible
improvement in some parts of the system, as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General on improvement in the
status of women in the United Nations system,82
Reaffirming the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
stressing the need for their participation therein, including at decision-making levels, and noting in this regard
that 2015 marked the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October
2000 on women and peace and security,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008, 1888 (2009) of
30 September 2009, 1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009, 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010, 2106 (2013) of 24 June
2013, 2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013 and 2242 (2015) of 13 October 2015 on women and peace and security and
resolution 1882 (2009) of 4 August 2009 on children and armed conflict,

_______________
78

Resolution 63/239, annex.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
80
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
81
Resolution 65/277, annex.
82
A/69/346 and Corr.1.
79

619

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the measures taken and progress
achieved in follow-up to and implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of
the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly;83
2. Reaffirms the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted at the Fourth World Conference on
Women71 and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,72 affirms the political
declaration on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-ninth session,84 and also affirms its commitment to their full,
effective and accelerated implementation;
3. Also reaffirms the primary and essential role of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as the catalytic role of the Commission on the Status of Women, in promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women, based on the full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, and in promoting and monitoring gender mainstreaming within
the United Nations system, and encourages the Commission to contribute to the follow-up to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development77 in order to accelerate the realization of gender equality and the empowerment of women
and girls;
4. Recognizes that the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
fulfilment of the obligations of States parties under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women85 are mutually reinforcing in respect of achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women, and welcomes in this regard the contributions of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women to promoting the implementation of the Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session;
5. Calls upon States parties to comply fully with their obligations under the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Optional Protocol thereto86 and to take into consideration
the concluding observations as well as the general recommendations of the Committee, urges States parties to
consider limiting the extent of any reservations that they lodge to the Convention, to formulate any reservations as
precisely and narrowly as possible and to regularly review such reservations with a view to withdrawing them so as
to ensure that no reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention, also urges all Member
States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention to consider doing so, and calls upon those Member
States that have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol;
6. Reaffirms that States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent and combat all forms of
violence against women and girls, provide protection to the victims and investigate, prosecute and punish the
perpetrators of violence against women and girls, and that failure to do so violates and impairs or nullifies the
enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, calls upon Governments to elaborate and implement
laws and strategies to eliminate violence against women and girls, encourages and supports men and boys to take an
active part in the prevention and elimination of all forms of violence, encourages increased understanding among
men and boys of how violence harms girls, boys, women and men and undermines gender equality, encourages all
actors to speak out against any form of violence against women, and in this regard encourages Member States to
continue to support the Secretary-General’s ongoing campaign “UNiTE to End Violence against Women” and the
social mobilization and advocacy platform of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women (UN-Women) “Say NO – UNiTE to End Violence against Women”, as well as the Entity’s “HeforShe”
campaign;
7. Reiterates the importance and value of the mandate of UN-Women, and welcomes the Entity’s
leadership in providing a strong voice for women and girls at all levels and its efforts to support intergovernmental
processes so that they fully contribute to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls and the realization of their human rights;
_______________
83

A/70/180.
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I, sect. C, resolution 59/1, annex.
85
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
86
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
84

620

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

8. Notes with concern that, currently, UN-Women has to draw on voluntary contributions in order to enable
it to carry out its mandate of servicing normative intergovernmental processes, and emphasizes the need for the full
implementation of resolution 64/289 in this regard;
9. Reaffirms the important role of UN-Women in leading, coordinating and promoting accountability of the
United Nations system in its work on gender equality and the empowerment of women;
10. Notes with appreciation the important and extensive work of UN-Women for more effective and
coherent gender mainstreaming across the United Nations system, and calls upon UN-Women to continue to
support gender mainstreaming across the United Nations system as an integral part of its work and of its efforts to
accelerate action across the United Nations system;
11. Welcomes the commitment of UN-Women to support Member States in their efforts to develop and
strengthen norms, policies and standards on gender equality and the empowerment of women, as well as to integrate
gender perspectives into sectoral policy and normative frameworks, in line with its mandate, and encourages the
Entity to continue to promote the need to mainstream and strengthen a gender perspective in the work of
intergovernmental bodies and processes and the opportunities therein, and to provide technical assistance, at the
request of Member States, in strengthening a gender perspective in resolutions and other outcomes;
12. Recognizes the important role of UN-Women in promoting gender equality and the empowerment of
women and the central role it plays in supporting Member States, in coordinating the United Nations system and in
mobilizing civil society, the private sector and other relevant stakeholders, at all levels, in support of the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and calls upon UN-Women and the United
Nations system, within their respective mandates, to continue to support the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action at the international, regional, national and local
levels, including through systematic gender mainstreaming, the mobilization of resources to deliver results and the
monitoring of progress with data and robust accountability systems;
13. Urges Member States to increase funding for the budget of UN-Women by providing, when legislative
and budgetary provisions allow, core, multi-year, predictable, stable and sustainable voluntary contributions,
recognizing the importance of adequate funding in enabling UN-Women to implement its strategic plan promptly
and effectively, and that the mobilization of financial resources for achieving its goals still remains a challenge;
14. Also urges Member States to take further concrete action to ensure the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, including through strengthened implementation of laws, policies, strategies and
programme activities for all women and girls; strengthened and increased support for institutional mechanisms for
gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls at all levels; the transformation of discriminatory norms
and gender stereotypes and the promotion of social norms and practices that recognize the positive role and
contribution of women and eliminate discrimination against women and girls; significantly increased investment to
close resource gaps, including through the mobilization of financial resources from all sources, including domestic
resource mobilization and allocation and increased priority on gender equality and the empowerment of women in
official development assistance to build on progress achieved and ensure that official development assistance is used
effectively to contribute to the implementation of the Platform for Action; strengthened accountability for the
implementation of existing commitments; and enhanced capacity-building, data collection, monitoring and
evaluation, and access to and use of information and communications technologies;
15. Encourages all actors, including Governments, the United Nations system, other international
organizations and civil society, to continue to support the work of the Commission on the Status of Women in
fulfilling its central role in the follow-up to and review of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, and, as applicable, to carry out the
recommendations of the Commission, welcomes in this regard the Commission’s continued sharing of experiences,
lessons learned and good practices in overcoming challenges to the full implementation at the national and
international levels and the evaluation of progress in the implementation of priority themes, and encourages the
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations system, as appropriate, to incorporate the outcomes of the
Commission into their work;
621

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

16. Requests the entities of the United Nations system to systematically and strategically incorporate the
outcomes of the Commission on the Status of Women into their work, within their mandates, and, inter alia, to
ensure effective support for the efforts of Member States towards the achievement of gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls, and in this regard encourages UN-Women to continue to use concrete resultsbased reporting mechanisms and to ensure coherence, consistency and coordination between the normative and
operational aspects of its work;
17. Calls upon Governments and the organs and the relevant funds and programmes and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, other international and regional
organizations, including financial institutions, and all relevant actors of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, to intensify and accelerate action to achieve the full and effective implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, 20 years after their adoption, and of the outcome of the twenty-third special
session;
18. Reiterates its call upon the United Nations system, including the main organs, their main committees
and subsidiary bodies, through forums such as the high-level political forum on sustainable development and
functions such as the annual ministerial review and the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and
Social Council and the funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, to increase efforts to fully mainstream a
gender perspective into all issues under their consideration and within their mandates, as well as into all United
Nations summits, conferences and special sessions and their follow-up processes, including those of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in 2012, the third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, held in 2014, and the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, the
third International Conference on Financing for Development and the United Nations summit for the adoption of
the post-2015 development agenda, held in 2015;
19. Calls upon States to ensure that intergovernmental processes, such as the United Nations Conference on
Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), consistently address gender perspectives in their
preparatory processes and outcomes, including in the discussions of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change on a new climate change agreement;
20. Reiterates that the full, effective and accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session is essential to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals;
21. Strongly encourages Governments to continue to support the role and contribution of civil society, in
particular non-governmental organizations and women’s organizations, in the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session;
22. Calls upon Governments and the United Nations system to encourage women’s groups and other nongovernmental organizations specializing in gender equality and the empowerment of women to participate in
intergovernmental processes, including through increased outreach, funding and capacity-building;
23. Calls upon the intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations system to systematically request the
inclusion of a gender perspective in reports of the Secretary-General and other inputs to intergovernmental
processes;
24. Requests that reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and their subsidiary bodies systematically address gender perspectives through gender-sensitive
analysis and the provision of data disaggregated by sex and age, and that conclusions and recommendations for
further action address the different situations and needs of women and men and girls and boys in order to facilitate
gender-sensitive policy development, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to convey the importance of
reflecting a gender perspective to all stakeholders who provide input to his reports;
25. Encourages Member States, with the support of, as appropriate, United Nations entities, including UNWomen, international and regional organizations and other relevant actors, to prioritize the strengthening of national
622

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

data collection and monitoring capacities with regard to statistics disaggregated by sex and age, as well as national
tracking indicators for gender equality and the empowerment of women, through multisectoral efforts and
partnerships;
26. Calls upon all parts of the United Nations system to continue to play an active role in ensuring the full,
effective and accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session through, inter alia, the maintenance of gender specialists in all entities of the United
Nations system, as well as by ensuring that all personnel, especially those in the field, receive training and
appropriate follow-up, including tools, guidance and support, for accelerated gender mainstreaming, and reaffirms
the need to strengthen the capabilities of the United Nations system in the area of gender;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to review and redouble his efforts to make progress towards achieving
the goal of 50/50 gender balance at all levels throughout the United Nations system, with full respect for the
principle of equitable geographical distribution, in conformity with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations, considering, in particular, women from the developing and the least developed countries, countries
with economies in transition and unrepresented or largely underrepresented Member States, and to ensure the
implementation of measures, including temporary special measures, to accelerate progress, and managerial and
departmental accountability with respect to gender balance targets, and strongly encourages Member States to
identify and regularly submit more women candidates for appointment to positions in the United Nations system,
especially at more senior and policymaking levels, including in peacekeeping operations;
28. Calls upon the United Nations system to continue its efforts towards achieving the goal of gender
balance, including with the active support of gender focal points, and requests the Secretary-General to provide an
oral report to the Commission on the Status of Women at its sixtieth and sixty-first sessions and to report to the
General Assembly at its seventy-second session on the improvement of the status of women in the United Nations
system, under the item entitled “Advancement of women”, and on progress made and obstacles encountered in
achieving gender balance, with recommendations for accelerating progress and up-to-date statistics to be provided
annually by entities of the United Nations system, including on the number and percentage of women and their
functions and nationalities throughout the United Nations system, as well as information on the responsibility and
accountability of the offices of human resources management and the secretariat of the United Nations System
Chief Executives Board for Coordination for promoting gender balance;
29. Encourages increased efforts by Governments and the United Nations system to enhance accountability
for the implementation of commitments to gender equality and the empowerment of women at the international,
regional, national and local levels, including through improved monitoring and reporting on progress in relation to
policies, strategies, resource allocations and programmes and by achieving gender balance;
30. Reaffirms that Governments bear the primary responsibility for the achievement of gender equality and
the empowerment of women and that international cooperation has an essential role in assisting developing
countries in progressing towards the full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action;
31. Encourages its Main Committees and subsidiary bodies, as well as the Economic and Social Council
and its functional commissions, particularly in the light of the analysis contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral82 and of the cross-cutting nature of gender equality and the empowerment of women, to make further
progress in the integration of a gender perspective into their work;
32. Encourages the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the United Nations system the findings of
his report in order to strengthen follow-up on these findings and to accelerate the implementation of the present
resolution;
33. Encourages States and all stakeholders to strengthen the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into all
sectors and in all areas of development;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly, on a biennial basis, under the item
entitled “Advancement of women”, on the follow-up to and progress made in the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session.
623

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/134
A/RE S/70 /134

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/483, para. 12)87

70/134. Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Organization of African Unity Convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in
Africa of 196988 and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights,89
Reaffirming that the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,90 together with the 1967 Protocol
thereto,91 as complemented by the Organization of African Unity Convention of 1969, remains the foundation of the
international refugee protection regime in Africa,
Welcoming the entry into force on 6 December 2012 and the ongoing process of ratification of the African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, which mark a
significant step towards strengthening the national and regional normative frameworks for the protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons,
Recognizing the particular vulnerability of women and children among refugees and displaced persons,
including exposure to discrimination and sexual and physical abuse, violence and exploitation and the recruitment
and use of children by parties to armed conflict in violation of applicable international law, and in this regard
acknowledging the importance of preventing, responding to and addressing sexual and gender-based violence as
well as violations and abuses committed against refugee, returnee and displaced children,
Gravely concerned about the rising number of refugees and displaced persons in various parts of the
continent,
Acknowledging the efforts of Member States, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
stakeholders in improving the situation of refugees,
Expressing grave concern about funding gaps in responding to various refugee situations in different parts of
Africa, which are a major factor leading to the deterioration in living conditions in many refugee camps in Africa,
Recognizing that refugees, internally displaced persons and, in particular, women and children are at an
increased risk of exposure to HIV and AIDS, malaria and other infectious diseases,
Recalling the high-level segment on the theme “Enhancing international cooperation, solidarity, local
capacities and humanitarian action for refugees in Africa” of the sixty-fifth session of the Executive Committee of
the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, held in Geneva from 29 September to
3 October 2014, and the statement adopted on 30 September 2014 by States members of the Executive
Committee,92 and expressing deep concern that this particular event has not mobilized the necessary support for
refugees and their hosting countries and communities,
Welcoming the hosting of the regional ministerial meeting on the Global Initiative on Somali Refugees, held in
Addis Ababa on 20 August 2014, endorsing the Addis Ababa Commitment towards Somali Refugees adopted
during the ministerial meeting, and welcoming the pledging conference, held in Brussels on 21 October 2015, to
_______________
87

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Georgia, Honduras, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Madagascar (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of
the Group of African States), Netherlands, New Zealand, Sweden, Timor-Leste and Turkey.
88
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1001, No. 14691.
89
Ibid., vol. 1520, No. 26363.
90
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
91
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
92
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/69/12/Add.1), annex I.

624

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

mobilize the support and resources needed to achieve solutions for Somali refugees through the creation of
conditions conducive to safe and dignified returns as well as the enhancement of the sustainable integration of
displaced persons,
Recalling the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region, adopted by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in 2006, and its instruments, in particular two of the protocols
to the Pact which are relevant to the protection of displaced persons, namely, the Protocol on the Protection of and
Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and the Protocol on the Property Rights of Returning Persons,
Acknowledging with appreciation the generosity, hospitality and spirit of solidarity of African States that,
despite their limited resources, continue to host a large number of refugees owing to the humanitarian crises and
protracted refugee situations, and in this regard expressing particular appreciation for the commitment and efforts of
neighbouring countries in the recent humanitarian crises on the continent, welcoming efforts by African States that
endeavour to facilitate the voluntary repatriation, local integration, resettlement and rehabilitation of refugees and to
promote conditions conducive to the voluntary return and sustainable reintegration of refugees in their country of
origin, and also acknowledging with appreciation the coordination of humanitarian assistance by the United Nations
as well as the continuing efforts of donors, the United Nations system, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, regional organizations, international agencies, non-governmental organizations
and other partners, with regard to, inter alia, integration, voluntary return, reintegration and resettlement, in
addressing the plight of refugees during emergencies,
Recognizing that host States have the primary responsibility for the protection of and assistance to refugees on
their territory and the need to redouble efforts to develop and implement comprehensive durable solution strategies,
in appropriate cooperation with the international community, and burden- and responsibility-sharing, and
recognizing also the efforts of all States in this regard,
Emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility to provide protection and assistance to internally
displaced persons within their jurisdiction, as well as to address the root causes of the displacement problem, in
appropriate cooperation with the international community,
Recognizing the need to expand resettlement opportunities,
Recognizing also the need to encourage increased efforts towards voluntary return and local integration,
Welcoming the ongoing implementation of pledges made by States at the intergovernmental ministerial event
held in 2011 to mark the sixtieth anniversary of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the
fiftieth anniversary of the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness,93
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General94 and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;95
2. Calls upon African States that have not yet signed or ratified the African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa to consider doing so as early as possible in order
to ensure its wider implementation;
3. Notes the need for African States to address resolutely the root causes of all forms of forced
displacement in Africa and to foster peace, stability and prosperity throughout the African continent so as to forestall
flows of refugees;
4. Notes with great concern that, despite all the efforts made so far by the United Nations, the African
Union and others, the situation of refugees and displaced persons in Africa remains precarious and the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons has dramatically increased, and calls upon States and other parties to
armed conflict to observe scrupulously the letter and spirit of international humanitarian law, bearing in mind that
armed conflict is one of the principal causes of forced displacement in Africa;

_______________
93

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 989, No. 14458.
A/70/337.
95
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/70/12).
94

625

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Welcomes decisions EX.CL/Dec.854 (XXVI) and EX.CL/Dec.877 (XXVII) adopted by the Executive
Council of the African Union at its twenty-sixth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa from 23 to 27 January 2015,
and at its twenty-seventh ordinary session, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from 7 to 12 June 2015, on the
humanitarian situation in Africa, insofar as they relate to persons of concern to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the leadership shown by the Office of the High Commissioner, and
commends the Office for its ongoing efforts, with the support of the international community, to assist African States
hosting large numbers of refugees, including by providing support to vulnerable local host communities, and to
respond to the protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa;
7. Notes with appreciation the initiatives taken by the African Union, the Subcommittee on Refugees,
Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons of its Permanent Representatives Committee and the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, in particular the role of its Special Rapporteur on Refugees, Asylum
Seekers, Migrants and Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, to ensure the protection of and assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa;
8. Acknowledges the important contribution of age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in identifying,
through a participatory approach, the protection risks faced by the different members of the refugee communities, in
particular the non-discriminatory treatment and protection of women, children, persons with disabilities and the elderly;
9. Affirms that children, because of their age, social status and physical and mental development, are often
more vulnerable than adults in situations of forced displacement, recognizes that forced displacement, return to postconflict situations, integration into new societies, protracted situations of displacement and statelessness can increase
child protection risks, taking into account the particular vulnerability of displaced children to forcible exposure to
the risks of physical and psychological injury, exploitation and death in connection with armed conflict, as well as
the recruitment and use of children by parties to armed conflict in violation of applicable international law, and
acknowledges that wider environmental factors and individual risk factors, particularly when combined, may
generate different protection needs;
10. Recognizes that no solution to displacement can be durable unless it is sustainable, and therefore
encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to support the sustainability of voluntary return, reintegration and
resettlement;
11. Welcomes the adoption of the conclusion on civil registration by the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at its sixty-fourth session, held in Geneva from
30 September to 4 October 2013,96 and recognizes the importance of early registration and effective registration
systems and censuses as a tool of protection and as a means to the quantification and assessment of needs for the
provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance and to implement appropriate durable solutions;
12. Recalls the conclusion on registration of refugees and asylum seekers adopted by the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner at its fifty-second session,97 notes the many forms of
harassment faced by refugees and asylum seekers who remain without any form of documentation attesting to their
status, recalls the responsibility of States to register refugees on their territories and, as appropriate, the responsibility
of the Office of the High Commissioner or mandated international bodies to do so, reiterates in this context the
central role that early and effective registration and documentation can play, guided by protection considerations, in
enhancing protection and supporting efforts to find durable solutions, and calls upon the Office, as appropriate, to
help States to conduct this procedure should they be unable to register refugees on their territory;
13. Calls upon the international community, including States and the Office of the High Commissioner and
other relevant United Nations organizations, within their respective mandates, to take concrete action to meet the
protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons and to contribute generously to projects
and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight, facilitating durable solutions and supporting vulnerable local host
communities;
_______________
96
97

626

Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/68/12/Add.1), chap. III, sect. A.
Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/56/12/Add.1), chap. III, sect. B.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Reaffirms the importance of timely and adequate assistance and protection for refugees, returnees and
displaced persons, also reaffirms that assistance and protection are mutually reinforcing and that inadequate material
assistance and food shortages undermine protection, notes the importance of a rights- and community-based
approach in engaging constructively with individual refugees, returnees and displaced persons and their
communities so as to achieve fair and equitable access to food and other forms of material assistance, and expresses
concern with regard to situations in which minimum standards of assistance are not met, including those in which
adequate needs assessments have yet to be undertaken;
15. Also reaffirms that respect by States for their protection responsibilities towards refugees is strengthened
by international solidarity involving all members of the international community and that the refugee protection
regime is enhanced through committed international cooperation in a spirit of solidarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing among all States;
16. Further reaffirms that host States have the primary responsibility to ensure the civilian and humanitarian
character of asylum, calls upon States, in cooperation with international organizations, within their mandates, to take
all measures necessary to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection and, in particular, to ensure that the
civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps is not compromised by the presence or the activities of armed
elements or used for purposes that are incompatible with their civilian character, and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue efforts, in consultation with States and other relevant actors, to ensure the civilian and
humanitarian character of camps;
17. Condemns all acts that pose a threat to the personal security and well-being of refugees and asylum
seekers, such as refoulement, unlawful expulsion and physical attacks, calls upon States of refuge, in cooperation
with international organizations, where appropriate, to take all measures necessary to ensure respect for the
principles of refugee protection, including the humane treatment of asylum seekers, notes with interest that the High
Commissioner has continued to take steps to encourage the development of measures to better ensure the civilian
and humanitarian character of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner to continue those efforts, in
consultation with States and other relevant actors;
18. Deplores the continuing violence and insecurity, which constitute an ongoing threat to the safety and
security of staff members of the Office of the High Commissioner and other humanitarian organizations and an
obstacle to the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Office and the ability of its implementing partners and
other humanitarian personnel to discharge their respective humanitarian functions, urges States, parties to conflict
and all other relevant actors to take all measures necessary to protect activities related to humanitarian assistance,
prevent attacks on and kidnapping of national and international humanitarian workers and ensure the safety and
security of the personnel and property of the Office and that of all humanitarian organizations discharging functions
mandated by the Office, and calls upon States to investigate fully any crime committed against humanitarian
personnel and bring to justice the persons responsible for such crimes;
19. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the African Union, subregional organizations and all
African States, in conjunction with agencies of the United Nations system, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and the international community, to strengthen and revitalize existing partnerships and
forge new ones in support of the protection system for refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons,
and encourages African States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying and enforcing the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel;98
20. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the international community and other entities
concerned to continue and, where appropriate, to intensify their support to African Governments through
appropriate capacity-building activities, including training of relevant officers, disseminating information about
refugee instruments and principles, providing financial, technical, legal and advisory services to accelerate the
enactment or amendment and implementation of legislation relating to refugees, strengthening emergency response
and enhancing capacities for the coordination of humanitarian activities, in particular those Governments that have
received large numbers of refugees and asylum seekers;
_______________
98

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

627

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

21. Reaffirms the right of return and the principle of voluntary repatriation, appeals to countries of origin and
countries of asylum to create conditions that are conducive to voluntary repatriation, and recognizes that, while
voluntary repatriation remains the pre-eminent solution, local integration and third-country resettlement, where
appropriate and feasible, are also viable options for dealing with the situation of African refugees who, owing to
prevailing circumstances in their respective countries of origin, are unable to return home;
22. Also reaffirms that voluntary repatriation should not necessarily be conditioned on the accomplishment
of political solutions in the country of origin in order not to impede the exercise of the refugees’ right to return,
recognizes that the voluntary repatriation and reintegration process is normally guided by the conditions in the
country of origin, in particular that voluntary repatriation can be accomplished in conditions of safety and dignity,
and urges the High Commissioner to promote sustainable return through the development of durable and lasting
solutions, particularly in protracted refugee situations;
23. Calls upon the international donor community to provide financial and material assistance that allows
for the implementation of community-based development programmes that benefit both refugees and host
communities, as appropriate, in agreement with host countries and consistent with humanitarian objectives;
24. Appeals to the international community to respond positively, in the spirit of solidarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing, to the third-country resettlement needs of African refugees, notes in this regard the
importance of using resettlement strategically, as part of situation-specific comprehensive responses to refugee
situations, and to this end encourages States, the Office of the High Commissioner and other relevant partners to
make full use of the Multilateral Framework of Understandings on Resettlement, where appropriate and feasible;
25. Expresses serious concern about the expected reduction of the budget allocated to provide humanitarian
assistance to refugees and internally displaced persons in Africa in 2016 and 2017;
26. Calls upon the international donor community to provide material and financial assistance for the
implementation of programmes intended for the rehabilitation of the environment and infrastructure affected by
refugees in countries of asylum as well as internally displaced persons, where appropriate;
27. Urges the international community, in the spirit of international solidarity and burden-sharing, to
continue to fund generously the refugee programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner and, taking into
account the substantially increased needs of programmes in Africa, inter alia, as a result of repatriation possibilities,
to ensure that Africa receives a fair and equitable share of the resources designated for refugees;
28. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner and interested States to identify protracted refugee
situations which might lend themselves to resolution through the development of specific, multilateral,
comprehensive and practical approaches to resolving such refugee situations, including the improvement of
international burden- and responsibility-sharing and the realization of durable solutions, within a multilateral
context, and recalls that those solutions include voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local
integration and resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation, supported, as necessary,
by rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
29. Expresses grave concern about the plight of internally displaced persons in Africa, notes the efforts of
African States in strengthening the regional mechanisms for the protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons, calls upon States to take concrete action to pre-empt internal displacement and to meet the protection and
assistance needs of internally displaced persons, recalls in that regard the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement,99 notes the current activities of the Office of the High Commissioner related to the protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons, including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field,
emphasizes that such activities should be consistent with relevant General Assembly resolutions and should not
undermine the refugee mandate of the Office and the institution of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner
to continue his dialogue with States on the role of his Office in this regard;
30. Encourages African States, together with development and humanitarian actors, to work closely on
multi-year strategies for refugees and internally displaced persons;
_______________
99

628

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

31. Invites the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights of internally displaced
persons to continue his ongoing dialogue with Member States and the intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations concerned, in accordance with his mandate, and to include information thereon in his reports to the
Council and the General Assembly;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on assistance to refugees, returnees
and displaced persons in Africa to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, taking fully into account the
efforts expended by countries of asylum, under the item entitled “Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions”.
RESOLUTION 70/135
A/RE S/70 /135

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/483, para. 12)100

70/135. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office101 and the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the work of its sixty-sixth session102 and the decisions contained therein,
Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees since its establishment by the General Assembly,
Expressing deep concern that the number of people who are forcibly displaced owing to conflict, persecution,
violence and other reasons, including terrorism, has reached the highest level since the Second World War,
Noting with grave concern that, despite the tremendous generosity of host countries and donors, including
unprecedented levels of humanitarian funding, the gap between needs and humanitarian funding continues to grow,
Recognizing that forced displacement has, inter alia, humanitarian and development implications,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High Commissioner,
Commending the staff of the Office of the High Commissioner and of its partners for the competent,
courageous and dedicated manner in which they discharge their responsibilities,
Underlining its strong condemnation of all forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel are increasingly exposed,
1. Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and its Executive Committee in the course of the year, which is aimed at strengthening the international
protection regime and at assisting Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities;
2. Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its sixty-sixth session;102

_______________
100

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and United States of America.
101
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/70/12).
102
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/70/12/Add.1).

629

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Recognizes the relevance of the Executive Committee’s practice of adopting conclusions, encourages the
Executive Committee to continue this process, and welcomes the adoption of the decision on a multi-year workplan
for Executive Committee conclusions;103
4. Appreciates the convening of the high-level segment on the Afghan refugee situation of the sixty-sixth
session of the Executive Committee, welcomes the statement adopted by the States members of the Executive
Committee on 7 October 2015,104 commends the efforts of Afghanistan, Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Pakistan, as
well as those of the Office of the High Commissioner, to align policies, strategies and plans for voluntary
repatriation and reintegration in the country of origin, as well as assistance and continued protection for refugees in
host countries, and urges donors, development and humanitarian actors, United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and civil society to render their unequivocal support to enhance reintegration and absorption capacity
in areas of return, while also supporting refugees and host communities;
5. Recalls the high-level segments of the sixty-fourth and sixty-fifth sessions of the Executive Committee,
renews its call upon all States to provide the necessary support with a view to sharing the burden of the host
countries, and underscores the critical importance of development support for host communities;
6. Welcomes the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development105 and its recognition of the
needs of, among others, refugees and internally displaced persons, and urges its full implementation;
7. Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees106 and the 1967 Protocol thereto107 as
the foundation of the international refugee protection regime, recognizes the importance of their full and effective
application by States parties and the values they embody, notes with satisfaction that 148 States are now parties to
one or both instruments, encourages States not parties to consider acceding to those instruments and States parties
with reservations to give consideration to withdrawing them, underlines, in particular, the importance of full respect
for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that a number of States not parties to the international refugee
instruments have shown a generous approach to hosting refugees;
8. Urges States that are parties to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967
Protocol thereto to respect their obligations in letter and spirit;
9. Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the responsibility of States, whose full and
effective cooperation, action and political resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to
fulfil its mandated functions, and strongly emphasizes, in this context, the importance of active international
solidarity and burden-sharing;
10. Notes with appreciation the adoption of the Brazil Declaration and Plan of Action on 3 December 2014
by Latin American and Caribbean States, appreciates the commitment therein to implementing innovative solutions
for refugees, displaced persons and stateless persons, and encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to work
with the States concerned in their implementation;
11. Welcomes recent accessions to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons108 and the
1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness109 and notes that 86 States are now parties to the 1954
Convention and 65 States are parties to the 1961 Convention, encourages States that have not done so to give
consideration to acceding to those instruments, notes the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in regard to identifying stateless persons, preventing and reducing statelessness and protecting stateless
persons, and urges the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to work in this area in accordance with relevant
General Assembly resolutions and Executive Committee conclusions;
_______________
103

Ibid., chap. III, sect. E.
Ibid., annex II.
105
Resolution 70/1.
106
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
107
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
108
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
109
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
104

630

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Re-emphasizes that prevention and reduction of statelessness are primarily the responsibility of States, in
appropriate cooperation with the international community, in this regard welcomes the global campaign to end
statelessness within a decade and encourages all States to consider actions they may take to further the prevention
and reduction of statelessness, and welcomes efforts that have been made by States in this regard;
13. Also re-emphasizes that protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons are primarily the
responsibility of States, in appropriate cooperation with the international community;
14. Notes the current activities of the Office of the High Commissioner related to protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons, including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field,
emphasizes that such activities should be consistent with relevant General Assembly resolutions and should not
undermine the refugee mandate of the Office and the institution of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner
to continue his dialogue with States on the role of his Office in this regard;
15. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to respond adequately to emergencies, in
accordance with its mandate and in cooperation with States, notes the measures taken by the Office to strengthen its
capacity to respond to emergencies, and encourages the Office to pursue its efforts to further strengthen its
emergency capacity and thereby ensure a more predictable, effective and timely response;
16. Also encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to work in partnership and in full cooperation
with relevant national authorities, United Nations offices and agencies, international and intergovernmental
organizations, regional organizations and non-governmental organizations to contribute to the continued
development of humanitarian response capacities at all levels, and recalls the role of the Office as the leading entity
of the cluster for protection, camp coordination and management and emergency shelter in complex emergencies;
17. Further encourages the Office of the High Commissioner, among other relevant United Nations and
other relevant intergovernmental organizations and humanitarian and development actors, to continue to work with
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat to enhance the coordination, effectiveness
and efficiency of humanitarian response and to contribute, in consultation with States, as appropriate, to making
further progress towards common humanitarian needs assessments, as stated, among other important issues, in
General Assembly resolution 69/135 of 12 December 2014 on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;
18. Welcomes the recent efforts by the Office of the High Commissioner to ensure a more inclusive,
transparent, predictable and well-coordinated response to refugees as well as internally displaced persons and other
persons of concern, consistent with its mandate, and in this regard takes note of the articulation of the refugee
coordination model;
19. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to engage in and implement in full the objectives of
the “Delivering as one” initiative;
20. Notes with appreciation the measures taken and efficiencies gained in the process of structural and
management change to reinforce the capacity of the Office of the High Commissioner, and encourages the Office to
focus on continuous improvement in order to enable a more efficient response to the needs of persons of concern,
including identifying unmet needs, and to ensure the effective and transparent use of its resources;
21. Expresses deep concern about the increasing threats to the safety and security of humanitarian aid
workers and convoys and, in particular, the loss of life of humanitarian personnel working in the most difficult and
challenging conditions in order to assist those in need;
22. Emphasizes the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of attacks committed on their territory against
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel do not operate with impunity and that the
perpetrators of such acts are promptly brought to justice as provided for by national laws and obligations under
international law;
23. Strongly condemns attacks on refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons and acts that
pose a threat to their personal security and well-being, and calls upon all States concerned and, where applicable,
parties involved in an armed conflict to take all measures necessary to ensure respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law;
631

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

24. Deplores the refoulement and unlawful expulsion of refugees and asylum seekers, and calls upon all
States concerned to ensure respect for the relevant principles of refugee protection and human rights;
25. Urges States to uphold the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and settlements, inter
alia, through effective measures to prevent the infiltration of armed elements, to identify and separate any such
armed elements from refugee populations, to settle refugees in secure locations and to afford to the Office of the
High Commissioner and, where appropriate, other humanitarian organizations prompt, unhindered and safe access
to asylum seekers, refugees and other persons of concern;
26. Notes with concern that asylum seekers, refugees and stateless persons are subject to arbitrary detention
in numerous situations, welcomes the increasing use of alternatives to detention, especially in the case of children,
and emphasizes the need for States to limit detention of asylum seekers, refugees and stateless persons to that which
is necessary, giving full consideration to possible alternatives;
27. Notes with grave concern the significant risks to which many refugees and asylum seekers are exposed
as they attempt to reach safety, and encourages international cooperation to ensure adequate response mechanisms,
including life-saving measures, reception, registration and assistance, as well as to ensure that safe and regular
access to asylum for persons in need of international protection remains open and accessible;
28. Expresses concern at the large number of asylum seekers who have lost their lives at sea trying to reach
safety, encourages international cooperation to further strengthen search and rescue mechanisms in accordance with
international law, and commends the great lifesaving efforts and actions taken by a number of States in this regard;
29. Emphasizes that the international protection of refugees is a dynamic and action-oriented function that is
at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High Commissioner and that it includes, in cooperation with States
and other partners, the promotion and facilitation of the admission, reception and treatment of refugees in
accordance with internationally agreed standards and the ensuring of durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing
in mind the particular needs of vulnerable groups and paying special attention to those with specific needs, and notes
in this context that the delivery of international protection is a staff-intensive service that requires adequate staff with
the appropriate expertise, especially at the field level;
30. Expresses deep concern about the long-term impact of cuts in food rations on the health and well-being
of refugees globally, particularly in Africa and the Middle East, and especially its impact on children, owing to
insufficient funding and increased costs, and in this regard calls upon States to ensure sustained support for the
Office of the High Commissioner and the World Food Programme, while looking to provide refugees with
alternatives to food assistance, pending a durable solution;
31. Affirms the importance of age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in analysing protection needs and
ensuring the participation of refugees and other persons of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner, as
appropriate, in the planning and implementation of programmes of the Office and of State policies, also affirms the
importance of according priority to addressing discrimination, gender inequality and the problem of sexual and
gender-based violence, recognizing the importance of addressing the protection needs of women, children and
persons with disabilities in particular, and underlines the importance of continuing to work on those issues;
32. Expresses appreciation for the convening of the World Education Forum 2015 at Incheon, Republic of
Korea, from 19 to 22 May 2015, notes with concern that a large proportion of the world’s out-of-school population
lives in conflict-affected areas, and takes note of the commitment in the Incheon Declaration110 to developing more
inclusive, responsive and resilient education systems to meet the needs of children, youth and adults in these
contexts, including internally displaced persons and refugees;
33. Notes the efforts by the Office of the High Commissioner to improve its humanitarian assistance
response, and stresses the importance of tailored, innovative approaches, including cash-based interventions;
34. Also notes that the lack of civil registration and related documentation makes persons vulnerable to
statelessness and associated protection risks, recognizes that birth registration provides an official record of a child’s
legal identity and is crucial to preventing and reducing statelessness, and welcomes efforts by States to ensure the
birth registration of children;
_______________
110

632

Incheon Declaration: Education 2030: Towards inclusive and equitable quality education and lifelong learning for all.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

35. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely humanitarian and non-political character
of the function of the Office of the High Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
durable solutions to refugee situations, and recalls that those solutions include voluntary repatriation and, where
appropriate and feasible, local integration and resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary
repatriation, supported, as necessary, by rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate sustainable
reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
36. Expresses concern about the particular difficulties faced by the millions of refugees in protracted
situations, recognizes that the average length of stay has continued to grow, and emphasizes the need to redouble
international efforts and cooperation to find practical and comprehensive approaches to resolving their plight and to
realize durable solutions for them, consistent with international law and relevant General Assembly resolutions;
37. Recognizes the importance of achieving durable solutions to refugee situations and, in particular, the
need to address in this process the root causes of refugee movements;
38. Encourages further efforts by the Office of the High Commissioner, in cooperation with countries
hosting refugees and countries of origin, including their respective local communities, relevant United Nations
agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations, as appropriate, nongovernmental organizations and development actors, to actively promote durable solutions, particularly in
protracted refugee situations, with a focus on sustainable, timely and voluntary return, which encompasses
repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities, and encourages States and other relevant
actors to continue to support these efforts through, inter alia, the allocation of funds;
39. Expresses concern about the current low level of voluntary repatriation, encourages the solution-oriented
approach pursued by the Office of the High Commissioner to support the sustainability of voluntary repatriation and
reintegration, including from the onset of displacement, and in this regard urges the Office to further strengthen
partnerships with national Governments and development actors, as well as international financial institutions;
40. Acknowledges with appreciation voluntary action taken by several host countries to enable permanent
residence and naturalization for refugees and former refugees;
41. Calls upon States to create opportunities for resettlement as a durable solution, acknowledges with
appreciation the many countries that continue to offer enhanced resettlement opportunities and other forms of
humanitarian admission, recognizes the need to further increase the number of resettlement places and the number
of countries with regular resettlement programmes and to improve the integration of resettled refugees, calls upon
States to ensure inclusive and non-discriminatory policies in their resettlement programmes, and notes that
resettlement is a strategic protection tool and solution for refugees;
42. Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken by States to strengthen the regional initiatives that
facilitate cooperative policies and approaches on refugees, and encourages States to continue their efforts to address,
in a comprehensive manner, the needs of the people who require international protection in their respective regions,
including the support provided for host communities that receive large numbers of persons who require international
protection;
43. Notes the importance of States and the Office of the High Commissioner discussing and clarifying the
role of the Office in mixed migratory flows in order to better address protection needs in the context of mixed
migratory flows, bearing in mind the particular needs of vulnerable groups, especially women, children and persons
with disabilities, including by safeguarding access to asylum for those in need of international protection, and also
notes the readiness of the High Commissioner, consistent with his mandate, to assist States in fulfilling their
protection responsibilities in this regard;
44. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their nationals, calls upon States to
facilitate the return of their nationals who have been determined not to be in need of international protection, and
affirms the need for the return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full respect for
their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons concerned;
45. Expresses concern about the challenges associated with climate change and environmental degradation
to the operations of the Office of the High Commissioner and the assistance it provides to vulnerable populations
of concern across the globe, particularly in the least developed countries, and urges the Office to continue to
633

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

address such challenges in its work, within its mandate, and in consultation with national authorities and in
cooperation with competent agencies in its operations;
46. Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations, in conjunction with the Office
of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international solidarity and burden-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources, including through financial and in-kind assistance, as well as direct aid to host countries, refugee
populations and the communities hosting them, with a view to enhancing the capacity of and reducing the heavy
burden borne by countries and communities hosting refugees, in particular those that have received large numbers
of refugees and asylum seekers, and whose generosity is appreciated;
47. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to play its catalytic role in mobilizing
assistance from the international community to address the root causes as well as the economic, environmental and
social impact of large-scale refugee populations in developing countries, in particular the least developed countries,
and countries with economies in transition, and notes with appreciation those host countries, donor States,
organizations and individuals that contribute to improving the condition of refugees through building the resilience
of refugees and their host communities, while working towards a durable solution;
48. Expresses concern that the needs required to protect and assist persons of concern to the Office of the
High Commissioner continue to increase and that the gap between global needs and available resources continues to
grow, appreciates the continued and increasing hospitality of host countries and generosity of donors, and therefore
calls upon the Office to continue and enhance efforts to broaden its donor base so as to achieve greater burdensharing by reinforcing cooperation with governmental donors, non-governmental donors and the private sector;
49. Recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office of the High Commissioner to
continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it through its statute111 and by subsequent General Assembly
resolutions on refugees and other persons of concern, recalls its resolution 58/153 of 22 December 2003 and
subsequent resolutions on the Office of the High Commissioner concerning, inter alia, the implementation of
paragraph 20 of the statute of the Office, and urges Governments and other donors to respond promptly to annual
and supplementary appeals issued by the Office for requirements under its programmes;
50. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his annual activities to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session.
RESOLUTION 70/136
A/RE S/70 /136

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/484,
para. 10),112 by a recorded vote of 121 to 2, with 60 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Belarus, Israel
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,

_______________
111

Resolution 428 (V), annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Russian Federation, Sierra Leone (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States) and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
112

634

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

70/136. Report of the Human Rights Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/251 of 15 March 2006, by which it established the Human Rights Council, and
65/281 of 17 June 2011 on the review of the Council,
Recalling also its resolutions 62/219 of 22 December 2007, 63/160 of 18 December 2008, 64/143 of
18 December 2009, 65/195 of 21 December 2010, 66/136 of 19 December 2011, 67/151 of 20 December 2012,
68/144 of 18 December 2013 and 69/155 of 18 December 2014,
Having considered the recommendations contained in the report of the Human Rights Council,113,114
Takes note of the report of the Human Rights Council,113 including the addendum thereto,114 and its
recommendations.
RESOLUTION 70/137
A/RE S/70 /137

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/485,
para. 30),115 by a recorded vote of 141 to 1, with 42 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam
Against: Botswana
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Cameroon, Comoros, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, Iraq, Kenya,
Kuwait, Libya, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

_______________
113

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53).
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1).
115
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
114

635

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

70/137. Rights of the child
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming all of its previous resolutions on the rights of the child, the most recent of which was resolution
69/157 of 18 December 2014, and in particular recognizing the importance of resolution 44/25 of 20 November
1989, in which it adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child,116
Recalling its resolutions 69/158 of 18 December 2014 on protecting children from bullying and 69/187 of
18 December 2014 on migrant children and adolescents,
Emphasizing that the Convention on the Rights of the Child constitutes the standard in the promotion and
protection of the rights of the child, reaffirming that States parties to the Convention shall undertake all appropriate
legislative, administrative and other measures for the implementation of the rights recognized therein, while bearing
in mind the importance of the Optional Protocols to the Convention117 and calling for their universal ratification and
effective implementation, as well as that of other human rights instruments,
Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,118 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,118 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,119 the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,120 the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,121 the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime122 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime,123 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,124
Reaffirming that the general principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the best
interests of the child, non-discrimination, participation and survival and development, provide the framework for
actions concerning children,
Reaffirming also the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,125 the United Nations Millennium
Declaration126 and the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly on
children, entitled “A world fit for children”,127 recalling the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and
the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development,128 the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development,129 the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition,130 the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples131 and the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,132 the Declaration on the Right to

_______________
116

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
118
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
119
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
120
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
121
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
122
Ibid., vol. 2225, No. 39574.
123
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
124
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
125
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
126
Resolution 55/2.
127
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
128
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
129
See resolution 2542 (XXIV).
130
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
131
Resolution 61/295, annex.
132
Resolution 69/2.
117

636

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Development,133 the Declaration of the commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to the follow-up to the
outcome of the special session on children, held in New York from 11 to 13 December 2007,134 the outcome
document, entitled “The future we want”, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,135 and the outcome document of the third Global
Conference on Child Labour, held in Brasilia from 8 to 10 October 2013, and recalling also the World Congresses
against Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents, the Global Action Programme on Education for
Sustainable Development136 and the World Education Forum 2015, held in Incheon, Republic of Korea, from 19 to
22 May 2015,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,137 and underscoring the
importance of its implementation in ensuring the enjoyment of the rights of the child,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on progress made towards achieving the commitments set
out in the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly138 and on the status of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the issues addressed in Assembly resolution 69/157,139 as well as the
report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children,140 the report of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict141 and the report of the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography,142 whose
recommendations should be carefully studied, taking fully into account the views of Member States,
Reaffirming that States have the primary responsibility to respect, promote and protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the rights of the child,
Acknowledging the important role played by national governmental structures for children, including, where
they exist, ministries and institutions in charge of child, family and youth issues and independent ombudspersons for
children or other national institutions for the promotion and protection of the rights of the child,
Recognizing that the family has the primary responsibility for the nurturing and protection of children, in the
best interests of the child, and that children, for the full and harmonious development of their personality, should
grow up in a family environment and in an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding,
Noting with appreciation the work to promote and protect the rights of the child carried out by all relevant
organs, bodies, entities and organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, by
relevant mandate holders and special procedures of the United Nations and by relevant regional organizations,
where appropriate, and intergovernmental organizations, and recognizing the valuable role of civil society, including
non-governmental organizations,
Profoundly concerned that the situation of children in many parts of the world remains negatively affected by
the prolonged effects of the world financial and economic crisis, poverty and inequality, and reaffirming that
eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and
an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, recognizing its impact beyond the socioeconomic
context and the intrinsic interlinkage between poverty eradication and the promotion of sustainable development,
and in this regard underlining the importance of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,

_______________
133

Resolution 41/128, annex.
Resolution 62/88.
135
Resolution 66/288, annex.
136
See A/69/76, annex, enclosure 2.
137
Resolution 70/1.
138
A/70/265.
139
A/70/315.
140
A/70/289.
141
A/70/162.
142
A/70/222.
134

637

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Profoundly concerned also that the situation of children in many parts of the world remains critical, in an
increasingly globalized environment, as a result of the persistence of poverty, social inequality, inadequate social and
economic conditions, pandemics, in particular HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, non-communicable diseases,
lack of access to safe drinking water and sanitation, environmental damage, climate change, natural disasters, armed
conflict, foreign occupation, displacement, violence, terrorism, abuse, all forms of exploitation, including for the
purposes of commercial sexual exploitation of children, such as child prostitution, child pornography and child sex
tourism, and trafficking in children, including for the purpose of organ removal and for the transfer of organs of the
child for profit, neglect, illiteracy, hunger, intolerance, discrimination, racism, xenophobia, gender inequality,
disability and inadequate legal protection, and convinced that urgent and effective national and international action
is called for,
Expressing deep concern that, despite the recognition of the right of the child to express his or her views freely
on all matters affecting him or her, with his or her views given due weight in accordance with the age and maturity
of the child, children are still seldom seriously consulted and involved in such matters owing to a variety of
constraints and impediments and that the full implementation of this right has yet to be fully realized,
Deeply concerned that children disproportionately suffer the consequences of discrimination, exclusion,
inequality and poverty,
Deeply concerned also that approximately 6 million children under the age of 5 die each year, mostly from
preventable and treatable causes, owing to inadequate or lack of access to integrated and quality maternal, newborn
and child health care and services, to early childbearing, as well as lack of access to health determinants, such as
safe drinking water and sanitation, safe and adequate food and nutrition, including breastfeeding, and that mortality
remains highest among children belonging to the poorest and most marginalized communities,
Recognizing that a strong focus is needed on poverty, deprivation and inequality to prevent and protect
children from all forms of violence and to promote the resilience of children, their families and communities,
Recognizing also the large and growing number of migrant children, including those unaccompanied or
separated from their parents or primary caregivers, and especially those who find themselves in a vulnerable
situation by attempting to cross international borders without the required travel documents,
Taking into special consideration the situation of child refugees, internally displaced children and child asylum
seekers, in particular those unaccompanied or separated from their parents,
I
Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Optional Protocols thereto
1. Reaffirms paragraphs 1 to 10 of its resolution 68/147 of 18 December 2013, and welcomes the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography and on the involvement of children in armed conflict;143
2. Welcomes the increasing number of ratifications of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,116 and
urges States that have not yet done so to consider acceding to it and to the Optional Protocols thereto117 as a matter
of priority and to implement them effectively and fully, and encourages further efforts by the Secretary-General in
this regard;
3. Notes the entry into force on 14 April 2014 of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on a communications procedure,144 and calls upon States to consider its accession, ratification and
implementation;
4. Urges States parties to withdraw reservations that are incompatible with the object and purpose of the
Convention or the Optional Protocols thereto and to consider reviewing regularly other reservations with a view to
withdrawing them in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;125
_______________
143
144

638

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531.
Resolution 66/138, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Welcomes the work of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, and, taking into account the adoption
of its general comments and its actions to follow up on its concluding observations on the implementation of the
Convention and recommendations, calls upon all States to strengthen their cooperation with the Committee, to
comply in a timely manner with their reporting obligations under the Convention and the Optional Protocols thereto,
in accordance with the guidelines elaborated by the Committee, and to take into account its recommendations,
observations and general comments on the implementation of the Convention;
6. Also welcomes the attention paid to the rights of the child by the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children and for Children and Armed Conflict and the Special Rapporteur of
the Human Rights Council on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and, in this regard, their
contribution to the progress achieved in the promotion and the protection of the rights of children;
II
Promotion and protection of the rights of the child
and non-discrimination against children
Non-discrimination
7. Reaffirms paragraphs 11 to 14 of its resolution 68/147, and calls upon States to ensure the enjoyment by
all children of all their civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights without discrimination of any kind;
8. Notes with concern the large number of children belonging to national, ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, migrant children, refugee or asylum-seeking children, internally displaced children, and children of
indigenous origin who are victims of discrimination, including racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, stresses the need to incorporate special measures, in accordance with the principle of the best interests
of the child and respect for his or her views and the child’s gender-specific needs, including children with special
needs, in education programmes and programmes to combat these practices, and calls upon States to provide special
support and to ensure equal access to services for those children;
9. Urges all States to respect, protect and promote the right of girls and boys to express themselves freely,
and their right to be heard, to ensure that their views are given due weight, in accordance with their age and
maturity, in all matters affecting them, and to involve children, including children with special needs, in decisionmaking processes, taking into account the evolving capacities of children and the importance of involving children’s
organizations and child-led initiatives;
10. Recognizes that discrimination against any child on the basis of disability is a violation of the inherent
dignity and worth of the child, and expresses grave concern that children with disabilities face violations of their
human rights, as well as discriminatory, attitudinal and environmental barriers to their participation and inclusion in
society and in the community;
Registration, family relations, adoption and alternative care
11. Reaffirms paragraphs 15 to 19 of its resolution 68/147, and urges all States parties to intensify their
efforts to comply with their obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child to protect children in
matters relating to registration, family relations and adoption or other forms of alternative care, and, in cases of
international parental or familial child abduction, encourages States to consider accession to or ratification of the
Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction,145 which takes into consideration the
principle of the best interests of the child, and to engage in bilateral and, when appropriate, multilateral cooperation
to resolve those cases by facilitating, inter alia, the return of the child to his or her country of habitual residence,
where the appropriate court can make a custody decision, taking into consideration the principle of the best interests
of the child;
_______________
145

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1343, No. 22514.

639

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Economic and social well-being of children
12. Reaffirms paragraphs 20 to 29 of its resolution 68/147, calls upon all States and the international
community to create an environment in which the well-being of the child is ensured, including by strengthening
international cooperation in this field and by implementing their commitments, including the Sustainable
Development Goals, and affirms that investment in children has high economic and social returns and that all
related efforts to ensure that resources allocated and spent for children should serve as a means for the fulfilment of
the rights of the child;
13. Emphasizes the role of international cooperation in support of national and subnational efforts and in
raising the capacities, including at the community level, for the fulfilment of the rights of the child, through, inter
alia, the enhancement of cooperation with the human rights mechanisms, relevant United Nations agencies,
programmes and funds, including through the provision of technical and financial assistance, upon the request of
and in accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned;
14. Calls upon all States and the international community to cooperate, support and participate in the global
efforts towards poverty eradication, by fulfilling their previous commitments, implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development137 and mobilizing all necessary resources and support in that regard, according to national
plans and strategies, including through an integrated and multifaceted approach based on the rights and well-being
of children;
Child labour
15. Reaffirms paragraphs 30 to 33 of its resolution 68/147, and urges States to take immediate and effective
measures to secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour and to end child labour in all
its forms, by 2025 at the latest, and to promote education as a key strategy in this regard;
16. Urges all States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying both the Worst Forms of Child Labour
Convention, 1999 (No. 182),146 and the Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138),147 of the International Labour
Organization;
17. Recognizes that poverty and social exclusion, labour mobility, discrimination and lack of adequate social
protection and educational opportunity as well as lack of birth registration all influence child labour;
Prevention and elimination of violence against children
18. Reaffirms paragraphs 34 to 39 of its resolution 68/147 and paragraphs 47 to 62 of its resolution 62/141
of 18 December 2007 on the elimination of violence against children, condemns all forms of violence against
children, and urges all States to implement the measures set out in paragraph 34 of its resolution 68/147 and
paragraph 3 of its resolution 69/158 and:
(a) To take effective and appropriate legislative and other measures to prohibit, prevent and eliminate all
forms of violence against children in all settings, including harmful practices in all situations, and to strengthen
international, national and local cooperation and mutual assistance in this regard;
(b) To protect children from all forms of violence, including by exercising due diligence, investigating,
prosecuting and punishing the perpetrators of violence against all children and ending impunity, to provide
protection as well as universal access to comprehensive social, physical and mental health and legal services and
counselling for all victims and survivors, to ensure their full recovery and reintegration into society, and to address
the structural and underlying causes of violence against all children through enhanced prevention measures, research
and strengthened coordination and monitoring and evaluation;
(c) To address the gender dimension of all forms of violence against children and incorporate a gender
perspective in all policies adopted and actions taken to protect children against all forms of violence and harmful
practices, including female genital mutilation, acknowledging that girls and boys face varying risks from different
forms of violence at different ages and in different situations;
_______________
146
147

640

Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
Ibid., vol. 1015, No. 14862.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. Also reaffirms that violence against children is never justifiable and that it is the duty of States to protect
children, including those in conflict with the law, from all forms of violence and human rights violations and to
exercise due diligence to prohibit, prevent and investigate acts of violence against children, eliminate impunity and
provide assistance to the victims, including preventing revictimization;
20. Recalls that 2016 will mark the tenth anniversary of the submission of the United Nations study on
violence against children to the General Assembly,148 and welcomes the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children in mainstreaming the study recommendations in the international,
regional and national agenda;
21. Strongly condemns the abduction of children, and calls upon all States to take all appropriate measures to
secure their unconditional release, rehabilitation and reintegration and their reunification with their families or legal
guardians, in accordance with the best interests of the child;
22. Notes with appreciation the adoption of the United Nations Model Strategies and Practical Measures on
the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,149 encourages
States to take effective measures for their dissemination and implementation, as appropriate, and invites relevant
United Nations actors to support Member States, where appropriate, to this end through concerted efforts;
Promoting and protecting the rights of children, including children in particularly difficult situations
23. Reaffirms paragraphs 40 to 48 of its resolution 68/147, and calls upon all States to promote and protect
all human rights of all children, to implement evidence-based programmes and measures that provide them with
special protection and assistance, including access to health care and inclusive and equitable quality education and
social services, to consider implementing voluntary repatriation, reintegration where appropriate and feasible, family
tracing and family reunification, in particular for children who are unaccompanied, and to ensure that the best
interests of the child are a primary consideration;
24. Calls upon all States to ensure, for children belonging to minorities and vulnerable groups and children
in vulnerable situations, including migrant children and indigenous children, as well as children placed in alternative
care and within the juvenile justice system and in detention, the enjoyment of all human rights, as well as access to
health care, social services and education, on an equal basis with others and to ensure that all such children, in
particular unaccompanied migrant children and those who are victims of violence and exploitation, receive
appropriate protection and assistance;
Migrant children
25. Reaffirms the need to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrant children, regardless of their migration status, and to address international migration through international,
regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and through a comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the
roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human rights
of all migrant children, and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their vulnerability;
26. Expresses the commitment to protect the human rights of migrant children, given their vulnerability,
particularly unaccompanied migrant children, and to provide for their health, education and psychosocial
development, ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in policies of integration, return
and family reunification;
Children and the administration of justice
27. Reaffirms paragraphs 49 to 57 of its resolution 68/147, and calls upon all States to respect and protect the
rights of children alleged to have infringed or recognized as having infringed penal law, as well as children of
persons alleged to have infringed or recognized as having infringed penal law;
_______________
148
149

See A/61/299.
Resolution 69/194, annex.

641

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

28. Encourages continued regional and cross-regional efforts, the sharing of best practices and the provision
of technical assistance in the field of juvenile justice, acknowledges in this regard the holding of the World Congress
on Juvenile Justice in Geneva, from 26 to 30 January 2015, and noting with interest its final declaration;
29. Encourages States to develop and implement a comprehensive juvenile justice policy to protect and
address the needs of children in contact with the law, with a view to promoting, inter alia, a commitment to
improving the quality of education available to children placed in alternative care and within the juvenile justice
system, crime prevention programmes, the use of alternative measures, such as diversion, restorative justice and
community-based programmes that focus on the rehabilitation and reintegration of the child, and ensuring
compliance with the principle that deprivation of liberty of children should be used only as a measure of last resort
and for the shortest appropriate period of time, as well as to avoid, wherever possible, the use of pretrial detention
for children;
Prevention and eradication of the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography
30. Reaffirms paragraph 58 of its resolution 68/147, and calls upon all States to prevent, criminalize, prosecute
and punish all forms of the sale and trafficking of children, including for the purposes of removal of organs of the child
for profit, child slavery, and the sexual exploitation of children, including child prostitution and child pornography, with
the aim of eradicating those practices and the use of the Internet and other information and communications
technologies for these purposes, to combat the existence of a market that encourages such criminal practices and
take measures to eliminate the demand that fosters them, as well as to address the rights and needs of victims
effectively and take effective measures against the criminalization of children who are victims of exploitation;
Children affected by armed conflict
31. Reaffirms paragraphs 59 to 70 of its resolution 68/147, condemns in the strongest terms all violations
and abuses committed against children in armed conflict, and in this regard urges all States and other parties to
armed conflict that are engaged, in contravention of applicable international law, in the recruitment and use of
children, in patterns of killing and maiming of children and/or rape and other sexual violence against children,
acknowledging that sexual violence in these situations disproportionately affects girls, in recurrent attacks on
schools and/or hospitals and related personnel, and in patterns of abduction of children, as well as in all other
violations and abuses against children, to take time-bound and effective measures to end and prevent them, and
takes note in this regard of the adoption of Security Council resolution 2225 (2015) of 18 June 2015;
32. Urges all States, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, other relevant international and
regional organizations and civil society to give serious attention to, and to protect and assist child victims of, all
violations and abuses committed against children in situations of armed conflict, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions of 1949;150
33. Calls upon States to protect children affected by armed conflict, in particular from violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law, and to ensure that they receive timely, effective humanitarian
assistance, noting the efforts taken to end impunity by ensuring accountability and punishing perpetrators, and calls
upon the international community to hold those responsible for violations accountable, inter alia, through the
International Criminal Court;
34. Remains deeply concerned, however, over the lack of progress on the ground in some situations and the
deterioration in other situations where parties to armed conflict continue to violate with impunity the relevant
provisions of applicable international law relating to the rights and protection of children in armed conflict;
35. Expresses its deep concern about attacks, as well as threats of attacks, in contravention of applicable
international law against schools and/or hospitals, and protected persons in relation to them, welcomes the
publication of the guidance note on Security Council resolution 1998 (2011) of 12 July 2011 on attacks on schools
and hospitals by the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
in collaboration with the United Nations Children’s Fund, the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and takes note of the adoption of Security Council resolution
2143 (2014) of 7 March 2014;
_______________
150

642

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

36. Welcomes in this regard the “Children, not soldiers” campaign initiated by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations Children’s Fund, in collaboration
with other United Nations partners, aimed at ending and preventing, by 2016, the recruitment and use of children by
the national security forces concerned, and requests the Special Representative to report on progress in her next
report to the General Assembly;
III
Right to education
37. Reaffirms that education is a fundamental human right, a basis for guaranteeing the realization of other
human rights and is essential for sustainable development and the promotion of peace and tolerance, as well as key
to achieving full employment and poverty eradication;
38. Also reaffirms the human right of everyone to education, which is enshrined in, inter alia, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,151 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,118 the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182), the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,124 the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,152 the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,153 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities,119 and in other relevant international instruments;
39. Welcomes the attention paid to the right to education of children by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the International Labour Organization and all relevant special representatives of
the Secretary-General, as well as special procedures mandate holders, including the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on the right to education, in particular, the human rights treaty bodies and the operational
activities of the United Nations system on the issue;
40. Underlines that full access to inclusive and equitable quality education and the promotion of lifelong
learning at all levels is an essential precondition for achieving sustainable development and for the full realization of
the right to education;
41. Expresses its dismay at the aggravation of attacks on educational institutions, their students and staff, in
contravention of international humanitarian law, recognizes the grave impact that such attacks have on the full
realization of the right to education, in particular of women and girls, and reiterates its condemnation in the strongest
terms of all such attacks;
42. Expresses its deep concern about the persistence of the gender gap in education, which is reflected by
the fact that, according to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, nearly two thirds of
the world’s non-literate adults are women;
43. Notes with concern that child, early and forced marriage disproportionally affects girls who have
received little or no formal education and is itself a significant obstacle to educational opportunities for girls and
young women, in particular girls who are forced to drop out of school owing to marriage and/or childbirth,
recognizing that educational opportunities are directly related to women’s and girls’ empowerment, employment
and economic opportunities and to their active participation in economic, social and cultural development,
governance and decision-making;
44. Notes that evidence has shown that the States that have made the biggest investments in education are
those that have achieved the highest gains in national income, economic growth and poverty reduction as well as in
human development outcomes;

_______________
151

Resolution 217 A (III).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
153
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
152

643

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

45. Also notes that the Oslo Summit on Education for Development, in its declaration of 7 July 2015,
decided to establish the International Commission on the Financing of Global Education Opportunities, to be
chaired by the United Nations Special Envoy for Global Education, and that the Commission will present its report
to the Secretary-General in September 2016;
46. Recognizes that the right of the child to education can be severely hampered as a result of physical,
psychological and sexual violence, as well as bullying, both in school and on the way to school, as well as online,
which compromises learning outcomes and may lead to school dropout;
47. Also recognizes that a large portion of the world’s children out of school live in conflict-affected areas, in
areas affected by outbreaks of communicable diseases, such as Ebola, and in regions stricken by natural disasters,
and that this is a serious challenge to the realization of all the rights of the child as well as the fulfilment of
international commitments on education, reaffirms the State’s obligation to ensure that children continue to fully
enjoy their human rights during conflict and post-conflict periods, as well as in other emergency situations,
including, inter alia, the human right to education, and stresses in that context the importance of ensuring that
children continue to have access to basic services in all such situations;
48. Expresses its deep concern about the growing number of attacks and threats of attacks against schools,
and recognizes the grave impact of such attacks on children’s and teachers’ safety, as well as on the full realization
of the right to education, also expresses its concern that the military use of schools in contravention of applicable
international law may also affect the safety of children and teachers and the right of the child to education,
and encourages all States to strengthen efforts to prevent the military use of schools in contravention of
international law;
49. Calls upon all States to give full effect to the right to education for all children and in particular:
(a) To eliminate gender disparities in education and to ensure effective and equal access to inclusive and
equitable quality education, including vocational training, at all levels for all children without discrimination of any
kind, particularly the vulnerable, including indigenous children, as well as children with disabilities and children in
vulnerable or marginalized situations;
(b)

To make primary education available, free and compulsory for all children;

(c) To take all appropriate measures to eliminate obstacles to effectively accessing and completing
education, such as the cost of education, hunger and poor nutrition, distance from home to school, the
institutionalization of children, armed conflicts, all forms of violence in school, insufficient infrastructure, including
lack of access to water and sanitation, the lack of adequate and physically and otherwise accessible schooling
facilities for girls, and child labour or heavy domestic work, and to ensure that children who are institutionalized
also enjoy their right to education;
(d) To take all measures, including sufficient budgetary allocations, to ensure inclusive, equitable and nondiscriminatory quality education and to promote learning opportunities for all children;
(e) To take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against girls in the field of education and to
ensure equal access for all girls to all levels of education, including through gender-responsive policies and
programmes, improving the safety of girls on the way to and from school, taking steps to ensure that all schools are
accessible, safe, secure and free from violence and providing separate and adequate sanitation facilities that provide
privacy and dignity, and thereby contributing to achieving equal opportunity and combating exclusion and ensuring
school attendance, including for girls as well as for children from low-income families, children who become heads
of households and girls who are already married or pregnant;
(f) To promote the development of gender-responsive curricula for educational programmes at all levels
and to take concrete measures to ensure that educational materials portray women and men, youth, girls and boys in
positive and non-stereotypical roles, including in the teaching of scientific and technological subjects;
(g) To develop training programmes and materials for teachers and educators that promote equality,
cooperation, mutual respect and shared responsibilities between girls and boys from pre-primary level onward;
(h) To adopt all appropriate measures to ensure that school discipline is administered in a manner consistent
with the child’s human dignity and human rights by taking all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and
educational measures, in accordance with the best interests of the child, to protect the child from all forms of
644

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including
sexual abuse in schools, and in this context to take measures to promote non-violent forms of discipline in schools;
(i) To establish child-friendly and confidential counselling, complaints and reporting mechanisms to
address incidents of violence, including sexual violence, against children in schools or on the way to or from school,
and support the rehabilitation of child victims, as well as for the promotion of training and guidance for teachers and
school staff to detect and report cases of violence against children to the relevant authorities;
(j) To prevent and protect children from bullying, including cyberbullying and other online risks such as
sexual violence and online exploitation, by generating statistical information, promptly and adequately responding
to such acts, providing appropriate support and counselling to children affected by and involved in bullying,
recognizing the important role that schools can play in preventing and responding to such incidents and in
promoting online safety, through close collaboration between governments, teachers, parents, communities, the
private sector, civil society, non-governmental organizations and children themselves;
(k) To ensure that all girls and boys have access to quality early childhood development, care and preprimary education;
(l) To strengthen the role of education, including human rights education, as the most effective means of
promoting tolerance, in preventing the spread of extremism by instilling respect for human rights and promoting the
practice of non-violence, moderation, dialogue and cooperation, calling upon all States, the specialized agencies of
the United Nations and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to contribute actively to this
endeavour by, inter alia, placing emphasis on civic education and life skills as well as democratic principles and
practices at all levels of formal, informal and non-formal education;
(m) To take all feasible measures to protect schools from attacks, as well as persons entitled to protection in
relation to them in situations of armed conflict, and to refrain from actions that impede children’s access to
education;
(n) To ensure, as primary duty-bearers, the realization of the right to education in all phases of emergency
situations and to implement strategies and policies in this regard as an integral element of humanitarian assistance
and humanitarian response, to the maximum of their available resources, with the support of the international
community, the United Nations system, donors, multilateral agencies, the private sector, civil society and nongovernmental organizations;
(o) To ensure inclusive quality education, including by strengthening inputs, processes and evaluation of
learning outcomes and mechanisms to measure and monitor progress, including by collecting disaggregated data, as
well as by ensuring that teachers and educators are empowered, adequately recruited, well-trained, qualified,
motivated and well supported with well-resourced, efficient and effectively governed systems, recognizing the
importance of regional and international cooperation in this regard;
(p) To further ensure relevant and effective learning outcomes and ensure the acquisition of the foundational
skills of literacy and numeracy, as well as analytical, problem-solving and other high-level cognitive, interpersonal
and social skills;
(q) To take specific measures to respect, protect, promote and fulfil the right of the child to engage in play
and recreational activities, in particular by promoting the provision of a school curriculum that allows for sufficient
opportunity for play and recreational activities, including physical education and sport;
(r) To integrate human rights education and training, education for democracy, along with civic education
and education for sustainable development into national and subnational education standards, and in this regard to
develop and strengthen national and subnational programmes, curricular and extracurricular educational activities
and to implement, as appropriate, the Global Action Programme on Education for Sustainable Development;136
(s) To adopt legislative and other appropriate measures with a view to realizing the right to education for
children with disabilities, on the basis of equal opportunity, and to ensure an inclusive education system at all levels
that provides reasonable accommodation of the child’s needs, along with the required effective individualized
support measures in environments to maximize academic and social development, within the general education
system, and consistent with the goal of full inclusion, which facilitates effective education;
645

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(t) To take all appropriate measures to safeguard the realization of the right to education for indigenous
children, including their access to quality education, on the basis of equal opportunity, in a manner conducive to
their fullest possible social inclusion and individual development, including through the provision of compulsory
primary education that is available free to all and, when possible, is provided in their own language, and to take all
appropriate measures to make all other levels and all forms of education available and accessible to indigenous
children without discrimination;
(u) To develop and implement educational programmes and teaching materials, including comprehensive
evidence-based education on human sexuality, based on full and accurate information, for all adolescents and youth,
in a manner consistent with their evolving capacities, with appropriate direction and guidance from parents and legal
guardians, with the active involvement of all relevant stakeholders, in order to modify the social and cultural
patterns of conduct of men and women of all ages, to eliminate prejudices and to promote and build decisionmaking, communication and risk reduction skills for the development of respectful relationships based on gender
equality and human rights, as well as teacher education and training programmes for both formal and non-formal
education;
(v) To measure progress in the realization of the right to education, by, for example, developing national
indicators as an important tool for the realization of the right to education and for policy formulation, impact
assessment and transparency;
50. Urges all States and all relevant stakeholders to give high priority to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, including the education-related Sustainable Development Goal and targets;
IV
Follow-up
51. Expresses support for the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children, and recognizes the progress achieved since the establishment of her mandate in promoting the
prevention and elimination of all forms of violence against children in all regions and in advancing the
implementation of the recommendations of the United Nations study on violence against children,148 including
through her regional and thematic consultations and field missions, and thematic reports addressing emerging
concerns;
52. Recommends that the Secretary-General extend the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children, as established in paragraphs 58 and 59 of its resolution 62/141, for
a further three years, and maintain support for the effective and independent performance and the sustainability of
the mandate of the Special Representative, funded from the regular budget;
53. Urges all States, requests United Nations entities and agencies, and invites regional organizations and
civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to cooperate with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children in promoting further implementation of the recommendations of the
United Nations study on violence against children, and encourages States to provide support to the Special
Representative, including adequate voluntary financial support for the continued, effective and independent
performance of her mandate, and invites organizations, including the private sector, to provide voluntary
contributions for that purpose;
54. Recalls its resolution 69/157, in which it invited the Secretary General to commission an in-depth global
study on children deprived of liberty, to be funded through voluntary contributions, and in this regard encourages
Member States, United Nations agencies, funds, programmes and offices, as well as other relevant stakeholders to
support the elaboration of the study;
55. Decides:
(a) To request the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report
on the rights of the child containing information on the status of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
issues addressed in the present resolution, with a focus on migrant children;
(b) To request the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
continue to submit reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on the activities undertaken in
646

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the fulfilment of her mandate, including information on her field visits and on the progress achieved and the
challenges remaining on the children and armed conflict agenda;
(c) To request the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children to continue
to submit annual reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on the activities undertaken in the
fulfilment of her mandate, consistent with paragraphs 58 and 59 of its resolution 62/141, including information on
her field visits and on the progress achieved and the challenges remaining on the violence against children agenda;
(d) To request the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography to continue to submit reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council on the activities undertaken in the fulfilment of her mandate, including information on her field visits and
on the progress achieved and the challenges remaining on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography agenda;
(e) To invite the Chair of the Committee on the Rights of the Child to present an oral report on the work of
the Committee and to engage in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its seventy-first session as a
way to enhance communication between the Assembly and the Committee;
(f) To continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-first session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of the rights of children”, focusing section III of the resolution entitled “Rights of the
child” on the theme “Migrant children”.
RESOLUTION 70/138
A/RE S/70 /138

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/485, para. 30)154

70/138. The girl child
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 68/146 of 18 December 2013 and all relevant resolutions on the girl child, and
recalling its resolution 66/170 of 19 December 2011 on the International Day of the Girl Child and the agreed
conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women, in particular those relevant to the girl child,
Recalling all human rights and other instruments relevant to the rights of the child, in particular the girl child,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child,155 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,156 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,157 the Optional
Protocols thereto158 and the Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of
Marriages,159

_______________
154

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Southern African Development Community), Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, France, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine and Uruguay.
155
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
156
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
157
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
158
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531, and resolution 66/138, annex; United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2131, No. 20378; and ibid.,
vol. 2518, No. 44910.
159
Ibid., vol. 521, No. 7525.

647

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the adoption of the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”,160 and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development,161 and reaffirming other internationally agreed development goals and commitments relevant to the
girl child,
Reaffirming all relevant outcomes of major United Nations summits and conferences relevant to the girl child,
including the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly on children,
entitled “A world fit for children”,162 the Beijing Declaration163 and Platform for Action,164 the outcome of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”,165 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development,166 the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development,167 the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS adopted at the twenty-sixth special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS,
entitled “Global Crisis – Global Action”,168 and the Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS adopted by the high-level
meetings of the General Assembly held in 2006169 and 2011,170 and reiterating that their full and effective
implementation is essential to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable
Development Goals,
Recognizing that chronic poverty remains one of the biggest obstacles to meeting the needs of and promoting
and protecting the rights of children, including the girl child, and that poverty continues to impede access to clean
water, sanitation and hygiene, among other basic social services for children,
Recognizing also that urgent national and international action is required to eliminate poverty, in particular
extreme poverty, and noting that the ongoing effects of the global financial and economic crisis, volatile energy and
food prices and continuing food insecurity as a result of various factors are felt directly by households, especially
those headed by girls,
Recognizing further that social protection, education, adequate health care, nutrition, full access to clean water,
including safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, skills development and combating discrimination and
violence against girls, among other things, are all necessary for the empowerment of the girl child, and recalling the
importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective across the United Nations system in relation to the girl child,
Deeply concerned about the serious social problem of child-headed households, in particular those headed by
girls, which may result from the death of parents and legal guardians and other economic, social and political
realities, and that the impact of the HIV and AIDS epidemic, including illness and mortality, the erosion of the
extended family, the exacerbation of poverty, unemployment and underemployment and migration, as well as
urbanization, have contributed to the increase in the number of child-headed households,
Deeply concerned also about the extreme vulnerability of children who are heads of households and those
raised in child-headed households, particularly girls, who suffer from the lack of adult support and may be
particularly vulnerable to poverty, mental and psychosocial trauma and physical vulnerability and may be
_______________
160

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
162
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
163
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
164
Ibid., annex II.
165
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
166
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
167
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
168
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
169
Resolution 60/262, annex.
170
Resolution 65/277, annex.
161

648

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

exceptionally negatively affected by the economic and care burdens placed on them at a young age, which in turn
may lead to their having difficulty completing their education and increase their vulnerability to poverty,
discrimination, trafficking and physical abuse,
Deeply concerned further that, in situations of poverty, armed conflict, climate-related and other hazards,
natural disasters, disease outbreaks and other humanitarian emergencies, the incidence of child-headed households
increases and makes girl children particularly vulnerable to poverty, physical and sexual violence and abuse, and
discrimination, thus limiting their potential for full development,
Deeply concerned about the lack of recent information and statistics on the status of child-headed households
and the need for such information to inform appropriate policy responses by Member States and the United Nations
system,
Noting with disappointment that the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
68/146171 did not contain any information on the implementation of the priority theme of that resolution, namely, the
situation of child-headed households,
Recognizing that women and girls are more vulnerable to HIV infection and that they bear a disproportionate
burden of the impact of the HIV and AIDS epidemic, including the care of and support for those living with and
affected by HIV and AIDS, and that this negatively affects girls by depriving them of their childhood and
diminishing their opportunities to receive an education, often resulting in their having to head households and
increasing their vulnerability to the worst forms of child labour and to sexual exploitation,
Noting with concern that millions of girls are engaged in child labour and its worst forms, including those who
have been victims of trafficking in persons and affected by armed conflict and humanitarian emergencies, that
children without nationality or birth registration are vulnerable to trafficking in persons and child labour and that
many children face the double burden of having to combine economic activities with domestic chores, which
deprive them of their childhood and diminish their opportunities to benefit from education and decent employment
in the future, and noting in this regard the need to recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work,
Recognizing that girl children are often at greater risk of being exposed to and encountering various forms of
discrimination and violence and forced labour, which, among other things, would hinder efforts towards the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly those goals that are relevant to gender equality and
the empowerment of girls, and reaffirming the need to achieve gender equality to ensure a just and equitable world
for girls, including through partnering with men and boys, as an important strategy for advancing the rights of the
girl child,
Recognizing also that the empowerment of and investment in girls, which is critical for economic growth, and
the achievement of all Sustainable Development Goals, including the eradication of poverty and extreme poverty, as
well as the meaningful participation of girls in decisions that affect them, are key in breaking the cycle of
discrimination and violence and in promoting and protecting the full and effective enjoyment of their human rights,
and recognizing further that empowering girls requires their active participation in decision-making processes and as
agents of change in their own lives and communities, including through girls’ organizations with the active support
and engagement of their parents, legal guardians, families and care providers, boys and men, as well as the wider
community,
Deeply concerned about all forms of violence against children, in particular the phenomena that
disproportionately affect girls, such as commercial sexual exploitation and child pornography, rape, sexual abuse,
domestic violence, trafficking in persons and the use of information and communications technology and social
media to perpetrate violence against women and girls, and, in addition, about the corresponding impunity and lack
of accountability, and that violence against women and girls is underrecognized and underreported, particularly at
the community level, which reflects discriminatory norms that reinforce the lower status of girls in society,
Deeply concerned also about discrimination against the girl child and the violation of the rights of the girl
child, including girls with disabilities, which often result in less access for girls to education, and to quality
education, nutrition, including food allocation, and physical and mental health-care services, in girls enjoying fewer
_______________
171

A/70/267.

649

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of the rights, opportunities and benefits of childhood and adolescence than boys, and in leaving them more
vulnerable than boys to the consequences of unprotected and premature sexual relations and often being subjected
to various forms of cultural, social, sexual and economic exploitation and violence, abuse, rape, incest, honourrelated crimes and harmful practices, such as female infanticide, child, early and forced marriage, prenatal sex
selection and female genital mutilation,
Deeply concerned further that despite its widespread practice, child, early and forced marriage is still
underreported, recognizing that this requires further attention and that child, early and forced marriage exposes the
girl child to greater risk of HIV and sexually transmitted infections, often leads to premature sexual relations, early
pregnancy and early childbearing and increases the risk of obstetric fistula and high levels of maternal mortality and
morbidity, and furthermore entails complications during pregnancy and childbirth, which often lead to disability,
stillbirth and maternal death, particularly for young women and girls, which require appropriate prenatal and
postnatal health-care services for mothers, including in the area of skilled birth attendance and emergency obstetric
care, and noting with concern that this reduces girls’ opportunities to complete their education, gain comprehensive
knowledge, participate in the community or develop employable skills and is likely to have a long-term adverse
impact on their employment opportunities, their quality of life and that of their children, and violates and impairs the
full enjoyment of their human rights,
Stressing the need for the international community, the relevant United Nations entities, the specialized
agencies, civil society and international financial institutions to continue to actively support, through the allocation
of enhanced financial resources and technical assistance, targeted comprehensive programmes that address the
needs and priorities of child-headed households and the water, sanitation and hygiene needs of the girl child,
Emphasizing that increased and equal access to quality education for young people, especially adolescent
girls, including in the areas of sexual and reproductive health, as well as health care, hygiene and sanitation,
dramatically lowers their vulnerability to preventable diseases and infections, in particular HIV and other sexually
transmitted infections,
1. Stresses the need for the full and urgent implementation of the rights of the girl child as provided to her
under human rights instruments, and urges States to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child,155 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,156 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities157 and the Optional Protocols thereto158 as a matter of priority;
2. Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Minimum Age Convention, 1973
(No. 138),172 and the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182),173 of the International Labour
Organization to consider doing so;
3. Urges States to improve the situation of girl children living in poverty, in particular extreme poverty,
deprived of adequate food and nutrition, water and sanitation facilities, with limited or no access to basic physical
and mental health-care services, shelter, education, participation and protection, taking into account that, while a
severe lack of goods and services hurts every human being, it is particularly threatening and harmful to the girl child
and is further exacerbated by living in a child-headed household, leaving her unable to enjoy her rights, to reach her
full potential and to participate as a full member of society;
4. Calls upon States to recognize the right to education on the basis of equal opportunity and nondiscrimination by making primary education compulsory and available free to all children, including those living in
rural areas, and ensuring that all children have equal access to quality education, as well as making secondary and
tertiary education available and accessible to all, in particular through the progressive introduction of free secondary
education, bearing in mind that special measures to ensure equal access, including affirmative action, ensuring
physical access to education, including by increasing financial incentives to families, improving the safety of girls
on the way to and from school, ensuring that all schools are accessible, safe, secure and free from violence and
providing hygienic, separate and adequate sanitation facilities, contribute to achieving equal opportunity and
combating exclusion and ensuring school attendance, in particular for girls and children from low-income families
and children who become heads of households;
_______________
172
173

650

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14862.
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Calls upon all States to place enhanced emphasis on quality education, including communications and
technology education, where available, for the girl child, including catch-up and literacy education for those who did
not receive formal education, special initiatives for keeping girls in school through post-primary education,
including those who are already married or pregnant, to promote access to skills and entrepreneurship training for
young women and to tackle male and female stereotypes, in order to ensure that young women entering the labour
market have opportunities to obtain full and productive employment, equitable compensation and decent work;
6. Calls upon States, with the support, where appropriate, of international organizations, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, to develop policies and programmes, giving priority to formal, informal and nonformal education programmes, including age-appropriate sex education with appropriate direction and guidance
from parents and legal guardians, that support girls and adolescent girls and enable them to acquire relevant and
adequate knowledge and information in a manner consistent with their evolving capacities, develop self-esteem and
take responsibility for their own lives, and to place special focus on programmes to educate women and men,
especially parents, about the importance of girls’ physical and mental health and well-being and the need to develop
and maintain respectful relationships between girls and boys;
7. Urges States to acknowledge the different needs of girls and boys during their childhood and
adolescence and, as appropriate, to make adapted investments that are consistent with and responsive to their
changing needs, in particular ensuring that girls have access to clean water, including safe drinking water, sanitation,
hygiene and feminine hygiene products as well as private toilet facilities, including feminine hygiene product
disposal facilities, in educational institutions and other public spaces, which will improve their health and access to
education and increase their safety;
8. Also urges States to strengthen efforts to urgently eradicate all forms of discrimination against women
and girls, and calls upon all States, the United Nations system and civil society to take measures to address the
obstacles that continue to affect the achievement of the goals set forth in the Beijing Platform for Action,164 as
contained in paragraph 33 of the further actions and initiatives,174 including reviewing remaining laws that
discriminate against women and girls in order to modify or abolish them and, where appropriate, strengthening
national mechanisms to implement policies and programmes for the girl child and, in some cases, to enhance
coordination among responsible institutions for the realization of the human rights of girls, including fighting
impunity for perpetrators of and ensuring the availability of appropriate penalties for crimes of sexual violence
committed against the girl child, and to mobilize all necessary resources and support in order to achieve those goals;
9. Further urges States to ensure that the applicable requirements of the International Labour Organization
for the employment of girls and boys are respected and effectively enforced and that girls who are employed have
equal access to decent work and equal payment and remuneration for equal work or work of equal value, are
protected from economic and sexual exploitation, discrimination, sexual harassment, violence and abuse in the
workplace, are aware of their rights and have access to formal and non-formal education, skills development and
vocational training, and urges States to develop gender-sensitive measures, including national action plans, where
appropriate, to eliminate child labour and its worst forms, commercial sexual exploitation, hazardous forms of child
labour, trafficking and slavery-like practices, including forced and bonded labour, and recruitment or use of children
in armed conflict in violation of applicable international law, and to recognize that girls, including in child-headed
households, face greater risks in this regard;
10. Calls upon States, with the support of relevant stakeholders, including the private sector, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations, as appropriate, to take all measures necessary
to ensure the right of girls to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health, including sexual and
reproductive health, and to develop sustainable health systems, strengthen existing ones to ensure primary health
care with an integrated HIV response and make them more accessible to adolescent girls;
11. Urges all States to develop or review relevant programmes that promote gender equality and equal
access to basic social services, such as education, nutrition, water and sanitation, birth registration, health care,
vaccinations and protection from diseases representing the major causes of mortality, including non-communicable
diseases, and to mainstream a gender perspective into all development policies and programmes, including those
specific to the girl child;
_______________
174

Resolution S-23/3, annex.

651

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Calls upon States to strengthen the capacity of national health systems, and in this regard invites the
international community to assist national efforts, upon request, including by allocating adequate resources in order
to provide the essential services needed to prevent obstetric fistula and to treat those cases that occur by providing
the continuum of services, including family planning, prenatal and postnatal care, skilled birth attendance,
emergency obstetric care and post-partum care, to adolescent girls, including those living in poverty and in
underserved rural areas where obstetric fistula is most common;
13. Urges all States to enact, uphold and strictly enforce laws and policies aimed at preventing and ending
child, early and forced marriage and protecting those at risk and to ensure that marriage is entered into only with the
informed, free and full consent of the intending spouses, to enact and strictly enforce laws concerning the minimum
legal age of consent and the minimum age for marriage, to raise the minimum age for marriage, engage all relevant
stakeholders, including girls, where necessary, and ensure that these laws are well known, to further develop and
implement holistic, comprehensive and coordinated policies, plans of action and programmes and to support already
married girls and adolescents and ensure the provision of viable alternatives and institutional support, especially
educational opportunities for girls, to ensure the survival, protection, development and advancement of the girl child
in order to promote and protect the full enjoyment of her human rights and to ensure equal opportunities for girls,
including by making such plans an integral part of her total development process;
14. Urges States to ensure that the rights of children in child-headed households are respected and that the
heads of such households exercise all the rights of the child and to further ensure that children in child-headed
households, particularly girls, receive the support they need to ensure their continued attendance in school consistent
with their age;
15. Also urges States to ensure that efforts to enact and implement legislation to protect, support and
empower child-headed households, in particular those headed by girls, include provisions to ensure their economic
well-being, including protecting their property and inheritance rights, access to health-care services, nutrition, clean
water, including safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, shelter and education, and inheritance, and that the
family is protected and assisted in staying together;
16. Further urges States to forge partnerships with relevant stakeholders, particularly by working with and
involving communities in developing programmes and mechanisms designed to ensure the safety and protection as
well as the empowerment of children, especially girls, in child-headed households, and to ensure that they receive
the support, including psychosocial support, they need from their communities;
17. Calls upon States to strengthen research on families and household formation and structure, with a
particular emphasis on the existence of de facto child-headed households and the long-term economic and
psychological impact that being a child head of a household or a child raised by another child has on children and on
social sustainability;
18. Also calls upon States to strengthen research, data collection and analysis on the girl child, disaggregated
by household structure, sex, age, disability status, economic situation, marital status and geographical location, and
improve gender statistics on time use, unpaid care work and water and sanitation in order to provide a better
understanding of the situations of girls, especially of the multiple forms of discrimination that they face, and to
inform the development of necessary policies and programme responses, which should take a holistic ageappropriate approach to addressing the full range of the forms of discrimination that girls may face, in order to
protect their rights effectively;
19. Urges States to take all measures necessary to ensure the full enjoyment by girls with disabilities of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, on an equal basis with other children, and to adopt, implement and
strengthen appropriate policies and programmes designed to address their needs;
20. Urges all States to enact and enforce legislation to protect girls from all forms of violence,
discrimination, exploitation and harmful practices in all settings, including female infanticide and prenatal sex
selection, female genital mutilation, rape, domestic violence, incest, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, child
prostitution and child pornography, trafficking and forced migration, forced labour and child, early and forced
marriage, and to develop age-appropriate, safe, confidential and disability-accessible programmes and medical,
social and psychological support services to assist girls who are subjected to violence and discrimination;
21. Calls upon all States to enact and enforce the necessary legislative or other measures, in cooperation
with relevant stakeholders, including the private sector and the media, to prevent the distribution over the Internet of
652

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

child pornography, including depictions of child sexual abuse, ensuring that adequate mechanisms are in place to
enable the reporting and removal of such material and that its creators, distributors and collectors are prosecuted, as
appropriate;
22. Urges States to formulate or review as needed comprehensive, multidisciplinary and coordinated
national plans, programmes or strategies to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against women and
girls, which should have dedicated resources, be widely disseminated and provide targets and timetables for
implementation, as well as effective domestic enforcement procedures through the establishment of monitoring and
evaluation mechanisms involving all parties concerned, including consultations with women’s organizations, giving
attention to the recommendations relating to the girl child of the Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council
on violence against women, its causes and consequences, and on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, and of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children;
23. Also urges States to ensure that children who are capable of forming their own views have the right to
express those views freely in all matters affecting them, with the views of the child being given due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child, to ensure that this right is fully and equally enjoyed by the girl
child, to meaningfully involve girl children, including those with special needs, as well as girls with disabilities, and
their representative organizations in decision-making processes, as appropriate, and to include them as full partners
in identifying their own needs and in developing, planning, implementing and assessing policies and programmes to
meet those needs, with a view to ensuring their full and effective participation;
24. Recognizes that a considerable number of girl children are particularly vulnerable, including orphans,
children living on the street, internally displaced and refugee children, children affected by trafficking and sexual
and economic exploitation, children living with or affected by HIV and AIDS, and children who are incarcerated or
who live without parental support, and therefore urges States, with the support of the international community,
where relevant, to take appropriate measures to address the needs of such children by implementing national,
subregional and regional policies and strategies to build and strengthen governmental, community and family
capacities to provide a supportive environment for such children, including by providing appropriate counselling
and psychosocial support, and ensuring their safety, enrolment in school and access to shelter, good nutrition and
health and social services on an equal basis with other children;
25. Urges all States and the international community to respect, promote and protect the rights of the girl
child, taking into account the particular vulnerabilities of the girl child in pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict
situations and in climate-related and other hazards and natural disasters, as well as in other humanitarian
emergencies, all of which may result in the creation of child-headed households, and also urges States to take special
measures for the protection of girls in all phases of humanitarian emergencies, from relief to recovery, and in
particular to ensure that children have access to basic services, which include clean water, including safe drinking
water, sanitation and hygiene, to protect them from sexually transmitted infections, including HIV infection, genderbased violence, including rape, sexual abuse and sexual exploitation, torture, abduction and trafficking, including
forced labour, paying special attention to refugee and displaced girls, and to take into account their special needs in
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation assistance and reintegration processes;
26. Deplores all acts of sexual exploitation, abuse of and trafficking in women and children, including in
humanitarian crises and by humanitarian workers and peacekeepers, including military, police and civilian
personnel involved in United Nations operations, welcomes the efforts undertaken by United Nations agencies and
peacekeeping operations to implement a zero-tolerance policy in this regard, and requests the Secretary-General or
the Member States from which those humanitarian workers originate and personnel-contributing countries to
continue to take all appropriate action necessary to combat these abuses by such personnel, including through the
full implementation without delay of those measures adopted in the relevant General Assembly resolutions based on
recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;175
27. Calls upon Member States to devise, enforce and strengthen effective child- and youth-sensitive
measures to combat, eliminate and prosecute all forms of trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual and
economic exploitation, as part of a comprehensive anti-trafficking strategy within wider efforts to eliminate all

_______________
175

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1).

653

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

forms of violence against women and girls, including by taking effective measures against the criminalization of
girls who are victims of exploitation and ensuring that girls who have been exploited receive access to the necessary
psychosocial support, and in this regard urges Member States, the United Nations and other international, regional
and subregional organizations, as well as civil society, including non-governmental organizations, the private sector
and the media, to fully and effectively implement the relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons176 and the activities outlined therein, with full respect for the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;177
28. Reaffirms that everyone has a right to a nationality as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,178 and in this regard calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider adopting and implementing
nationality legislation consistent with their applicable obligations under international law and to facilitate the
acquisition of nationality by and ensure free or low-cost birth registration for children born on their territories or
their nationals abroad who would otherwise be stateless;
29. Calls upon Governments, civil society, including the media, and non-governmental organizations to
promote human rights education and full respect for and the enjoyment of the human rights of the girl child, inter
alia, through the translation, production and dissemination of age-appropriate and gender-sensitive information
material on those rights to all sectors of society, in particular to children;
30. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to ensure that all organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, individually and collectively,
in particular the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the World Health Organization, the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Labour Organization, take into account the rights and the
particular needs of the girl child in country programmes of cooperation in accordance with national priorities,
including through the United Nations Development Assistance Framework;
31. Requests all human rights treaty bodies and the human rights mechanisms of the Human Rights Council,
including the special procedures, to adopt regularly and systematically a gender perspective in the implementation
of their mandates and to include in their reports information on the qualitative analysis of violations of the human
rights of women and girls, and encourages the strengthening of cooperation and coordination in that regard;
32. Requests States to ensure that, in all policies and programmes designed to provide comprehensive HIV
and AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support, particular attention and support are given to the girl child at risk,
living with or affected by HIV, including pregnant girls and young and adolescent mothers and girls with
disabilities, and child heads of households, with a view to achieving Sustainable Development Goal 3, in particular
the target of ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030;
33. Invites States to promote initiatives aimed at reducing the prices of antiretroviral drugs, especially
second-line drugs, available to the girl child, including bilateral and private sector initiatives as well as initiatives on
a voluntary basis taken by groups of States, including those based on innovative financing mechanisms that
contribute to the mobilization of resources for social development, including those that aim to provide further access
to drugs at affordable prices to developing countries on a sustainable and predictable basis, and in this regard takes
note of the International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID;
34. Calls upon all States to integrate food and nutritional support with the goal that children, especially girl
children, have access at all times to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food
requirements for an active and healthy life;
_______________
176

Resolution 64/293.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
178
Resolution 217 A (III).
177

654

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

35. Calls upon States to ensure that social protection programmes, including HIV-sensitive programmes, are
provided to orphans and other vulnerable children, with particular attention to addressing the needs and
vulnerabilities of girl children, ensuring school attendance and protecting their rights;
36. Urges States and the international community to increase resources at all levels, particularly in the
education and health sectors, so as to enable young people, especially girls, to gain the knowledge, attitudes and life
skills that they need to fulfil their social, economic and other potential and overcome their challenges, including the
prevention of HIV infection and early pregnancy, and to enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health, including sexual and reproductive health;
37. Urges States, the international community, relevant United Nations entities, civil society and
international financial institutions to continue to actively support, through the allocation of financial resources and
technical assistance, efforts to address the situation of child-headed households;
38. Strongly calls upon States and the international community to create an environment in which the wellbeing of the girl child is ensured, inter alia, by cooperating, supporting and participating in global efforts towards the
full and timely realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development160 and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development161 and of all other relevant internationally
agreed development goals, in particular for the eradication of poverty at the global, regional and country levels,
recognizing that strengthened availability and effective allocation of resources are required at all levels in this
regard, and reaffirming that investment in children, particularly girls, and the realization of their rights are among the
most effective ways to eradicate poverty;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session
on the implementation of the present resolution, including a status analysis on improvements in the social, economic
and political investments made by Member States towards fulfilling the right to education for the girl child, using
information provided by Member States, the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and nongovernmental organizations, with a view to assessing the impact of the present resolution on the well-being of the
girl child;
40. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in that report information on the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 68/146 relating to the priority theme of child-headed households and a status update on the
situation and prevalence of child-headed households globally.
RESOLUTION 70/139
A/RE S/70 /139

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/487,
para. 18),179 by a recorded vote of 133 to 4, with 49 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,

_______________
179

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, China, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Serbia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.

655

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Palau, Ukraine, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland

70/139. Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,180 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,181 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination182 and other relevant human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16 of 16 April 2004183 and
2005/5 of 14 April 2005184 and relevant Human Rights Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of
28 March 2008,185 18/15 of 29 September 2011186 and 21/33 of 28 September 2012,187 as well as its resolutions
60/143 of 16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006, 62/142 of 18 December 2007, 63/162 of 18 December
2008, 64/147 of 18 December 2009, 65/199 of 21 December 2010, 66/143 of 19 December 2011, 67/154 of
20 December 2012, 68/150 of 18 December 2013 and 69/160 of 18 December 2014 on this issue, resolutions
61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220 of 22 December 2007, 63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of 18 December
2009, 65/240 of 24 December 2010, 66/144 of 19 December 2011, 67/155 of 20 December 2012 and 68/151 of
18 December 2013, and its resolution 69/162 of 18 December 2014, entitled “A global call for concrete action for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”,
Acknowledging other important initiatives of the General Assembly aimed at raising awareness about the
suffering of victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including in the historical
perspective, in particular regarding commemoration of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade,
Mindful of the seventieth anniversary of the establishment of the Nuremberg Tribunal, and recalling in this
regard the Charter of the Tribunal and the Judgement of the Tribunal, which recognized as criminal, inter alia, the
SS organization and all its integral parts, including the Waffen SS, through its officially accepted members
implicated in or with knowledge of the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity connected with the
Second World War, as well as other relevant provisions of the Charter and the Judgement,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001,188 in
particular paragraph 2 of the Declaration and paragraph 86 of the Programme of Action, as well as the relevant
provisions of the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference of 24 April 2009,189 in particular
paragraphs 11 and 54,
_______________
180

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
182
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
183
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
184
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
185
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
186
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
187
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
188
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
189
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
181

656

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Alarmed, in this regard, at the spread in many parts of the world of various extremist political parties,
movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, as well as racist extremist movements and
ideologies,
Deeply concerned by all recent manifestations of violence and terrorism incited by violent nationalism,
racism, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Recognizing with deep concern the alarming increase in instances of discrimination, intolerance and extremist
violence motivated by anti-Semitism, Islamophobia and Christianophobia and prejudices against persons of other
religions and beliefs,
Recalling that in 2015 the international community celebrated the seventieth anniversary of victory over
Nazism in the Second World War, and welcoming in this regard the special solemn meeting held on 5 May 2015
during the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
Stressing that this historic event contributed to establishing the conditions for the creation of the United
Nations, designed to prevent future wars and save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
1. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration188 and of the outcome document of the
Durban Review Conference,189 in which States condemned the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neoFascism and violent nationalist ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena
could never be justified in any instance or under any circumstances;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared in accordance
with the request contained in its resolution 69/160;190
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and his Office
for their efforts to fight racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including the maintenance
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of a database on practical means to
combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
4. Expresses deep concern about the glorification, in any form, of the Nazi movement, neo-Nazism and
former members of the Waffen SS organization, including by erecting monuments and memorials and holding
public demonstrations in the name of the glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo-Nazism, as well
as by declaring or attempting to declare such members and those who fought against the anti-Hitler coalition and
collaborated with the Nazi movement participants in national liberation movements;
5. Calls for the universal ratification and effective implementation of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,182 and encourages those States parties that have not yet done so
to consider making the declaration under its article 14, thus providing the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination with the competence to receive and consider communications from individuals or groups of
individuals within their jurisdiction claiming to be victims of a violation by a State party of any of the rights set forth
in the Convention;
6. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that “any commemorative celebration of the
Nazi regime, its allies and related organizations, whether official or unofficial, should be prohibited by States”,191
also emphasizes that such manifestations do injustice to the memory of the countless victims of the Second World
War and negatively influence children and young people, and stresses in this regard that it is important that States
take measures, in accordance with international human rights law, to counteract any celebration of the Nazi SS
organization and all its integral parts, including the Waffen SS;
7. Expresses concern about recurring attempts to desecrate or demolish monuments erected in
remembrance of those who fought against Nazism during the Second World War, as well as to unlawfully exhume
_______________
190
191

A/70/321.
Ibid., para. 73.

657

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

or remove the remains of such persons, and in this regard urges States to fully comply with their relevant
obligations, inter alia, under article 34 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949;192
8. Notes with concern the increase in the number of racist incidents worldwide, including the rise of
skinhead groups, which have been responsible for many of these incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and
xenophobic violence targeting, inter alia, persons belonging to national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities,
including arson attacks on houses and vandalization of schools and places of worship;
9. Reaffirms that such acts may be qualified as falling within the scope of the Convention, that they may
not be justified when they fall outside the scope of the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association as
well as the rights to freedom of expression and that they may fall within the scope of article 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights181 and may be subject to certain restrictions, as set out in articles 19, 21
and 22 of the Covenant;
10. Condemns without reservation any denial of or attempt to deny the Holocaust;
11. Welcomes the call of the Special Rapporteur for the active preservation of those Holocaust sites that
served as Nazi death camps, concentration and forced labour camps and prisons, as well as his encouragement to
States to take measures, including legislative, law enforcement and educational measures, to put an end to all forms
of Holocaust denial;193
12. Calls upon States to continue to take adequate steps, including through national legislation, in
accordance with international human rights law, aimed at the prevention of hate speech and incitement to violence
against persons belonging to vulnerable groups;
13. Expresses deep concern about attempts at commercial advertising aimed at exploiting the sufferings of
the victims of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the Second World War by the Nazi
regime;
14. Stresses that the practices described above do injustice to the memory of the countless victims of crimes
against humanity committed in the Second World War, in particular those committed by the SS organization and by
those who fought against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement, and may negatively
influence children and young people, and that failure by States to effectively address such practices is incompatible
with the obligations of States Members of the United Nations under its Charter, including those related to the
purposes and principles of the Organization;
15. Also stresses that such practices fuel contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance and contribute to the spread and multiplication of various extremist political parties,
movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for increased vigilance;
16. Expresses concern that the human rights and democratic challenges posed by extremist political parties,
movements and groups are universal and no country is immune to them;
17. Emphasizes the need to take the measures necessary to put an end to the practices described above, and
calls upon States to take more effective measures in accordance with international human rights law to combat those
phenomena and extremist movements, which pose a real threat to democratic values;
18. Encourages States to adopt further measures to provide training for the police and other law
enforcement bodies on the ideologies of extremist political parties, movements and groups whose advocacy
constitutes incitement to racist and xenophobic violence, to strengthen their capacity to address racist and
xenophobic crimes, to fulfil their responsibility for bringing to justice the perpetrators of such crimes and to combat
impunity;
19. Expresses deep concern about the increased number of seats occupied by representatives of extremist
parties of a racist or xenophobic character in a number of national and local parliaments, and emphasizes in this
regard the need for all democratic political parties to base their programmes and activities on respect for human
_______________
192
193

658

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.
A/69/334, para. 76.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

rights and freedoms, democracy, the rule of law and good governance and to condemn all messages disseminating
ideas that are based on racial superiority or hatred and that have the objective of fuelling contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
20. Expresses concern that ethnic profiling and police violence against vulnerable groups discourage victims
from seeking redress owing to their distrust of the legal system, and in this regard encourages States to improve
diversity within law enforcement agencies and to impose appropriate sanctions against those within the public
service found guilty of racially motivated violence or of using hate speech;
21. Expresses deep concern about the increase in reported cases of racist manifestations during sports
events, including those committed by extremist groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and calls upon
States, sports federations and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen measures to prevent such incidents, while
also welcoming the steps that many States, sports federations and clubs have taken to eliminate racism at sporting
events;
22. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to introduce into national criminal law a
provision according to which committing an offence with racist or xenophobic motivations or aims constitutes an
aggravating circumstance, allowing for enhanced penalties,194 and encourages those States whose legislation does
not contain such provisions to consider that recommendation;
23. Underlines that the roots of extremism are multifaceted and must be addressed through adequate
measures such as education, awareness-raising and the promotion of dialogue, and in this regard recommends the
increase of measures to raise awareness among young people of the dangers of the ideologies and activities of
extremist political parties, movements and groups;
24. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of education, including human rights
education, as a complement to legislative measures, and calls upon States to continue to invest in education, in both
conventional and non-conventional curricula, inter alia, in order to transform attitudes and counteract ideas of racial
hierarchies and superiority, and counter their negative influence, and to promote the values of non-discrimination,
equality and respect for all, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;
25. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur presented at the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly, in which he emphasized the importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and
human suffering which arose out of the adoption of ideologies such as Nazism and Fascism;195
26. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed at bringing communities
together and providing them with space for genuine dialogue, such as round tables, working groups and seminars,
including training seminars for State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising activities,
especially those initiated by civil society representatives, which require continued State support;
27. Underlines the positive role that relevant United Nations entities and programmes, in particular the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
28. Reaffirms article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties condemn all propaganda and all
organizations which are based on ideas or theories of superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or
ethnic origin, or which attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and undertake to
adopt immediate and positive measures designed to eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and,
to this end, with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights180 and the
rights expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention, inter alia:
(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or
hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any
race or group of persons of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist
activities, including the financing thereof;
_______________
194
195

Ibid., para. 81.
A/64/295, para. 104.

659

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and also organized and all other propaganda activities,
which promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall recognize participation in such organizations or activities
as an offence punishable by law;
(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local, to promote or incite racial
discrimination;
29. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome document of the Durban Review
Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination,
hostility or violence should be prohibited by law, that all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred,
or incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts, shall be declared
offences punishable by law, in accordance with the international obligations of States, and that these prohibitions are
consistent with freedom of opinion and expression;
30. Recognizes the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, as well
as full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information, including through the Internet, can play in
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
31. Expresses concern about the increased use of the Internet to promote and disseminate racism, racial
hatred, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related intolerance, and in this regard calls upon States parties to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to counter the dissemination of the above-mentioned ideas
while respecting their obligations under articles 19 and 20 of the Covenant, which guarantee the right to freedom of
expression and outline the grounds on which the exercise of this right can be legitimately restricted;
32. Recognizes the need to promote the use of new information and communications technologies, including
the Internet, to contribute to the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
33. Also recognizes the positive role that the media can play in combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, promoting a culture of tolerance and representing the diversity of a multicultural
society;
34. Encourages States, civil society and other relevant stakeholders to use all opportunities, including
those provided by the Internet and social media, to counter, in accordance with international human rights law,
the dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred and to promote the values of equality,
non-discrimination, diversity and democracy;
35. Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the Convention to give serious
consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a matter of priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur;
36. Notes the importance of strengthening cooperation at the regional and international levels with the aim
of countering all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular
regarding issues raised in the present resolution;
37. Stresses the importance of cooperating closely with civil society and international and regional human
rights mechanisms in order to counter effectively all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, as well as extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead
groups, and other similar extremist ideological movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
38. Encourages States parties to the Convention to ensure that their legislation incorporates the provisions of
the Convention, including those of article 4;
39. Encourages States to adopt the legislation necessary to combat racism while ensuring that the definition
of racial discrimination set out therein complies with article 1 of the Convention;
40. Recalls that any legislative or constitutional measures adopted with a view to countering extremist
parties, movements and groups of a racist or xenophobic character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups and
similar extremist ideological movements, should be in conformity with the relevant international human rights
norms, in particular articles 4 and 5 of the Convention and articles 19 to 22 of the Covenant;
660

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

41. Also recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 2005/5,184 that the Special
Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue, make relevant recommendations in his future reports and seek and take
into account in this regard the views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
42. Encourages States to consider including in their reports for the universal periodic review and their
reports to relevant treaty bodies information on the steps taken to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, including with the aim of implementing the provisions of the present resolution;
43. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session and to the Human Rights Council at its thirty-second session, reports on the implementation of the present
resolution, in particular regarding paragraphs 4, 6, 7, 9, 13, 14, 25 and 26 above, based on the views collected in
accordance with the request of the Commission, as recalled in paragraph 41 above;
44. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and non-governmental organizations that have
provided information to the Special Rapporteur in the course of the preparation of his reports to the General
Assembly;
45. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences and best practices in the fight
against extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other
extremist ideological movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
46. Encourages Governments and non-governmental organizations to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the exercise of the tasks outlined in paragraph 43 above;
47. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant actors to disseminate, as
widely as possible, information regarding the contents of and the principles outlined in the present resolution,
including through the media, but not limited to it;
48. Decides to remain seized of the issue.
RESOLUTION 70/140
A/RE S/70 /140

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/487,
para. 18),196 by a recorded vote of 133 to 11, with 44 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Israel, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine

_______________
196

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: South Africa (on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Russian Federation.

661

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

70/140. A global call for concrete action for the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the effective implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference,197 and in this regard underlining
the imperative need for their full and effective implementation,
Stressing that the outcome of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance has the same status as the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences, summits and
special sessions in the human rights and social fields, and that the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
remains a solid basis and the only instructive outcome of the World Conference, which prescribes comprehensive
measures for combating all the scourges of racism and adequate remedies for victims,
Recalling the three Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination previously declared by
the General Assembly, and regretting that the Programmes of Action for those Decades were not fully implemented
and that their objectives have yet to be attained,
Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and have the potential to
contribute constructively to the development and well-being of their societies, and that any doctrine of racial
superiority is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must be rejected, together
with theories that attempt to determine the existence of separate human races,
Underlining the intensity, magnitude and organized nature of slavery and the slave trade, including the
transatlantic slave trade, and the associated historical injustices, as well as the untold suffering caused by colonialism
and apartheid, and that Africans and people of African descent, Asians and people of Asian descent and indigenous
peoples continue to be victims of the cascading effects of those legacies,
Acknowledging the efforts and initiatives undertaken by States to prohibit racial discrimination and racial
segregation and to engender the full enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, as well as civil and political
rights,
Emphasizing that, despite efforts in this regard, millions of human beings continue to be victims of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their contemporary forms and manifestations,
some of which manifest in violent forms,
Welcoming the efforts made by civil society in support of the follow-up mechanisms in the implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
Recalling the appointment of the five independent eminent experts by the Secretary-General on 16 June 2003,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 56/266 of 27 March 2002, with the mandate to follow up on the
implementation of the provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to make appropriate
recommendations thereon, and in this regard underlining the role played and still to be played by those independent
eminent experts in mobilizing global political will for concrete action for the total elimination of all the scourges of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Underlining the primacy of the political will, international cooperation and adequate funding at the national,
regional and international levels needed to address all forms and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance for the successful implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action,
Recalling its resolution 2142 (XXI) of 26 October 1966, in which it proclaimed 21 March as the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
_______________
197

662

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also its resolution 62/122 of 17 December 2007, in which it designated 25 March as the annual
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade,
Recalling further the suffering of the victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, and the need to honour their memory,
Noting that 2016 will mark the fifteenth anniversary of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, and
looking forward to its commemoration,
Recognizing and affirming that the global fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and all their abhorrent and contemporary forms and manifestations is a matter of priority for the
international community,
I
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
1. Reaffirms the paramount importance of universal adherence to and the full and effective implementation
of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,198 adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965, in addressing the scourges of racism and racial
discrimination;
2. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider acceding to the Convention, and States parties to
make the declaration under article 14 of the Convention as a matter of urgency;
3. Underlines, in the above context, that the provisions of the Convention do not respond effectively to
contemporary manifestations of racial discrimination, in particular in relation to xenophobia and related intolerance,
which is recognized as the rationale behind the convening of the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in 2001;
4. Takes note of the acknowledgement by the Human Rights Council and its subsidiary structures of the
existence of both procedural and substantive gaps in the aforementioned Convention, which must be filled as a
matter of urgency, necessity and priority;
5. Invites the Human Rights Council, in conjunction with its Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of
Complementary Standards to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, in the execution of its mandate, to continue to elaborate complementary standards in order to fill
existing gaps in the Convention, in the form of new normative standards aimed at combating all forms of
contemporary and resurgent racism, and in this regard, areas such as xenophobia, Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and
incitement to national or ethnic and religious hatred that have been identified as constituting substantive gaps;
II
International Decade for People of African Descent
6. Welcomes the proclamation of the International Decade for People of African Descent, as contained in
its resolution 68/237 of 23 December 2013, and the celebratory launch of the Decade on 10 December 2014;
7. Also welcomes the adoption of the programme of activities for the implementation of the International
Decade for People of African Descent;199
8. Requests the Human Rights Council, through the Chair of the Working Group of Experts on People of
African Descent, to submit a report on the work of the Working Group to the General Assembly, and in this regard
_______________
198
199

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
Resolution 69/16, annex.

663

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

invites the Chair of the Working Group to engage in an interactive dialogue with the Assembly under the item
entitled “Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance” at its seventy-first
session;
III
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
9. Welcomes the positive response by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to the requests made by the Human Rights Council, in its resolution 6/22 of 28 September 2007,200 and by
the General Assembly, in its resolution 68/151 of 18 December 2013, to realign the work and the name of the
former Anti-Discrimination Unit in the Office of the High Commissioner, and also welcomes its renaming as the
Anti-Racial Discrimination Section and the realignment of its operational activities to focus exclusively on racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as defined in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Durban
Declaration;197
10. Also welcomes the inclusion of the historic and landmark World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance of 2001 among the 20 major achievements of the Office of the
High Commissioner since the adoption of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action in 1993;201
11. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the High Commissioner to provide the resources
necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandates of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the Working Group of Experts on People of
African Descent, the group of independent eminent experts on the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action and the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of Complementary Standards;
IV
Group of independent eminent experts on the implementation
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
12. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General, pursuant to its resolution 68/151, to revitalize and
reactivate the operational activities of the group of independent eminent experts;
13. Reiterates its invitation to the Human Rights Council, pursuant to paragraph 16 of General Assembly
resolution 68/151, to ensure the visibility, effective participation and optimal utilization of the vast knowledge and
experience of the group of independent eminent experts within its subsidiary structures, charged with the mandate of
and responsibility for the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the effective implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action197, and in this regard requests the Council to submit a progress report to the Assembly at its seventy-first
session;
V
Trust Fund for the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
14. Recalls the establishment by the Secretary-General, in 1973, of the Trust Fund for the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination as a funding mechanism that has been utilized
for the implementation of the activities of the three Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination declared by the General Assembly, and in this regard appreciates the fact that the Trust Fund has also
been utilized for the subsequent programmes and operational activities transcending the three Decades;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, a section outlining the progress in the implementation of
_______________
200
201

664

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I, sect. A.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

paragraph 18 of its resolution 68/151 regarding the revitalization of the Trust Fund for the purpose of ensuring the
successful implementation of the activities of the International Decade for People of African Descent and enhancing
the effectiveness of the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the effective implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action;
16. Strongly appeals to all Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
individuals as well as other donors in a position to do so to contribute generously to the Trust Fund, and to that end
requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake appropriate contacts and initiatives to encourage
contributions;
VI
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance
17. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,202 and encourages the Special Rapporteur,
within his mandate, to continue to focus on the issues of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and incitement to hatred, which impede peaceful coexistence and harmony within societies, and to
submit reports in this regard to the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly;
18. Reiterates the invitation to the Special Rapporteur to consider examining national models of
mechanisms that measure racial equality and their added value in the eradication of racial discrimination and to
report on such challenges, successes and best practices in his next report;
VII
Follow-up and implementation activities
19. Reiterates its request to the Human Rights Council to develop and adopt a multi-year programme of
activities to provide for the renewed and strengthened outreach activities needed to inform and mobilize the global
public in support of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to strengthen awareness of the
contribution that they have made in the struggle against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, including the progress made on the commemoration of the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, including through the
Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action;
21. Requests the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Human Rights Council to
continue convening annual commemorative meetings of the Assembly and the Council during the commemoration
of the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, with the appropriate focus and themes, and to
hold a debate on the state of racial discrimination worldwide, with the participation of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and in this context encourages the participation of eminent
personalities active in the struggle against racial discrimination, Member States and civil society organizations in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the Assembly and the Council;
22. Decides to remain seized of this priority matter at its seventy-first session under the item entitled
“Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”.
_______________
202

A/70/321.

665

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/141
A/RE S/70 /141

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/488,
para. 22),203 by a recorded vote of 177 to 7, with 4 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Honduras, South Sudan, Tonga

70/141. The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Aware that the development of friendly relations among nations, based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, is among the purposes and principles of the United Nations, as defined in
the Charter,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, entitled “Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations”,
Bearing in mind the International Covenants on Human Rights,204 the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,205 the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples206 and the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted at the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,207
Recalling the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations,208

_______________
203

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Angola, Armenia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Chile, China, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation),
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius, Monaco,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia,
Zimbabwe and State of Palestine.
204
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
205
Resolution 217 A (III).
206
Resolution 1514 (XV).
207
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
208
Resolution 50/6.

666

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration,209
Recalling further the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,210 and noting in particular the
reply of the Court, including on the right of peoples to self-determination, which is a right erga omnes,211
Recalling the conclusion of the Court, in its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004, that the construction of the wall
by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, along with
measures previously taken, severely impedes the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,212
Stressing the urgency of achieving without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace settlement between the Palestinian and Israeli sides, based on the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative213 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,214
Stressing also the need for respect for and preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and recalling in this regard its resolution 58/292 of
6 May 2004,
Recalling its resolution 69/165 of 18 December 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Affirming the right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and internationally recognized
borders,
1. Reaffirms the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including the right to their
independent State of Palestine;
2. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system to continue
to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their right to self-determination.
RESOLUTION 70/142
A/RE S/70 /142

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/488,
para. 22),215 by a recorded vote of 130 to 53, with 6 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,

_______________
209

Resolution 55/2.
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
211
Ibid., advisory opinion, para. 88.
212
Ibid., para. 122.
213
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
214
S/2003/529, annex.
215
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Belarus,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, India, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Peru, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Zimbabwe.
210

667

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Colombia, Kenya, Liberia, Mexico, Switzerland, Tonga

70/142. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution 69/163 of 18 December 2014, and
Human Rights Council resolutions 15/12 of 30 September 2010,216 15/26 of 1 October 2010,217 18/4 of
29 September 2011,218 21/8 of 27 September 2012,219 24/13 of 26 September 2013,220 27/10 of 25 September
2014221 and 30/6 of 1 October 2015,222 as well as all resolutions adopted by the Commission on Human Rights in
this regard,
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it condemned any State that permitted or
tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly, transit or use of mercenaries with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries,
or of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the relevant resolutions and international
instruments adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
Organization of African Unity, inter alia, the Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination of
mercenarism in Africa,223 as well as by the African Union,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations concerning the strict
observance of the principles of sovereign equality, political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the selfdetermination of peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international relations and noninterference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all peoples have the right freely to
determine their political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development and that every State
has the duty to respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,224
Welcoming the establishment of the open-ended intergovernmental working group of the Human Rights
Council with the mandate of considering the possibility of elaborating an international regulatory framework,
including the option of elaborating a legally binding instrument on the regulation, monitoring and oversight of the
activities of private military and security companies,
Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries constitute to peace and security in
developing countries in various parts of the world, in particular in areas of conflict,
_______________
216

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II.
Ibid., chap. I.
218
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
219
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
220
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
221
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
222
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), chap. III.
223
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.
224
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
217

668

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the negative effects on the policies
and economies of affected countries resulting from international criminal mercenary activities,
Extremely alarmed and concerned about recent mercenary activities in some developing countries in various
parts of the world, including in areas of armed conflict, and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the
constitutional order of the affected countries,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which mercenaries or mercenary-related activities are used or the
form that they take to acquire some semblance of legitimacy, they are a threat to peace, security and the selfdetermination of peoples and an obstacle to the enjoyment of all human rights by peoples,
1. Acknowledges with appreciation the work and contributions of the Working Group of the Human Rights
Council on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination, including its research activities, and takes note with appreciation of its latest report;225
2. Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing, protection and training are causes
for grave concern to all States and that they violate the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations;
3. Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert operations by third Powers
encourage, inter alia, the demand for mercenaries on the global market;
4. Urges once again all States to take the steps necessary and to exercise the utmost vigilance against the
menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to take legislative measures to ensure that their territories and
other territories under their control are not used for, and that their nationals do not take part in, the recruitment,
assembly, financing, training, protection or transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities designed to impede
the right of peoples to self-determination, to destabilize or overthrow the Government of any State or to dismember
or impair, totally or in part, the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States conducting
themselves in accordance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
5. Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of recruitment, training, hiring or
financing of mercenaries by private companies offering international military consultancy and security services, and
to impose a specific ban on such companies intervening in armed conflicts or actions to destabilize constitutional
regimes;
6. Encourages States that import military assistance or consultancy and security services provided by
private companies to establish national regulatory mechanisms for registering and licensing those companies in
order to ensure that the imported services provided by those private companies neither impede the enjoyment of
human rights nor violate human rights in the recipient country;
7. Emphasizes its utmost concern about the impact of the activities of private military and security
companies on the enjoyment of human rights, in particular when operating in armed conflicts, and notes that private
military and security companies and their personnel are rarely held accountable for violations of human rights;
8. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider taking the action necessary to accede to or
ratify the International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries;226
9. Welcomes the cooperation extended by those countries that received a visit by the Working Group on the
use of mercenaries and the adoption by some States of national legislation that restricts the recruitment, assembly,
financing, training and transit of mercenaries;
10. Condemns recent mercenary activities in developing countries in various parts of the world, in particular
in areas of conflict, and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of those
countries and the exercise of the right of their peoples to self-determination, and stresses the importance for the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries of looking into sources and root causes, as well as the political
motivations of mercenaries and for mercenary-related activities;
_______________
225
226

A/70/330.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789.

669

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

11. Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement whenever and wherever
criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if
so requested, in accordance with national law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
12. Condemns any form of impunity granted to perpetrators of mercenary activities and to those responsible
for the use, recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries, and urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law, to bring them, without distinction, to justice;
13. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with their obligations under international law, to cooperate
with and assist the judicial prosecution of those accused of mercenary activities in transparent, open and fair trials;
14. Acknowledges with appreciation the work and contributions made by the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries, including its research activities, and takes note of its latest report;227
15. Recalls the holding of the fourth session of the open-ended intergovernmental working group to
consider the possibility of elaborating an international regulatory framework on the regulation, monitoring and
oversight of the activities of private military and security companies, expresses satisfaction at the participation of
experts, including the members of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries, as resource persons at the abovementioned session, and requests the Working Group and other experts to continue their participation during the fifth
session of the open-ended intergovernmental working group;
16. Welcomes the holding of the panel on the phenomenon of foreign fighters in New York on 23 July 2015,
and recognizes the efforts of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries in its organization;
17. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to continue the work already done by the Special
Rapporteurs on the use of mercenaries of the Commission on Human Rights with respect to the strengthening of the
international legal framework for the prevention and sanction of the recruitment, use, financing and training of
mercenaries, taking into account the proposal for a new legal definition of a mercenary drafted by the Special
Rapporteur in his report to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixtieth session;228
18. Also requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to continue to study and identify sources and
causes, emerging issues, manifestations and trends regarding mercenaries or mercenary-related activities and their
impact on human rights, particularly on the right of peoples to self-determination;
19. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as a matter of priority,
to publicize the adverse effects of the activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples to self-determination and,
when requested and where necessary, to render advisory services to States that are affected by those activities;
20. Recommends that all Member States, including those confronted with the phenomenon of private
military and security companies, as contracting States, States of operations, home States or States whose nationals
are employed to work for a private military and security company, contribute to the work of the open-ended
intergovernmental working group, taking into account the initial work done by the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries;
21. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Working Group on the use of mercenaries in the fulfilment of
its mandate;
22. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to provide the Working Group on the use of mercenaries with all the assistance and support necessary for
the fulfilment of its mandate, both professional and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation
between the Working Group and other components of the United Nations system that deal with countering
mercenary-related activities, in order to meet the demands of its current and future activities;
23. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to consult States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations on the implementation of the present resolution and to report, with specific
recommendations, to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session its findings on the use of mercenaries to
undermine the enjoyment of all human rights and to impede the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination;
_______________
227
228

670

A/HRC/30/34 and Add.1.
See E/CN.4/2004/15, para. 47.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

24. Decides to consider at its seventy-first session the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of
violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled
“Right of peoples to self-determination”.
RESOLUTION 70/143
A/RE S/70 /143

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/488, para. 22)229

70/143. Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights, of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied
in the International Covenants on Human Rights,230 as well as in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial, foreign or
alien occupation and their emergence into sovereign statehood and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of foreign military intervention and occupation that are
threatening to suppress, or have already suppressed, the right to self-determination of peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the persistence of such actions, millions of people have
been or are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need
for concerted international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation of the right of peoples to self-determination and other
human rights as a result of foreign military intervention, aggression and occupation adopted by the Commission on
Human Rights at its sixty-first231 and previous sessions,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination,
including resolution 69/164 of 18 December 2014,
Reaffirming also its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, containing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, and recalling its resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005, containing the 2005 World Summit Outcome,
which, inter alia, upheld the right to self-determination of peoples under colonial domination and foreign
occupation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the right of peoples to self-determination,232
1. Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right of all peoples, including those under colonial, foreign
and alien domination, to self-determination is a fundamental condition for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights and for the preservation and promotion of such rights;

_______________
229

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Paraguay, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
230
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
231
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2),
chap. II, sect. A.
232
A/70/314.

671

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign military intervention, aggression and occupation, since
these have resulted in the suppression of the right of peoples to self-determination and other human rights in certain
parts of the world;
3. Calls upon those States responsible to cease immediately their military intervention in and occupation of
foreign countries and territories and all acts of repression, discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment, in
particular the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed in the execution of those acts against the peoples
concerned;
4. Deplores the plight of millions of refugees and displaced persons who have been uprooted as a result of
the aforementioned acts, and reaffirms their right to return to their homes voluntarily in safety and with honour;
5. Requests the Human Rights Council to continue to give special attention to violations of human rights,
especially the right to self-determination, resulting from foreign military intervention, aggression or occupation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this question to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session under the item entitled “Right of peoples to self-determination”.
RESOLUTION 70/144
A/RE S/70 /144

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.1, para. 22)233

70/144. International Covenants on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/155 of 18 December 2013,
Welcoming the forthcoming fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights234 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,234
1. Welcomes the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee submitted to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth235 and seventieth236 sessions;
2. Also welcomes the reports of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on its fiftieth and
fifty-first sessions237 and on its fifty-second and fifty-third sessions;238
3. Decides to devote one plenary meeting of the General Assembly, within existing resources, at its
seventy-first session, to the commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights234 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,234 and
requests the President of the General Assembly to conduct consultations with Member States in order to determine
the modalities for that meeting;

_______________
233

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
234
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
235
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/69/40), vols. I and II.
236
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/70/40).
237
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2014, Supplement No. 2 (E/2014/22).
238
Ibid., 2015, Supplement No. 2 (E/2015/22).

672

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Invites the Chairs of the two Committees, within existing resources, to address and engage in an
interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its seventy-first and seventy-second sessions under the item
entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed of the status of the International
Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional Protocols thereto,239 including with regard to all reservations and
declarations made, through the United Nations websites.
RESOLUTION 70/145
A/RE S/70 /145

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.1, para. 22)240

70/145. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was resolution 67/160 of 20 December
2012, as well as relevant resolutions of the Human Rights Council, the Commission for Social Development and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolution 68/268 of 9 April 2014 on strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system,
Recalling further the universality, indivisibility, interdependence and interrelatedness of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the need for persons with disabilities to be guaranteed the full enjoyment of their rights
and freedoms without discrimination,
Welcoming the fact that, since the opening for signature of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities241 and the Optional Protocol thereto242 on 30 March 2007, 160 States have signed and 160 States
and 1 regional integration organization have ratified or acceded to the Convention and 92 States have signed and 88
States have ratified the Optional Protocol,
Bearing in mind the upcoming tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention, to be commemorated in
December 2016,
Welcoming the appointment of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities by the Human
Rights Council and her report to the General Assembly on the right of persons with disabilities to social
protection,243
Noting with appreciation the work and activities that have been and continue to be undertaken in support of
the Convention, including through, inter alia, the Conference of States Parties to the Convention, the report of the
_______________
239

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, resolution 44/128, annex, and resolution 63/117, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and Zimbabwe.
241
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
242
Ibid., vol. 2518, No. 44910.
243
A/70/297.
240

673

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Secretary-General,244 the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Special Rapporteur, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Disability and Accessibility and the Inter-Agency Support Group on the
Convention,
Acknowledging the contribution of recent international meetings and their outcome documents, including,
inter alia, the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development Goals
and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities: the way forward, a disabilityinclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond, held on 23 September 2013,245 the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held on 22 and
23 September 2014,246 the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Sendai,
Japan, from 14 to 18 March 2015,247 and the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda, held from 25 to 27 September 2015,248 towards the fulfilment and mainstreaming of the rights of persons
with disabilities,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development on 25 September 2015248 and its
inclusion of persons with disabilities,
Expressing concern that persons with disabilities, in particular women and girls, can face multiple and
intersecting forms of discrimination,
1. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities241 and the Optional Protocol thereto242 as a matter of priority;
2. Encourages States that have ratified the Convention and submitted one or more reservations to it to
review regularly the effect and continued relevance of such reservations and to consider the possibility of
withdrawing them;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to assist States to become parties to the Convention and
the Optional Protocol thereto, bearing in mind that the upcoming tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention offers an opportunity to create new momentum towards its universalization, including by providing
assistance with a view to achieving universal adherence;
4. Emphasizes the importance of mainstreaming disability issues as an integral part of relevant sustainable
development strategies, and encourages States to apply a human rights-based approach and to intensify their efforts
to advance the rights of persons with disabilities in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,248 consistent with their international obligations;
5. Notes that disability-specific indicators, which are sensitive to the measuring of existing inequality gaps
within different population groups, can improve the identification of existing social, economic and political
inequalities, and recalls that processes for the follow-up to and review of the 2030 Agenda at all levels will be, inter
alia, based on data that is of high-quality, accessible, timely, reliable and disaggregated by income, sex, age, race,
ethnicity, migration status, disability and geographic location and other characteristics that are relevant within
national contexts;
6. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, to continue to strengthen efforts undertaken to disseminate accessible and easy to
understand information on the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto, including to children and young
people to promote their understanding, and to assist States parties in implementing their obligations under those
instruments;
7. Invites the Chair of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Special Rapporteur
of the Human Rights Council on the rights of persons with disabilities to address and engage in interactive dialogues
_______________
244

A/69/284.
Resolution 68/3.
246
Resolution 69/2.
247
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
248
Resolution 70/1.
245

674

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

with the General Assembly annually, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”, as a way
to enhance communication between the Assembly and the Committee;
8. Invites the President of the General Assembly to convene a high-level panel meeting late in 2016 to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention, aimed at promoting its universalization;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the situation of women and girls with disabilities, in consultation with relevant United Nations agencies,
including, inter alia, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWomen), taking into account the views of relevant stakeholders and using existing available materials, and to
include a segment on the status of the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the Office of the High Commissioner has
adequate resources for the fulfilment of its tasks with respect to its work on the rights of persons with disabilities.
RESOLUTION 70/146
A/RE S/70 /146

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.1, para. 22)249

70/146. Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Reaffirming also that no one shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment,
Recalling that freedom from torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is a nonderogable right under international law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian
law, that must be respected and protected under all circumstances, including in times of international or internal
armed conflict or disturbance or any other public emergency, that the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is affirmed in relevant international instruments and that legal and
procedural safeguards against such acts must not be subject to measures that would circumvent this right,
Recalling also that the prohibition of torture is a peremptory norm of international law without territorial
limitation and that international, regional and domestic courts have recognized the prohibition of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment as customary international law,
Recalling further the definition of torture contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment250 and the obligation of States to abide strictly by the
definition of torture contained in article 1, without prejudice to any international instrument or national legislation
which contains or may contain provisions of wider application, and emphasizing the importance of properly
interpreting and implementing the obligations of States with respect to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,

_______________
249

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
250
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.

675

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing that States must protect the rights of those facing criminal sentences, including the death penalty
and life imprisonment without the possibility of parole, and of other affected persons in accordance with their
international obligations,
Noting that, under the Geneva Conventions of 1949,251 torture and inhuman treatment are a grave breach and
that, under the statute of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, the statute of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994 and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,252 acts of torture can
constitute crimes against humanity and, when committed in a situation of armed conflict, constitute war crimes,
Recognizing the importance of the implementation of the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance,253 which makes a significant contribution to the prevention and prohibition
of torture, including by prohibiting secret places of detention and by ensuring legal and procedural safeguards for
persons deprived of their liberty, and encouraging all States that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or
acceding to the Convention,
Commending the persistent efforts of civil society organizations, including non-governmental organizations,
national human rights institutions and national preventive mechanisms, and the considerable network of centres for
the rehabilitation of victims of torture, to prevent and combat torture and to alleviate the suffering of victims of
torture,
Deeply concerned about all acts which can amount to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment committed against persons exercising their rights of peaceful assembly and freedom of expression in
all regions of the world,
1. Condemns all forms of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including
through intimidation, which are and shall remain prohibited at any time and in any place whatsoever and can thus
never be justified, and calls upon all States to implement fully the absolute and non-derogable prohibition of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
2. Also condemns any action or attempt by States or public officials to legalize, authorize or acquiesce in
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment under any circumstances, including on
grounds of national security and counter-terrorism or through judicial decisions, and urges States to ensure the
accountability of those responsible for all such acts;
3. Stresses that States must neither punish personnel for not obeying orders to commit or conceal acts
amounting to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment nor allow pleas of respondeat
superior as a criminal defence in cases in which such orders were obeyed;
4. Emphasizes that acts of torture in armed conflict are serious violations of international humanitarian law
and in this regard constitute war crimes, that acts of torture can constitute crimes against humanity and that the
perpetrators of all acts of torture must be prosecuted and punished, and in this regard notes the efforts of the
International Criminal Court to end impunity by seeking to ensure accountability and punishment of perpetrators of
such acts, in accordance with the Rome Statute,252 bearing in mind its principle of complementarity, and encourages
States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Rome Statute;
5. Also emphasizes that States must take persistent, determined and effective measures to prevent and
combat all acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, stresses that all acts of
torture must be made offences under national criminal law punishable by appropriate penalties that take into account
their grave nature, and calls upon States to prohibit under national law acts constituting cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment;
_______________
251

Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
253
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
252

676

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Stresses that States must ensure that no statement that is established to have been made as a result of
torture is invoked as evidence in any proceedings, except against a person accused of torture as evidence that the
statement was made, urges States to extend that prohibition to statements made as a result of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, and recognizes that adequate corroboration of statements, including
confessions, used as evidence in any proceedings constitutes one safeguard for the prevention of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
7. Urges States not to expel, return (“refouler”), extradite or in any other way transfer a person to another
State where there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to
torture, stresses the importance of effective legal and procedural safeguards in this regard, and recognizes that
diplomatic assurances, where given, do not release States from their obligations under international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law, in particular the principle of non-refoulement;
8. Recalls that, for the purpose of determining whether there are such grounds, the competent authorities
shall take into account all relevant considerations, including, where applicable, the existence in the State concerned
of a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights;
9. Urges States to ensure that border control operations and reception centres fully comply with
international human rights obligations and commitments, including the prohibition of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
10. Calls upon all States to implement effective measures to prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, particularly in places of detention and other places where persons are deprived
of their liberty, including legal and procedural safeguards, as well as education and training of personnel who may
be involved in the custody, interrogation or treatment of any individual subjected to any form of arrest, detention or
imprisonment;
11. Recalls its resolution 43/173 of 9 December 1988 on the Body of Principles for the Protection of All
Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, and in this context stresses that ensuring that any individual
arrested or detained is promptly brought before a judge or other independent judicial officer in person, and
permitting prompt and regular medical care and legal counsel throughout all stages of detention, as well as visits by
family members and independent monitoring mechanisms, are effective measures for the prevention of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
12. Welcomes the adoption of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
(the Nelson Mandela Rules),254 and invites States to assess their national legislation and practices in accordance
with them;
13. Reminds all States that prolonged incommunicado detention or detention in secret places can facilitate
the perpetration of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and can in itself constitute
a form of such treatment, and urges all States to respect the safeguards concerning the liberty, security and dignity of
the person and to ensure that prolonged incommunicado detention and secret places of detention and interrogation
are abolished;
14. Emphasizes that conditions of detention must respect the dignity and human rights of persons deprived
of their liberty, highlights the importance of reflecting on this in efforts to promote respect for and protection of the
rights of persons deprived of their liberty, calls upon States to address and prevent detention conditions amounting to
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, notes in this regard concerns about solitary
confinement, and encourages States to take effective measures to address overcrowding in detention facilities, which
may have an impact on the dignity and human rights of persons deprived of their liberty;
15. Welcomes the establishment of national preventive mechanisms to prevent torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, urges States to consider establishing, appointing, maintaining or
enhancing independent and effective mechanisms that have experts with the required capabilities and professional
knowledge to undertake monitoring visits to places of detention, inter alia, with a view to preventing acts of torture
or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and calls upon States parties to the Optional Protocol
_______________
254

Resolution 70/175, annex.

677

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment255 to fulfil their
obligation to designate or establish national preventive mechanisms that are truly independent, properly resourced
and effective;
16. Calls upon all States to take appropriate effective legislative, administrative, judicial and other measures
to prevent and prohibit the production, trade, export, import and use of equipment that has no practical use other
than for the purpose of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
17. Urges States, as an important element in preventing and combating torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, to ensure that no authority or official orders, applies, permits or tolerates any
sanction, reprisal, intimidation or other prejudice against any person, group or association, including persons
deprived of their liberty, for contacting, seeking to contact or having been in contact with any national or
international monitoring or preventive body active in the prevention and combating of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
18. Also urges States to ensure accountability for any act of sanction, reprisal, intimidation or other form of
unlawful prejudicial conduct against any person, group or association, including persons deprived of their liberty, for
cooperating, seeking to cooperate or having cooperated with any national or international monitoring or preventive
body active in the prevention and combating of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, by ensuring impartial, prompt, independent and thorough investigations of any alleged act of sanction,
reprisal, intimidation or other form of unlawful prejudicial conduct; to bring the perpetrators to justice; to provide
access to effective remedies for victims, in accordance with their international human rights obligations and
commitments; and to prevent any recurrence;
19. Calls upon States parties to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment250 to fulfil their obligation to submit for prosecution or extradite those alleged to have
committed acts of torture, regardless of where such acts were committed, if the alleged offender is present in any
territory under their jurisdiction, and encourages other States also to do so, bearing in mind the need to fight
impunity;
20. Encourages States to consider establishing or maintaining appropriate national processes to record
allegations of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to ensure that such
information is accessible in accordance with applicable law;
21. Stresses that an independent, competent domestic authority must promptly, effectively and impartially
investigate all allegations of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, as well as
wherever there is reasonable ground to believe that such an act has been committed, and that those who encourage,
instigate, order, tolerate, acquiesce in, consent to or perpetrate such acts must be held responsible, brought to justice
and punished in a manner commensurate with the severity of the offence, including the officials in charge of any
place of detention or other place where persons are deprived of their liberty where the prohibited act is found to have
been committed;
22. Recalls, in this respect, the Principles on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the Istanbul Principles)256 as a valuable tool in
efforts to prevent and combat torture and the updated set of principles for the protection and promotion of human
rights through action to combat impunity;257
23. Emphasizes that States shall keep under systematic review interrogation rules, instructions, methods and
practices, as well as arrangements for the custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention
or imprisonment in any territory under their jurisdiction, with a view to preventing cases of torture;
24. Encourages all States to ensure that persons charged with torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment have no involvement in the custody, interrogation or treatment of any person under arrest,
detention, imprisonment or other deprivation of liberty while such charges are pending and, if such persons are
convicted, after the conviction;
_______________
255

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2375, No. 24841.
Resolution 55/89, annex.
257
E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1.
256

678

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

25. Calls upon all States to adopt a victim-oriented approach258 in the fight against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, paying special attention to the views and needs of victims in policy
development and other activities relating to rehabilitation, prevention and accountability for torture;
26. Also calls upon all States to adopt a gender-sensitive approach in the fight against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, paying special attention to gender-based violence;
27. Calls upon States to ensure that the rights of persons who are marginalized and most vulnerable,
including persons with disabilities, bearing in mind the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,259 are
fully integrated into torture prevention and protection, and welcomes the efforts of the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in this regard;
28. Stresses that national legal systems must ensure that victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment have effective access to justice and obtain redress without suffering any
retribution for bringing complaints or giving evidence;
29. Calls upon States to provide redress for victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, encompassing effective remedy and adequate, effective and prompt reparation, which should include
restitution, fair and adequate compensation, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition, taking into
full account the specific needs of the victim;
30. Urges States to ensure that appropriate rehabilitation services are promptly available to all victims
without discrimination of any kind and without limitation in time, until the fullest rehabilitation possible has been
achieved, and are provided either directly by the public health system or through the funding of private rehabilitation
facilities, including those administered by civil society organizations, and to consider making rehabilitation services
available to the immediate families or dependants of the victims and to persons who have suffered harm while
intervening to assist victims in distress or to prevent victimization;
31. Also urges States to establish, maintain, facilitate or support rehabilitation centres or facilities where
victims can receive such treatment and where effective measures for ensuring the safety of their staff and patients
are taken;
32. Urges all States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention against Torture and to
give early consideration to signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol thereto as a matter of priority;
33. Urges all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to make the declarations provided for
in articles 21 and 22 of the Convention concerning inter-State and individual communications, to consider the
possibility of withdrawing their reservations to article 20, to notify the Secretary-General of their acceptance of the
amendments to articles 17 and 18, with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the Committee against Torture as
soon as possible, and to comply strictly with their obligations under the Convention, including, in view of the high
number of reports not submitted in time, their obligation to submit reports in accordance with article 19 of the
Convention, and invites States parties to incorporate a gender perspective and information concerning persons who
are marginalized and most vulnerable, including children and juveniles and persons with disabilities, when
submitting reports to the Committee;
34. Welcomes the work and the reports of the Committee and of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, recommends that their reports continue to
include information on the follow-up by States parties to their recommendations, supports the Committee and the
Subcommittee in their efforts to further improve the effectiveness of their working methods, and invites the Chairs
of the Committee and the Subcommittee to present oral reports on the work of the committees and to engage in an
interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its seventy-first and seventy-second sessions under the sub-item
entitled “Implementation of human rights instruments” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human
rights”;

_______________
258
259

See A/HRC/16/52.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.

679

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

35. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in conformity with his mandate
established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, to continue to provide, at the
request of States, advisory services for the prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, including for the preparation of national reports to the Committee and for the establishment and
operation of national preventive mechanisms, as well as technical assistance for the development, production and
distribution of teaching materials for this purpose, and to provide the support necessary to enable the Subcommittee
to provide advice and assistance to States parties to the Optional Protocol;
36. Emphasizes the importance of States ensuring proper follow-up to the recommendations and
conclusions of the relevant treaty bodies and mechanisms, including the Committee, the Subcommittee, national
preventive mechanisms and the Special Rapporteur, while recognizing the important role of the universal periodic
review, national human rights institutions and other relevant national or regional bodies in preventing torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
37. Takes note with appreciation of the interim reports of the Special Rapporteur addressing the key role that
forensic science plays with regard to the obligation of States to effectively investigate and prosecute allegations of
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment260 and the extraterritorial application of the
prohibition of torture and other ill-treatment and attendant obligations under international law,261 encourages him to
continue to include in his recommendations proposals on the prevention and investigation of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including its gender-based manifestations, and requests him to
continue to consider including in his reports information on the follow-up by States to his recommendations, visits
and communications, including progress made and problems encountered, and on other official contacts;
38. Calls upon all States to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in the performance of his tasks,
to supply all necessary information requested by him, to fully and expeditiously respond to and follow up on his
urgent appeals, to give serious consideration to responding favourably to requests by him to visit their countries and
to enter into a constructive dialogue with him on requested visits to their countries as well as with respect to the
follow-up to his recommendations;
39. Stresses the need for the continued regular exchange of views among the Committee, the Subcommittee,
the Special Rapporteur and other relevant United Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as for the pursuit of
cooperation with relevant United Nations programmes, notably the United Nations crime prevention and criminal
justice programme, with regional organizations and mechanisms, as appropriate, and with civil society
organizations, including non-governmental organizations, with a view to enhancing further their effectiveness and
cooperation on issues relating to the prevention and eradication of torture by, inter alia, improving coordination;
40. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, within the overall budgetary framework of the United
Nations, the provision of adequate staff and facilities for the bodies and mechanisms involved in preventing and
combating torture and assisting victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including, in particular, the Committee, the Subcommittee and the Special Rapporteur, commensurate with the
strong support expressed by Member States for preventing and combating torture and assisting victims of torture, in
order to enable them to discharge their mandates in a comprehensive, sustained and effective manner, and taking
fully into account the specific nature of their mandates;
41. Recognizes the global need for international assistance to victims of torture, stresses the importance of
the work of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, appeals to all States
and organizations to contribute annually to the Fund, preferably with a substantial increase in the level of
contributions, and welcomes the establishment of and encourages contributions to the Special Fund established by
the Optional Protocol to support the implementation of the recommendations made by the Subcommittee and of
educational programmes by the national preventive mechanisms;
42. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to transmit to all States the appeals of the General Assembly
for contributions to the Funds, to include the Funds, on an annual basis, among the programmes for which funds are
_______________
260
261

680

A/69/387.
A/70/303.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

pledged at the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, and to submit to the Human Rights
Council, and to the General Assembly at its seventy-first and seventy-second sessions, a report on the operations of
the Funds;
43. Welcomes the Convention against Torture Initiative, launched in March 2014 on the thirtieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention to achieve the universal ratification and improved implementation of the
Convention by 2024, as well as related regional initiatives on the prevention and eradication of torture;
44. Calls upon all States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as relevant intergovernmental and civil society organizations, including
non-governmental organizations, to commemorate, on 26 June, the United Nations International Day in Support of
Victims of Torture;
45. Decides to consider at its seventy-first and seventy-second sessions the reports of the Secretary-General,
including the report on the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture and the Special Fund established
by the Optional Protocol, the report of the Committee, the report of the Subcommittee and the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur;
46. Also decides to give its full consideration to the subject matter at its seventy-second session.
RESOLUTION 70/147
A/RE S/70 /147

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)262

70/147. Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the protection of migrants, the most recent of which is resolution
69/167 of 18 December 2014, and recalling also Human Rights Council resolution 29/2 of 2 July 2015,263
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,264 which proclaims that all human beings are born
free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein,
without distinction of any kind, in particular as to race,
Reaffirming also that everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each
State and the right to leave any country, including his or her own, and to return to his or her country,
Reaffirming further that everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law,
Recalling all relevant international instruments, particularly the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights265 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,265 the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,266 the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,267 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,268 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,269 the International Convention on the
_______________
262

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Mali, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Senegal, Tajikistan, Turkey, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
263
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. V, sect. A.
264
Resolution 217 A (III).
265
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
266
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
267
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
268
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
269
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.

681

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,270 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,271
the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations,272 the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families273 and the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,274 in particular the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,275 and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,276
Acknowledging the relevant contribution of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to the international system for the protection of migrants,
Recalling the provisions concerning migrants contained in the outcome documents of major United Nations
conferences and summits, including the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis
and Its Impact on Development277 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,278
Recalling also Commission on Population and Development resolutions 2006/2 of 10 May 2006279 and
2009/1 of 3 April 2009,280 and its resolution 2013/1 of 26 April 2013 on new trends in migration: demographic
aspects,281
Taking note of advisory opinion OC 16/99 of 1 October 1999 on the Right to Information on Consular
Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due Process of Law, advisory opinion OC 18/03 of
17 September 2003 on the Juridical Condition and Rights of Undocumented Migrants, and advisory opinion
OC 21/14 of 19 August 2014 on the Rights and Guarantees of Children in the Context of Migration and/or in Need
of International Protection, issued by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
Taking note also of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 31 March 2004 in the case
concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals282 and the Judgment of the Court of 19 January 2009 regarding the
request for interpretation of the Avena Judgment,283 and recalling the obligations of States reaffirmed in both
decisions,
Underlining the importance of the Human Rights Council in promoting respect for the protection of the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all, including migrants,
Recognizing that women represent almost half of all international migrants, and in this regard recognizing also
that women migrant workers are important contributors to social and economic development in countries of origin
and destination, and underlining the value and dignity of their labour, including the labour of domestic workers,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in its entirety, and recalling
Sustainable Development Goals 8 and 10, including the targets on the protection of labour rights and promotion of
safe and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in particular women migrants
and those in precarious employment, and on the facilitation of orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and
mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies,
_______________
270

Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
272
Ibid., vol. 596, No. 8638.
273
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
274
Ibid., vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
275
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
276
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
277
Resolution 63/303, annex.
278
Resolution 70/1.
279
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2006, Supplement No. 5 (E/2006/25), chap. I, sect. B.
280
Ibid., 2009, Supplement No. 5 (E/2009/25), chap. I, sect. B.
281
Ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 5 (E/2013/25), chap. I, sect. B.
282
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/59/4), chap. V, sect. A.
283
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/64/4), chap. V, sect. B.
271

682

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the importance of the second High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development,
held on 3 and 4 October 2013, which recognized the important contribution of migration in realizing the
Millennium Development Goals and recognized that human mobility is a key factor for sustainable development,
Noting the eighth summit meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development, hosted by Turkey
from 14 to 16 October 2015, under the overarching theme of “Strengthening partnerships: human mobility for
sustainable development”, which addressed the link between migration and development, and the issues of
protecting the human rights of migrants, promoting the well-being of all people moving across international borders,
migration as a factor of development, and enhancing international cooperation and partnerships among all
stakeholders on emerging issues in migration and mobility,
Acknowledging the cultural and economic contributions made by migrants to their communities of origin and
destination and the need to identify appropriate means of maximizing development benefits, to respond to the
challenges that migration poses to countries of origin, transit and destination, to promote dignified, humane
treatment with applicable protections and access to basic services, and to strengthen mechanisms for international
cooperation,
Emphasizing the multidimensional character of international migration, the importance of international,
regional and bilateral cooperation and dialogue in this regard, as appropriate, and the need to protect the human
rights of all migrants, particularly at a time when migration flows have increased in the globalized economy and
take place in a context of continued security concerns,
Acknowledging the complexity of migratory flows and that international migration movements also occur
within the same geographical regions, and in this context calling for a better understanding of migration patterns
across and within regions,
Deeply concerned at the large and growing number of migrants, especially women and children, including
those unaccompanied or separated from their parents, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by attempting
to cross international borders, and recognizing the obligation of States to respect the human rights of those migrants
in accordance with their applicable international human rights obligations,
Recognizing the importance of coordinating international efforts to provide assistance and support to migrants
in vulnerable situations and, as appropriate, facilitate their voluntary return to their countries of origin or procedures
for determining the need for international protection while respecting the principle of non-refoulement,
Bearing in mind the obligations of States under international law, as applicable, to exercise due diligence to
prevent crimes targeting migrants and to investigate and punish perpetrators, and that not doing so violates and
impairs or nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of victims,
Affirming that migrant smuggling and crimes against migrants, including trafficking in persons, continue to
pose a serious challenge and require a concerted international assessment and response and genuine multilateral
cooperation among countries of origin, transit and destination for their eradication,
Bearing in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration, including those that refer to the orderly
management of migration, should promote holistic approaches that take into account the causes and consequences
of the phenomenon, as well as full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants,
Stressing the importance of all regulations and laws regarding irregular migration, at all levels of government,
being in accordance with the obligations of States under international law, including international human rights law,
Stressing also the obligation of States to protect the human rights of migrants regardless of their migration
status, including when implementing their specific migration and border security policies, and expressing its
concern at measures which, including in the context of policies aimed at reducing irregular migration, treat irregular
migration as a criminal rather than an administrative offence, where the effect of doing so is to deny migrants the
full enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, and in this regard recalling that sanctions and the
treatment given to irregular migrants should be commensurate with their offences,
Aware that, as criminals take advantage of migratory flows and attempt to circumvent restrictive immigration
policies and border controls, migrants become more vulnerable to, inter alia, kidnapping, extortion, forced labour,
sexual exploitation, physical assault, debt servitude and abandonment,
683

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the contributions of young migrants to countries of origin and destination, and in that regard
encouraging States to consider the specific circumstances and needs of young migrants,
Concerned about the large number of migrants, especially women and children, including those
unaccompanied or separated from their parents, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by crossing or
attempting to cross international borders without the required travel documents, and recognizing the responsibility
of States to respect the human rights of those migrants,
Recognizing the obligations of countries of origin, transit and destination under international human rights law,
Underlining the importance for States, in cooperation with civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, workers’ organizations and the private sector, among other relevant stakeholders, to undertake
information campaigns aimed at clarifying opportunities, limitations, risks and rights in the event of migration in
order to enable everyone to make informed decisions and to prevent anyone from utilizing dangerous means to
cross international borders,
1. Calls upon States to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of women and children, and to address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and a comprehensive and balanced
approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and
protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their vulnerability;
2. Expresses its concern about the impact of financial and economic crises as well as natural disasters and
the effects of climate-related phenomena on international migration and migrants, and in that regard urges
Governments to combat unfair and discriminatory treatment of migrants, in particular migrant workers and their
families;
3. Reaffirms the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights264 and the obligations of
States under the International Covenants on Human Rights,265 and in this regard:
(a) Strongly condemns acts, manifestations and expressions of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance against migrants and the stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion
or belief, and urges States to apply and, where needed, to reinforce existing laws when hate crimes, xenophobic or
intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants occur, in order to eradicate impunity for those who
commit those acts and, where appropriate, to provide effective remedy to the victims;
(b) Encourages States to establish or, when appropriate, strengthen mechanisms which allow migrants to
report alleged cases of abuse by relevant authorities and employers without fear of reprisal, and which allow for
such complaints to be addressed fairly;
(c) Expresses concern about legislation adopted by some States that results in measures and practices that
may restrict the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants, and reaffirms that, when exercising their
sovereign right to enact and implement migratory and border security measures, States have the duty to comply with
their obligations under international law, including international human rights law, in order to ensure full respect for
the human rights of migrants;
(d) Calls upon States to ensure that their laws and policies, including in the areas of counter-terrorism and
combating transnational organized crime, such as trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, fully respect the
human rights of migrants;
(e) Calls upon States that have not done so to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families273 as a matter of
priority, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to promote and raise awareness of the
Convention;
(f) Takes note of the report of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families on its twenty-first and twenty-second sessions;284
_______________
284

684

Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 48 (A/70/48).

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Also reaffirms the duty of States to effectively promote and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants, especially those of women and children, regardless of their migration status, in conformity
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international instruments to which they are party, and
therefore:
(a) Calls upon all States to respect the human rights and inherent dignity of migrants, to put an end to
arbitrary arrest and detention and, in order to avoid excessive detention of irregular migrants, to review, where
necessary, detention periods and to use alternatives to detention, where appropriate, including measures that have
been successfully implemented by some States;
(b) Encourages States to put in place, if they have not yet done so, appropriate systems and procedures in
order to ensure that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in all actions or decisions concerning
migrant children, regardless of their migration status, and to use, when applicable, alternatives to the detention of
migrant children;
(c) Encourages States to cooperate and to take appropriate measures, in full conformity with their
obligations under international human rights law, to prevent, combat and address the smuggling of migrants,
including strengthening laws, policies, information-sharing and joint operational functions, enhancing capacities and
support opportunities for migration in a well-managed, safe and dignified manner and strengthening legislative
methods for criminalizing acts of smuggling migrants, particularly women and children;
(d) Urges all States to adopt effective measures to prevent and punish any form of illegal deprivation of
liberty of migrants by individuals or groups;
(e) Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation of the human rights of migrants
while in transit, including in ports and airports and at borders and migration checkpoints, and to adequately train
public officials who work in those facilities and in border areas to treat migrants respectfully and in accordance with
their obligations under international human rights law;
(f) Underlines the right of migrants to return to their country of citizenship, and recalls that States must
ensure that their returning nationals are duly received;
(g) Calls upon States to analyse and implement, where appropriate, mechanisms for the safe and orderly
administration of returning migrants, with particular attention to the human rights of migrants, in accordance with
their obligations under international law;
(h) Calls upon States to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law, acts of violation of the human rights
of migrants and their families, such as arbitrary detention, torture and violations of the right to life, including
extrajudicial executions, during their transit from the country of origin to the country of destination and vice versa,
including transit across national borders;
(i) Recognizes the particular vulnerability of migrants in transit situations, including through national
borders, and the need to ensure full respect for their human rights also in these circumstances;
(j) Also recognizes the importance of promoting respect for human rights in coordinated efforts of the
international community to assist and support migrants who are stranded or in vulnerable situations;
(k) Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full respect for and observance of the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations,272 in particular with regard to the right of all foreign nationals, regardless of their
migration status, to communicate with a consular official of the sending State in case of arrest, imprisonment,
custody or detention, and the obligation of the receiving State to inform the foreign national without delay of his or
her rights under the Convention;
(l) Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and applicable international legal instruments
to which they are party, to enforce labour law effectively, including by addressing violations of such law, with regard
to migrant workers’ labour relations and working conditions, inter alia, those related to their remuneration and
conditions of health, safety at work and the right to freedom of association;
(m) Invites Member States to consider ratifying relevant conventions of the International Labour
Organization, including the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189) on decent work for domestic workers;
685

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(n) Encourages all States to remove unlawful obstacles, where they exist, that may prevent the safe,
transparent, unrestricted and expeditious transfer of remittances, earnings, assets and pensions of migrants to their
country of origin or to any other countries, and, in conformity with applicable laws, regulations and agreements, to
consider, as appropriate, measures to resolve any identified issues that may impede such transfers or subject them to
impractical restrictions;
(o) Recalls that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes that everyone has the right to an
effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted to him or her;
5.

Emphasizes the importance of protecting persons in vulnerable situations, and in this regard:

(a) Expresses its concern about the increase in the activities and profits of transnational and national
organized crime entities and others who profit from crimes against migrants, especially migrant women and
children, without regard for dangerous and inhumane conditions, and in flagrant violation of national laws and
international law and contrary to international standards;
(b) Also expresses its concern about the high level of impunity enjoyed by traffickers and their accomplices
as well as other members of organized crime entities and, in this context, the denial of rights and justice to migrants
who have suffered from abuse;
(c) Calls upon States, within the framework of applicable international law, to take steps to ensure that their
national procedures at international borders include adequate safeguards to protect the dignity, safety and human
rights of all migrants;
(d) Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that allow migrants to integrate fully
into the host countries, facilitate family reunification and promote a harmonious, tolerant and respectful
environment, and encourages States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
(e) Calls upon States that have not already done so to provide for the protection of the human rights of
women migrant workers, to promote fair labour conditions and to ensure that all women, including care workers,
are legally protected against violence and exploitation;
(f) Encourages States to implement gender-sensitive policies and programmes for women migrant workers,
to provide safe and legal channels that recognize the skills and education of women migrant workers and, as
appropriate, to facilitate their productive employment, decent work and integration into the labour force, including
in the fields of education and science and technology;
(g) Encourages all States to develop international migration policies and programmes that include a gender
perspective, in order to adopt the measures necessary to better protect women and girls against dangers and abuse
during migration;
(h) Calls upon States to protect the human rights of migrant children, given their vulnerability, particularly
unaccompanied migrant children, ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in their
legislation, policies and practices, including on integration, return and family reunification;
(i) Encourages all States to prevent and eliminate discriminatory policies and legislation at all levels of
government that deny migrant children access to education and, while taking into account the best interests of the
child as a primary consideration, to foster the successful integration of migrant children into the education system
and the removal of barriers to their education in host countries and countries of origin;
(j) Reminds all States that all persons, including migrants, should have access to lifelong learning
opportunities that help them acquire the knowledge and skills needed to take advantage of opportunities and to
participate fully in society;
(k) Urges States to ensure that repatriation mechanisms allow for the identification and special protection of
persons in vulnerable situations, including unaccompanied children and persons with disabilities, and take into
account, in conformity with their international obligations and commitments, the principle of the best interests of the
child, clarity of reception and care arrangements and family reunification;
(l) Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocols thereto,274 in particular the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,275 and the Protocol to
686

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,276 to implement them fully, and calls upon States that
have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to them as a matter of priority;
6. Encourages States to take into account the conclusions and recommendations of the study of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on challenges and best practices in the
implementation of the international framework for the protection of the rights of the child in the context of
migration285 when designing and implementing their migration policies;
7. Also encourages States to protect migrants from becoming victims of national and transnational
organized crime, including kidnapping and trafficking and, in some instances, smuggling, including through the
implementation of programmes and policies that prevent victimization and guarantee protection and access to
medical, psychosocial and legal assistance, where appropriate;
8. Encourages Member States that have not already done so to enact national legislation and to take further
effective measures to combat trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, recognizing that these crimes may
endanger the lives of migrants or subject them to harm, servitude, exploitation, debt bondage, slavery, sexual
exploitation or forced labour, and also encourages Member States to strengthen international cooperation to prevent,
investigate and combat such trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants and to identify and disrupt financial
flows related to these activities;
9. Stresses the importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation in the protection of the human
rights of migrants, and therefore:
(a) Requests all States, international organizations and relevant stakeholders to take into account in their
policies and initiatives on migration issues the global character of the migratory phenomenon and to give due
consideration to international, regional and bilateral cooperation in this field, including by undertaking dialogues on
migration that include countries of origin, transit and destination, as well as civil society, including migrants, with a
view to addressing, in a comprehensive manner, inter alia, its causes and consequences and the challenge of
undocumented or irregular migration, granting priority to the protection of the human rights of migrants;
(b) Encourages States to promote the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,278 including its target 10.7 on the facilitation of orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and
mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies;
(c) Also encourages States to take the measures necessary to achieve policy coherence on migration at the
national, regional and international levels, including by ensuring coordinated child protection policies and systems
across borders that are in full compliance with international human rights law;
(d) Further encourages States to cooperate effectively in protecting witnesses in cases of smuggling of
migrants, regardless of their migration status;
(e) Encourages States to cooperate effectively in protecting witnesses and victims in cases of trafficking in
persons, regardless of their migration status;
(f) Calls upon the United Nations system and other relevant international organizations and multilateral
institutions to enhance their cooperation in the development of methodologies for the collection and processing of
statistical data on international migration and the situation of migrants in countries of origin, transit and destination
and to assist Member States in their capacity-building efforts in this regard;
(g) Encourages States to include, as appropriate, information on the implementation of their international
obligations related to the human rights of migrants in their national reports to the universal periodic review
mechanism of the Human Rights Council;
10. Welcomes the consideration afforded to the issues of migration, development and human rights in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
_______________
285

A/HRC/15/29.

687

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

11. Encourages States, relevant international organizations, civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, and the private sector to continue and to enhance their dialogue in relevant international meetings
with a view to strengthening and making more inclusive public policies aimed at promoting and respecting human
rights, including those of migrants;
12. Requests Governments and international organizations to take appropriate measures to give due
consideration to the declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development, held on 3
and 4 October 2013;286
13. Recognizes the importance of the contribution of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Chair of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights of migrants, as well as other
key actors, to the discussion on international migration;
14. Invites the Chair of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families to present an oral report on the work of the Committee and to engage in an interactive dialogue
with the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human
rights”, as a way to enhance communication between the Assembly and the Committee;
15. Invites the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants to submit his report to the General
Assembly and to engage in an interactive dialogue at its seventy-first session, under the item entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights”;
16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the promotion and protection of human rights,
including ways and means to promote the human rights of migrants,287 and notes the recommendations on migrant
domestic workers contained therein;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council at
their seventy-first and thirty-third sessions, respectively, a comprehensive report entitled “Human rights of
migrants”, covering all aspects of the implementation of the present resolution;
18. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
RESOLUTION 70/148
A/RE S/70 /148

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)288

70/148. Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,289
Reaffirming further the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,290

_______________
286

Resolution 68/4.
A/70/259.
288
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
289
Resolution 217 A (III).
290
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
287

688

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the fundamental importance, including in response to terrorism and the fear of terrorism, of
respecting all human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law,
Reaffirming also that States are under the obligation to protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms of
all persons,
Reaffirming further that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group,
Reiterating the important contribution of measures taken at all levels against terrorism, consistent with
international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, to the functioning of
democratic institutions and the maintenance of peace and security and thereby to the full enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, as well as the need to continue this fight, including by strengthening international
cooperation and the role of the United Nations in this respect,
Reaffirming its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal and
unjustifiable, and renewing its commitment to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism,
Deeply deploring the occurrence of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of the
fight against terrorism, as well as violations of international refugee and humanitarian law,
Noting with concern measures that can undermine human rights and the rule of law, such as the detention of
persons suspected of acts of terrorism in the absence of a legal basis for detention and due process guarantees, the
deprivation of liberty that amounts to placing a detained person outside the protection of the law, the trial of suspects
without fundamental judicial guarantees, the illegal deprivation of liberty and transfer of individuals suspected of
terrorist activities, the return of suspects to countries without individual assessment of the risk of there being
substantial grounds for believing that they would be in danger of subjection to torture and limitations to effective
scrutiny of counter-terrorism measures,
Expressing its concern at the increasing use, in a globalized society, by terrorists and their supporters, of
information and communications technologies, in particular the Internet and other media, and the use of such
technologies to commit, incite, recruit for, fund or plan terrorist acts, noting the importance of cooperation among
stakeholders in the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,291 including among
Member States, international, regional and subregional organizations, the private sector and civil society, to address
this issue, while respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms and complying with international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter, and reiterating that such technologies can be powerful tools in countering the
spread of terrorism, including by promoting tolerance, dialogue among peoples and peace,
Stressing that all measures used in the fight against terrorism, including the profiling of individuals and the use
of diplomatic assurances, memorandums of understanding and other transfer agreements or arrangements, must be
in compliance with the obligations of States under international law, including international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law,
Stressing also that a criminal justice system based on respect for human rights and the rule of law, including
due process and fair trial guarantees, is one of the best means for effectively countering terrorism and ensuring
accountability,
Recalling article 30 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and reaffirming that acts, methods and
practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights,
fundamental freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and security of States and destabilizing
legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international community should take the steps necessary to
enhance cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism,292
_______________
291
292

Resolution 60/288.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. I, para. 17.

689

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Alarmed by the increasing number of terrorist acts targeting ethnic, religious and cultural groups, and seriously
concerned at all attacks upon religious places, sites and shrines, including any deliberate destruction of relics and
monuments,
Recognizing that respect for all human rights, respect for democracy and respect for the rule of law are
interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
Emphasizing the importance of properly interpreting and implementing the obligations of States with respect
to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and of abiding strictly by the definition of
torture contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment293 in the fight against terrorism,
Recalling its resolution 68/178 of 18 December 2013, Human Rights Council resolutions 25/7 of 27 March
2014294 and 29/9 of 2 July 2015,295 as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions, as stated in the preamble to
General Assembly resolution 65/221 of 21 December 2010, and welcoming the efforts of all relevant stakeholders
to implement those resolutions,
Recalling also its resolution 60/288 of 8 September 2006, by which it adopted the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and its resolution 68/276 of 13 June 2014 on the review of the Strategy, reaffirming that
the promotion and protection of human rights for all and the rule of law are essential to the fight against terrorism,
recognizing that effective counter-terrorism measures and the protection of human rights are not conflicting goals
but are complementary and mutually reinforcing, and stressing the need to promote and protect the rights of victims
of terrorism,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolution 22/8 of 21 March 2013,296 by which the Council decided
to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism,
Recalling its resolution 64/115 of 16 December 2009 and the annex thereto, entitled “Introduction and
implementation of sanctions imposed by the United Nations”, in particular the provisions of the annex regarding
listing and delisting procedures,
1. Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
2. Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims and their families, expresses its
profound solidarity with them, and stresses the importance of providing them with assistance and other appropriate
measures to protect, respect and promote their human rights;
3. Expresses serious concern at the occurrence of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as
well as of international refugee and humanitarian law, committed in the context of countering terrorism;
4. Reaffirms that all counter-terrorism measures should be implemented in accordance with obligations
under international law, including international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, thereby taking into full
consideration the human rights of all, including persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, and that such measures in this regard must not be discriminatory on grounds such as race, colour, sex,
language, religion or social origin;
5. Also reaffirms the obligation of States, in accordance with article 4 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights,297 to respect certain rights as non-derogable under any circumstances, recalls, in regard to
all other Covenant rights, that any measures derogating from the provisions of the Covenant must be in accordance
_______________
293

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
295
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. V, sect. A.
296
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
297
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
294

690

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

with that article in all cases, underlines the exceptional and temporary nature of any such derogations,298 and in this
regard calls upon States to raise awareness about the importance of these obligations among national authorities
involved in combating terrorism;
6.

Urges States, while countering terrorism:

(a) To fully comply with their obligations under international law, in particular international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law, with regard to the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
(b) To take all steps necessary to ensure that persons deprived of liberty, regardless of the place of arrest or
detention, benefit from the guarantees to which they are entitled under international law, including the review of the
detention and other fundamental judicial guarantees;
(c) To ensure that no form of deprivation of liberty places a detained person outside the protection of the
law, and to respect the safeguards concerning the liberty, security and dignity of the person, in accordance with
international law, including international human rights and humanitarian law;
(d) To take all steps necessary to ensure the right of anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge to be
brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorized by law to exercise judicial power and the entitlement to
trial within a reasonable time or release;
(e) To treat all prisoners in all places of detention in accordance with international law, including
international human rights and humanitarian law;
(f) To respect the right of persons to equality before the law, courts and tribunals and to a fair trial as
provided for in international law, including international human rights law, such as the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, and international humanitarian and refugee law;
(g) To safeguard the work of civil society by ensuring that counter-terrorism laws and measures are
consistent with and are applied in a manner that fully respects human rights, particularly the rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and association;
(h) To safeguard the right to privacy in accordance with international law, in particular international human
rights law,299 and to take measures to ensure that interferences with or restrictions on that right are not arbitrary, are
adequately regulated by law and are subject to effective oversight and appropriate redress, including through judicial
review or other means;
(i) To review their procedures, practices and legislation regarding the surveillance and interception of
communications and the collection of personal data, including mass surveillance, interception and collection, with
a view to upholding the right to privacy by ensuring the full and effective implementation of all their obligations
under international human rights law, and to take measures to ensure that interference with the right to privacy is
regulated by law, which must be publicly accessible, clear, precise, comprehensive and non-discriminatory, and
that such interference is not arbitrary or unlawful, bearing in mind what is reasonable for the pursuance of
legitimate aims;
(j) To protect all human rights, including economic, social and cultural rights, bearing in mind that certain
counter-terrorism measures may have an impact on the enjoyment of these rights;
(k) To ensure that guidelines and practices in all border control operations and other pre-entry mechanisms
are clear and fully respect their obligations under international law, particularly international refugee and human
rights law, towards persons seeking international protection;

_______________
298

See, for example, general comment No. 29 on states of emergency adopted by the Human Rights Committee on 24 July 2001 (Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/56/40), vol. I, annex VI).
299
See A/HRC/13/37 and Add.1 and 2.

691

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(l) To fully respect non-refoulement obligations under international refugee and human rights law and, at
the same time, to review, with full respect for these obligations and other legal safeguards, the validity of a refugee
status decision in an individual case if credible and relevant evidence comes to light that indicates that the person in
question has committed any criminal acts, including terrorist acts, falling under the exclusion clauses under
international refugee law;
(m) To refrain from returning persons, including in cases related to terrorism, to their countries of origin or to
a third State whenever such transfer would be contrary to their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law, including in cases where there are substantial grounds for
believing that they would be in danger of subjection to torture, or where their lives or freedom would be threatened,
in violation of international refugee law, on account of their race, religion, sex, nationality, membership in a
particular social group or political opinion, bearing in mind the obligations that States may have to prosecute
individuals not returned, and in that case, to adhere to the principle of extradite or prosecute;
(n) Insofar as such an act runs contrary to their obligations under international law, not to expose individuals
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment by way of return to another country;
(o) To ensure that their laws criminalizing acts of terrorism are accessible, formulated with precision, nondiscriminatory, non-retroactive and in accordance with international law, including human rights law;
(p) Not to resort to profiling based on stereotypes founded on grounds of discrimination prohibited by
international law, including on racial, ethnic and/or religious grounds;
(q) To ensure that the interrogation methods used against terrorism suspects are consistent with their
international obligations and are reviewed on a regular basis to prevent the risk of violations of their obligations
under international law, including international human rights and refugee and humanitarian law;
(r) To ensure that any person who alleges that his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms have been
violated has access to a fair procedure for seeking full, effective and enforceable remedy within a reasonable time
and that where such violations have been established, victims receive adequate, effective and prompt reparation,
which should include, as appropriate, restitution, compensation, rehabilitation and guarantees of non-recurrence,
including where the violation constitutes a crime under international or national law, to ensure accountability for
those responsible for such violations;
(s) To ensure due process guarantees, consistent with all relevant provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,289 and their obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949300 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977,301 and the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees302 and the 1967 Protocol thereto303 in their respective fields of applicability;
(t) To ensure that gender equality and non-discrimination are taken into account when shaping, reviewing
and implementing all counter-terrorism measures, and to promote the full and effective participation of women in
those processes;
(u) To ensure that any measures taken or means employed to counter terrorism, including the use of
remotely piloted aircraft, comply with their obligations under international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, human rights law and international humanitarian law, in particular the principles of distinction and
proportionality;
7. Also urges States, while undertaking counter-terrorism activities, to respect their international obligations
regarding humanitarian actors and to recognize the key role played by humanitarian organizations in areas where
terrorist groups are active;

_______________
300

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
302
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
303
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
301

692

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

8. Further urges States, while countering terrorism, to take into account relevant United Nations
resolutions and decisions on human rights, and encourages them to give due consideration to the recommendations
of the special procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and to the relevant comments and views of
United Nations human rights treaty bodies;
9. Recognizes the importance of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance,304 the implementation of which will make a significant contribution in support of the rule
of law in countering terrorism, including by prohibiting places of secret detention, and encourages all States that
have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention;
10. Urges all States that have not yet done so to sign, ratify or accede to the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,293 and encourages States to consider ratifying as a
matter of priority the Optional Protocol thereto,305 the implementation of which will make a significant contribution
in support of the rule of law in countering terrorism;
11. Calls upon the United Nations entities involved in supporting counter-terrorism efforts to continue to
facilitate the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as due process and the
rule of law, while countering terrorism;
12. Recognizes the need to continue to ensure that fair and clear procedures under the United Nations
terrorism-related sanctions regime are strengthened in order to enhance their efficiency and transparency, and
welcomes and encourages the ongoing efforts of the Security Council in support of these objectives, including by
supporting the enhanced role of the Office of the Ombudsperson and continuing to review all the names of
individuals and entities in the regime, while emphasizing the importance of these sanctions in countering terrorism;
13. Urges States, while ensuring full compliance with their international obligations, to ensure the rule of
law and to include adequate human rights guarantees in their national procedures for the listing of individuals and
entities with a view to combating terrorism;
14. Requests the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism to continue to make recommendations, in the
context of his mandate, with regard to preventing, combating and redressing violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of countering terrorism, and to continue to report and engage in interactive
dialogues on an annual basis with the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council in accordance with their
programmes of work;
15. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the performance of his
mandated tasks and duties, including by reacting promptly to his urgent appeals and providing the information
requested, and to give serious consideration to responding favourably to his requests to visit their countries, as well
as to cooperate with other relevant procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council regarding the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;
16. Welcomes the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to implement the
mandate given to him by the General Assembly in its resolution 60/158 of 16 December 2005, and requests him to
continue his efforts in this regard;
17. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;306
18. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,307 which refers, inter alia, to the negative impact that counterterrorism legislation and other measures can have on civil society;
_______________
304

Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
Ibid., vol. 2375, No. 24841.
306
A/70/271.
307
A/70/371.
305

693

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. Encourages States, while countering terrorism, to undertake prompt, independent and impartial factfinding inquiries whenever there are plausible indications of possible breaches of their obligations under
international human rights law, with a view to ensuring accountability;
20. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Rapporteur to continue to contribute to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, including by
raising awareness, inter alia, through regular dialogue, about the need to respect human rights and the rule of law
while countering terrorism and support the exchange of best practices to promote and protect human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law in all aspects of counter-terrorism, including, as appropriate, those
identified by the Special Rapporteur in his report submitted to the Human Rights Council pursuant to Council
resolution 15/15;308
21. Welcomes the ongoing dialogue established in the context of the fight against terrorism between the
Security Council and its respective bodies, namely, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, with the relevant bodies for the promotion and protection of human rights, and
encourages the Security Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee to strengthen the links, cooperation and
dialogue with relevant human rights bodies, in particular with the Office of the High Commissioner, the Special
Rapporteur, other relevant special procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and relevant treaty
bodies, giving due regard to the promotion and protection of human rights and the rule of law in their ongoing work
relating to counter-terrorism;
22. Calls upon States and other relevant actors, as appropriate, to continue to implement the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,291 which, inter alia, reaffirms respect for human rights for all and the rule of law
as the fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism;
23. Requests the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to continue its efforts to ensure that the
United Nations can better coordinate and enhance its support to Member States in their efforts to comply with their
obligations under international law, including international human rights and refugee and humanitarian law, while
countering terrorism, and to encourage the Working Groups of the Task Force to incorporate a human rights
perspective into their work;
24. Encourages relevant United Nations bodies and entities and international, regional and subregional
organizations, in particular those participating in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which provide
technical assistance, upon request, consistent with their mandates, related to the prevention and suppression of
terrorism, to step up their efforts to ensure respect for international human rights and refugee and humanitarian law,
as well as the rule of law, as an element of technical assistance, including in the adoption and implementation of
legislative and other measures by States;
25. Urges relevant United Nations bodies and entities and international, regional and subregional
organizations, including the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate related to the prevention
and suppression of terrorism, to step up their efforts to provide, upon request, technical assistance for building the
capacity of Member States in the development and implementation of programmes of assistance and support for
victims of terrorism in accordance with relevant national legislation;
26. Calls upon international, regional and subregional organizations to strengthen information-sharing,
coordination and cooperation in promoting the protection of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law while countering terrorism;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the
Human Rights Council and to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session;
28. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its seventy-second session under the item
entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
_______________
308

694

A/HRC/16/51.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/149
A/RE S/70 /149

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),309 by a recorded vote of 130 to 53, with 5 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru, Samoa

70/149. Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order,
including resolution 69/178 of 18 December 2014, and Human Rights Council resolutions 18/6 of 29 September
2011310 and 25/15 of 27 March 2014,311
Reaffirming the commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote universal respect for, and
observance and protection of, all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, other instruments relating to human rights and international law,
Affirming that the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion and protection of all human
rights should continue to be carried out in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and
international law, as set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter, and with full respect for, inter alia, sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence, the non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations and
non-intervention in matters that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State,
Recalling the Preamble to the Charter, in particular the determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small,

_______________
309

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
310
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1),
chap. II.
311
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. IV, sect. A.

695

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights and freedoms set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights312 can be fully realized,
Reaffirming also the determination expressed in the Preamble to the Charter to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from
treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained, to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom, to practise tolerance and good-neighbourliness and to employ international machinery for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Stressing that the responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social issues, as well as threats to
international peace and security, must be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised
multilaterally, and that in this regard the central role must be played by the United Nations, as the most universal and
representative organization in the world,
Concerned about the continued abuse by Member States of the extraterritorial application of their national
legislation in a manner that affects the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons under
their jurisdiction and the full enjoyment of human rights,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of all peoples for an
international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter, including promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and respect for the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law, pluralism, development, better
standards of living and solidarity,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights is essential for the
full achievement of the purposes of the United Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims that all human beings are born free
and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to
determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of
their lives,
Recognizing that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based on the principle of
cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their
human rights obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Emphasizing that democracy is not only a political concept, but that it also has economic and social
dimensions,
Recognizing that democracy, respect for all human rights, including the right to development, transparent and
accountable governance and administration in all sectors of society and effective participation by civil society are an
essential part of the necessary foundations for the realization of social and people-centred sustainable development,
Noting with concern that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance may be aggravated
by, inter alia, inequitable distribution of wealth, marginalization and social exclusion,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations could contribute greatly to the
enhancement of international cooperation at all levels,
_______________
312

696

Resolution 217 A (III).

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Underlining the fact that it is imperative for the international community to ensure that globalization becomes
a positive force for all the world’s people and that only through broad and sustained efforts, based on our common
humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable,
Deeply concerned that the current global economic, financial, energy and food crises, resulting from a
combination of several major factors, including macroeconomic and other factors, such as environmental
degradation, desertification and global climate change, natural disasters and the lack of financial resources and the
technology necessary to confront their negative impact in developing countries, particularly in the least developed
countries and small island developing States, represent a global scenario that is threatening the adequate enjoyment
of all human rights and widening the gap between developed and developing countries,
Stressing that efforts to make globalization fully inclusive and equitable must include policies and measures at
the global level that correspond to the needs of developing countries and countries with economies in transition and
are formulated and implemented with their effective participation,
Stressing also the need for adequate financing of, technology transfer to and capacity-building in developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing
States, including to support their efforts to adapt to climate change,
Having listened to the peoples of the world, and recognizing their aspirations to justice, to equality of
opportunity for all, to the enjoyment of their human rights, including the right to development, to live in peace and
freedom and to equal participation without discrimination in economic, social, cultural, civil and political life,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 on institution-building of the Council and 5/2 on the Code of
Conduct for Special Procedures Mandate Holders of the Council of 18 June 2007,313 and stressing that all mandate
holders shall discharge their duties in accordance with those resolutions and the annexes thereto,
Emphasizing the importance of a global and inclusive post-2015 development agenda for the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order,
Resolved to take all measures within its power to secure a democratic and equitable international order,
1.

Affirms that everyone is entitled to a democratic and equitable international order;

2. Also affirms that a democratic and equitable international order fosters the full realization of all human
rights for all;
3. Takes note of the report of the Independent Expert of the Human Rights Council on the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order,314 and notes in this regard its focus on the adverse human rights impact
of international investment agreements, bilateral investment treaties and multilateral free trade agreements on the
international order;
4. Calls upon all Member States to fulfil their commitment expressed in Durban, South Africa, during the
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to maximize the
benefits of globalization through, inter alia, the strengthening and enhancement of international cooperation to
increase equality of opportunities for trade, economic growth and sustainable development, global communications
through the use of new technologies and increased intercultural exchange through the preservation and promotion of
cultural diversity,315 and reiterates that only through broad and sustained efforts to create a shared future based upon
our common humanity and all its diversity can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable;
5. Declares that democracy includes respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms and is a
universal value based on the freely expressed will of people to determine their own political, economic, social and
_______________
313

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
A/70/285 and Corr.1.
315
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
314

697

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives, and reaffirms the need for universal
adherence to and implementation of the rule of law at both the national and international levels;
6. Affirms that a democratic and equitable international order requires, inter alia, the realization of the
following:
(a) The right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they can freely determine their political
status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development;
(b)

The right of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources;

(c)

The right of every human person and all peoples to development;

(d)

The right of all peoples to peace;

(e) The right to an international economic order based on equal participation in the decision-making
process, interdependence, mutual interest, solidarity and cooperation among all States;
(f)

International solidarity, as a right of peoples and individuals;

(g) The promotion and consolidation of transparent, democratic, just and accountable international
institutions in all areas of cooperation, in particular through the implementation of the principle of full and equal
participation in their respective decision-making mechanisms;
(h)
making;

The right to equitable participation of all, without any discrimination, in domestic and global decision-

(i) The principle of equitable regional and gender-balanced representation in the composition of the staff of
the United Nations system;
(j) The promotion of a free, just, effective and balanced international information and communications
order based on international cooperation for the establishment of a new equilibrium and greater reciprocity in the
international flow of information, in particular correcting the inequalities in the flow of information to and from
developing countries;
(k) Respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all, since this enhances cultural pluralism,
contributes to a wider exchange of knowledge and understanding of cultural backgrounds, advances the application
and enjoyment of universally accepted human rights across the world and fosters stable, friendly relations among
peoples and nations worldwide;
(l) The right of every person and all peoples to a healthy environment and to enhanced international
cooperation that responds effectively to the needs for assistance of national efforts to adapt to climate change,
particularly in developing countries, and that promotes the fulfilment of international agreements in the field of
mitigation;
(m) The promotion of equitable access to benefits from the international distribution of wealth through
enhanced international cooperation, in particular in international economic, commercial and financial relations;
(n) The enjoyment by everyone of ownership of the common heritage of mankind in connection to the
public right of access to culture;
(o) The shared responsibility of the nations of the world for managing worldwide economic and social
development, as well as threats to international peace and security, which should be exercised multilaterally;
7. Stresses the importance of preserving the rich and diverse nature of the international community of
nations and peoples, as well as respect for national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and
religious backgrounds, in the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights;
8. Also stresses that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with
the same emphasis, and reaffirms that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various
698

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their
political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all;
9. Reaffirms, among other principles, the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and noninterference in internal affairs;
10. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, social
justice, equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity
and universal human rights and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
11. Reaffirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance and strengthening of
international peace and security and, to that end, should do their utmost to achieve general and complete
disarmament under effective international control, as well as to ensure that the resources released by effective
disarmament measures are used for comprehensive development, in particular that of the developing countries;
12. Underlines that attempts to overthrow legitimate Governments by force disrupt the democratic and
constitutional order, the legitimate exercise of power and the full enjoyment of human rights;
13. Reaffirms the need to continue working urgently for the establishment of a new international economic
order based on equity, sovereign equality, interdependence, common interest and cooperation among all States,
irrespective of their economic and social systems, which shall correct inequalities and redress existing injustices,
make it possible to eliminate the widening gap between the developed and the developing countries and ensure
steadily accelerating economic and social development and peace and justice for present and future generations, in
accordance with relevant previous General Assembly resolutions, programmes of action and major conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related areas;
14. Also reaffirms that the international community should devise ways and means to remove the current
obstacles and meet the challenges to the full realization of all human rights and to prevent the continuation of human
rights violations resulting therefrom throughout the world;
15. Urges States to continue their efforts, through enhanced international cooperation, towards the
promotion of a democratic and equitable international order;
16. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to provide all the human and financial resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the
Independent Expert;
17. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Independent Expert in his task, to supply all
necessary information requested by him and to consider responding favourably to the requests of the Independent
Expert to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more effectively;
18. Requests the Human Rights Council, the human rights treaty bodies, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the special mechanisms extended by the Council and the Human Rights
Council Advisory Committee to pay due attention, within their respective mandates, to the present resolution and to
make contributions towards its implementation;
19. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to build upon the issue of the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, United
Nations organs, bodies and components, intergovernmental organizations, in particular the Bretton Woods
institutions, and non-governmental organizations and to disseminate it on the widest possible basis;
21. Requests the Independent Expert to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session an
interim report on the implementation of the present resolution and to continue his work;
22. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its seventy-first session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
699

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/150
A/RE S/70 /150

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)316

70/150. Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of
international cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that among the purposes of the United Nations are those of developing friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and taking other
appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace, as well as achieving international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Desirous of achieving further progress in international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that such international cooperation should be based on the principles embodied in international
law, especially the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,317 the
International Covenants on Human Rights318 and other relevant instruments,
Deeply convinced that United Nations action in the field of human rights should be based not only on a
profound understanding of the broad range of problems existing in all societies but also on full respect for the
political, economic and social realities of each of them, in strict compliance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and for the basic purpose of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms through international cooperation,
Recalling its previous resolutions in this regard,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring the universality, objectivity and non-selectivity of the consideration of
human rights issues, as affirmed in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,319 and the elimination of double standards,
Reaffirming also the importance of the objectivity, independence, impartiality and discretion of the special
rapporteurs and representatives on thematic issues and on countries, as well as of the members of the working
groups, in carrying out their mandates,
Underlining the obligation that Governments have to promote and protect human rights and to carry out the
responsibilities that they have undertaken under international law, especially the Charter, as well as various
international instruments in the field of human rights,
1. Reiterates that, by virtue of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, all peoples have the right freely to determine, without external interference, their
political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development, and that every State has the duty to
respect that right within the provisions of the Charter, including respect for territorial integrity;
_______________
316

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
317
Resolution 217 A (III).
318
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
319
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

700

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Reaffirms that it is a purpose of the United Nations and the task of all Member States, in cooperation
with the Organization, to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and to remain
vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur;
3. Calls upon all Member States to base their activities for the promotion and protection of human rights,
including the development of further international cooperation in this field, on the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,317 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,318
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights318 and other relevant international instruments, and to
refrain from activities that are inconsistent with that international framework;
4. Considers that international cooperation in this field should make an effective and practical contribution
to the urgent task of preventing mass and flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and
to the strengthening of international peace and security;
5. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, as a legitimate concern of the world community, should be guided by the principles of nonselectivity, impartiality and objectivity and should not be used for political ends;
6. Requests all human rights bodies within the United Nations system, as well as the special rapporteurs
and representatives, independent experts and working groups, to take duly into account the contents of the present
resolution in carrying out their mandates;
7. Expresses its conviction that an unbiased and fair approach to human rights issues contributes to the
promotion of international cooperation as well as to the effective promotion, protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
8. Stresses the continuing need for impartial and objective information on the political, economic and social
situations and events of all countries, and in this context highlights the role of the media in raising public awareness
on issues of public interest;
9. Invites Member States to consider adopting, as appropriate, within the framework of their respective
legal systems and in accordance with their obligations under international law, especially the Charter, and
international human rights instruments, the measures that they may deem appropriate to achieve further progress in
international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
10. Requests the Human Rights Council to continue taking duly into account the present resolution and to
consider further proposals for the strengthening of United Nations action in the field of human rights through the
promotion of international cooperation and the importance of the principles of non-selectivity, impartiality and
objectivity, including in the context of the universal periodic review;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to present further practical proposals and ideas that would contribute to the strengthening of United
Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of international cooperation based on the
principles of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity, and to submit a comprehensive report on the question to
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session;
12. Decides to consider the matter at its seventy-second session under the item entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 70/151
A/RE S/70 /151

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),320 by a recorded vote of 135 to 54, with no abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,

_______________
320

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: China, Cuba (on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries), Kyrgyzstan and South Sudan.

701

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: None

70/151. Human rights and unilateral coercive measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on this subject, the most recent of which was resolution 69/180 of
18 December 2014, and Human Rights Council decision 18/120 of 30 September 2011321 and resolutions 24/14 of
27 September 2013322 and 27/21 of 26 September 2014,323 as well as previous resolutions of the Council and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Reaffirming the pertinent principles and provisions contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, in particular
article 32 thereof, in which it declared that no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other
type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign
rights,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the negative impact of
unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
69/180,324 and recalling the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Assembly resolutions 52/120
of 12 December 1997325 and 55/110 of 4 December 2000,326
Stressing that unilateral coercive measures and legislation are contrary to international law, international
humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations
among States,
Recognizing the universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated character of all human rights, and in this
regard reaffirming the right to development as an integral part of all human rights,
Recalling the Final Document of the Sixteenth Ministerial Conference and Commemorative Meeting of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011,327 the Final Document of
the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran from 26 to

_______________
321

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1),
chap. III.
322
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
323
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
324
A/70/345.
325
A/53/293 and Add.1.
326
A/56/207 and Add.1.
327
A/65/896-S/2011/407, annex I.

702

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

31 August 2012,328 and the documents adopted at previous summits and conferences, in which States members of
the Movement agreed to oppose and condemn those measures or laws and their continued application, persevere
with efforts to effectively reverse them, urge other States to do likewise, as called for by the General Assembly and
other organs of the United Nations, and request States applying those measures or laws to revoke them fully and
immediately,
Recalling also that, at the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993,
States were called upon to refrain from any unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the
Charter that creates obstacles to trade relations among States and impedes the full realization of all human rights329
and also severely threatens the freedom of trade,
Bearing in mind all the references to this question in the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development,
adopted by the World Summit for Social Development on 12 March 1995,330 the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995,331 the Istanbul Declaration
on Human Settlements and the Habitat Agenda, adopted by the second United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) on 14 June 1996332 and their five-year reviews, and in the outcome document of the United
Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”,333
Expressing concern about the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on international relations, trade,
investment and cooperation,
Expressing grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children is adversely affected by unilateral
coercive measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations
among States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder the well-being of the
population in the affected countries, with particular consequences for women, children, including adolescents, the
elderly and persons with disabilities,
Deeply concerned that, despite the recommendations adopted on this question by the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council, the Commission on Human Rights and recent major United Nations conferences, and
contrary to general international law and the Charter, unilateral coercive measures continue to be promulgated and
implemented, with all their negative implications for the social-humanitarian activities and economic and social
development of developing countries, including their extraterritorial effects, thereby creating additional obstacles to
the full enjoyment of all human rights by peoples and individuals under the jurisdiction of other States,
Bearing in mind all the extraterritorial effects of any unilateral legislative, administrative and economic
measures, policies and practices of a coercive nature against the development process and the enhancement of
human rights in developing countries, which create obstacles to the full realization of all human rights,
Reaffirming that unilateral coercive measures are a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration on
the Right to Development,334
Recalling article 1, paragraph 2, common to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights335 and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,335 which provides, inter alia, that in no case
may a people be deprived of its own means of subsistence,

_______________
328

A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
330
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
331
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
332
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996 (A/CONF.165/14), chap. I,
resolution 1, annexes I and II.
333
Resolution 70/1.
334
Resolution 41/128, annex.
335
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
329

703

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting the continuing efforts of the open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human
Rights Council, and reaffirming in particular its criteria, according to which unilateral coercive measures are one of
the obstacles to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
1. Urges all States to cease adopting or implementing any unilateral measures not in accordance with
international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles
governing peaceful relations among States, in particular those of a coercive nature, with all their extraterritorial
effects, which create obstacles to trade relations among States, thus impeding the full realization of the rights set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights336 and other international human rights instruments, in
particular the right of individuals and peoples to development;
2. Strongly urges States to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral economic, financial or
trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of
economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
3. Condemns the inclusion of Member States in unilateral lists under false pretexts, which are contrary to
international law and the Charter, including false allegations of terrorism sponsorship, considering such lists as
instruments for political or economic pressure against Member States, particularly developing countries;
4. Urges all States not to adopt any unilateral measures not in accordance with international law and the
Charter that impede the full achievement of economic and social development by the population of the affected
countries, in particular children and women, that hinder their well-being and that create obstacles to the full
enjoyment of their human rights, including the right of everyone to a standard of living adequate for his or her health
and well-being and his or her right to food, medical care and education and the necessary social services, as well as
to ensure that food and medicine are not used as tools for political pressure;
5. Strongly objects to the extraterritorial nature of those measures which, in addition, threaten the
sovereignty of States, and in this context calls upon all Member States neither to recognize those measures nor to
apply them, as well as to take administrative or legislative measures, as appropriate, to counteract the extraterritorial
applications or effects of unilateral coercive measures;
6. Condemns the continuing unilateral application and enforcement by certain Powers of unilateral
coercive measures, and rejects those measures, with all their extraterritorial effects, as being tools for political or
economic pressure against any country, in particular against developing countries, adopted with a view to preventing
those countries from exercising their right to decide, of their own free will, their own political, economic and social
systems, and because of the negative effects of those measures on the realization of all the human rights of vast
sectors of their populations, in particular children, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities;
7. Expresses grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children is adversely affected by
unilateral coercive measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade
relations among States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder the well-being of
the population in the affected countries, with particular consequences for women, children, including adolescents,
the elderly and persons with disabilities;
8. Reaffirms that essential goods such as food and medicines should not be used as tools for political
coercion and that under no circumstances should people be deprived of their own means of subsistence and
development;
9. Calls upon Member States that have initiated such measures to abide by the principles of international
law, the Charter, the declarations of the United Nations and world conferences and relevant resolutions and to
commit themselves to their obligations and responsibilities arising from the international human rights instruments
to which they are parties by revoking such measures at the earliest possible time;
10. Reaffirms, in this context, the right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they freely
determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development;
_______________
336

704

Resolution 217 A (III).

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

11. Recalls that, according to the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the
annex to General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and the relevant principles and provisions
contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, proclaimed by the Assembly in its resolution
3281 (XXIX), in particular article 32 thereof, no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any
other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its
sovereign rights and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
12. Rejects all attempts to introduce unilateral coercive measures, and urges the Human Rights Council to
take fully into account the negative impact of those measures, including through the enactment and extraterritorial
application of national laws that are not in conformity with international law, in its task concerning the
implementation of the right to development;
13. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in discharging his functions
relating to the promotion, realization and protection of the right to development and bearing in mind the continuing
impact of unilateral coercive measures on the population of developing countries, to give priority to the present
resolution in his annual report to the General Assembly;
14. Underlines the fact that unilateral coercive measures are one of the major obstacles to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,334 and in this regard calls upon all States to avoid
the unilateral imposition of economic coercive measures and the extraterritorial application of national laws that run
counter to the principles of free trade and hamper the development of developing countries, as recognized by the
open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights Council;
15. Recognizes that, in the Declaration of Principles adopted at the first phase of the World Summit on the
Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003,337 States were strongly urged to avoid and
refrain from any unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations
in building the information society;
16. Reaffirms paragraph 30 of the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”,333 in which States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
17. Recalls the decision of the Human Rights Council, in its resolution 27/21,323 to appoint a Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, and welcomes
the work done in delivering his mandate during the first year;
18. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
provide all the human and financial resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur, and also requests them, in discharging their functions in relation to the promotion and protection of
human rights, to pay due attention and to give urgent consideration to the present resolution;
19. Recalls that the Human Rights Council took note of the research-based progress report of its Advisory
Committee containing recommendations on mechanisms to assess the negative impact of unilateral coercive
measures on the enjoyment of human rights and to promote accountability;338
20. Also recalls the convening in the Human Rights Council of the first biennial panel discussion on the
issue of unilateral coercive measures and human rights, and recognizes the importance of the future review by the
Council of the report on the panel discussion to be issued by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, which should take into account the practical means and mechanisms proposed during the
discussion, including, in particular, with regard to the issues of remedies and redress, with a view to promoting
accountability and reparation;
_______________
337
338

A/C.2/59/3, annex, chap. I, sect. A.
A/HRC/28/74.

705

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

21. Welcomes the increased attention paid by the Human Rights Council and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to the negative impact of the application of unilateral coercive
measures, and invites the Council to continue to explore ways to address this issue;
22. Reiterates its support for the invitation of the Human Rights Council to all special rapporteurs and
existing thematic mechanisms of the Council in the field of economic, social and cultural rights to pay due attention,
within the scope of their respective mandates, to the negative impact and consequences of unilateral coercive
measures;
23. Reaffirms the request of the Human Rights Council that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights organize a workshop on the impact of the application of unilateral coercive
measures on the enjoyment of human rights by the affected populations, in particular their socioeconomic impact on
women and children, in the States targeted;
24. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session an interim
report on the implementation of the present resolution and on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on
the full enjoyment of human rights, and reiterates its request that he focus the report on the negative impact of
unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights of victims and address in the report the issues of
remedies and redress with a view to promoting accountability and reparation;
25. Invites Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the fulfilment of his mandate
through, inter alia, the submission of comments and suggestions on the implications and negative effects of
unilateral coercive measures on the full enjoyment of human rights;
26. Decides to examine the question on a priority basis at its seventy-first session, under the sub-item
entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 70/152
A/RE S/70 /152

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),339 by a recorded vote of 134 to 54, with no abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: None

_______________
339

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Brazil, China, Cuba (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries), Russian Federation and South Sudan.

706

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

70/152. Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this question,
Reaffirming the importance of the goal of universal ratification of the United Nations human rights
instruments,
Welcoming the significant increase in the number of ratifications of United Nations human rights instruments
and the movement of some treaties towards universal ratification,
Reiterating the importance of the effective functioning of the treaty bodies established pursuant to United
Nations human rights instruments for the full and effective implementation of those instruments,
Recognizing that the equitable geographical distribution of membership is an essential requirement for the
effective functioning of the treaty bodies,
Recalling that, with regard to the election of the members of the human rights treaty bodies, the General
Assembly and the former Commission on Human Rights recognized the importance of giving consideration in their
membership to equitable geographical distribution, gender balance and representation of the principal legal systems
and of bearing in mind that the members shall be elected and shall serve in their personal capacity, and shall be of
high moral character, acknowledged impartiality and recognized competence in the field of human rights,
Reaffirming the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and
religious backgrounds, as well as of different political, economic and legal systems,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,340
Recognizing that the United Nations pursues multilingualism as a means of promoting, protecting and
preserving diversity of languages and cultures globally and that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity
and international understanding,
Recalling that the General Assembly and the former Commission on Human Rights encouraged States parties
to United Nations human rights treaties, individually and through meetings of States parties, to consider how to give
better effect, inter alia, to the principle of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of treaty bodies,
Expressing its deep concern at the regional imbalance in the current composition of the membership of the
human rights treaty bodies in favour in particular of representatives of members from Western European and other
States, as indicated and highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General,
Reaffirming the importance of increasing efforts to address that imbalance,
Convinced that the goal of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of human rights treaty
bodies is perfectly compatible and can be fully realized and achieved in harmony with the need to achieve gender
balance and the representation of the principal legal systems in those bodies and the high moral character,
acknowledged impartiality and recognized competence in the field of human rights of their members,
1. Reiterates that the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments should take into
account, in their nomination of members to the human rights treaty bodies, that these committees shall be composed
of persons of high moral character and recognized competence in the field of human rights, consideration being
given to the usefulness of the participation of persons having legal experience and to equal representation of women
and men, and that members shall serve in their personal capacity, and also reiterates that, in the elections to the

_______________
340

A/70/257.

707

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

human rights treaty bodies, strong consideration shall be given to equitable geographical distribution of membership
and to the representation of the different forms of civilization and of the principal legal systems;
2. Urges the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments, including the bureau members,
to include this matter in the agenda of each meeting and/or conference of States parties to those instruments in order
to initiate a debate on ways and means to ensure equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the
human rights treaty bodies, based on previous recommendations of the former Commission on Human Rights and
the Economic and Social Council and the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Encourages the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments to consider and adopt
concrete actions, inter alia, the possible establishment of quotas by geographical region for membership of the treaty
bodies, thereby ensuring the paramount objective of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of those
human rights bodies;
4. Recommends, when considering the possible allocation of seats on each treaty body on a regional basis,
the introduction of flexible procedures that encompass the following criteria:
(a) Each of the five regional groups established by the General Assembly is allocated seats on each treaty
body in equivalent proportion to the number of States parties to the instrument in that group;
(b) There must be provision for periodic revisions of the allocation of seats in order to reflect relative
changes in the level of treaty ratification in each regional group;
(c) Automatic periodic revisions should be envisaged in order to avoid amending the text of the instrument
when the quotas are revised;
5. Stresses that the process needed to achieve the goal of equitable geographical distribution in the
membership of human rights treaty bodies can contribute to raising awareness of the importance of gender balance,
the representation of the principal legal systems and the principle that the members of the treaty bodies shall be
elected and shall serve in their personal capacity, and shall be of high moral character, acknowledged impartiality
and recognized competence in the field of human rights;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a comprehensive
updated report in this regard, including information on any steps taken by States parties at meetings or conferences
of States parties to address the matter of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies, as well as concrete recommendations on the implementation of the present resolution;
7. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-second session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 70/153
A/RE S/70 /153

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)341

70/153. Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as well as relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and
_______________
341

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: China, Cuba (on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries), El Salvador, Paraguay, Russian Federation and South
Sudan.

708

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,342 for enhancing
genuine cooperation among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recalling its adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration on 8 September 2000,343 its resolution
69/179 of 18 December 2014, Human Rights Council resolution 28/2 of 26 March 2015344 and the resolutions of
the Commission on Human Rights on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights,
Recalling also the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review Conference,
held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009, and the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action,345 and their role in the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights is essential for the
full achievement of the purposes of the United Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Recognizing also that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based on the principle of
cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their
human rights obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Stressing the importance of international cooperation for improving the living conditions of all in every
country, including, in particular, in developing countries,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the field of human rights could
contribute greatly to the enhancement of international cooperation in this field,
Emphasizing the need for further progress in the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation, transparency and confidence-building
are important elements in all activities for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the adoption of resolution 2000/22 of 18 August 2000, on the promotion of dialogue on human
rights issues, by the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-second
session,346
1. Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the responsibility of all Member States
to promote, protect and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia,
international cooperation;
2. Recognizes that, in addition to their separate responsibilities to their individual societies, States have a
collective responsibility to uphold the principles of human dignity, equality and equity at the global level;
3. Reaffirms that dialogue among cultures and civilizations facilitates the promotion of a culture of
tolerance and respect for diversity, and welcomes in this regard the holding of conferences and meetings at the
national, regional and international levels on dialogue among civilizations;

_______________
342

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution 55/2.
344
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
345
Resolution 66/3.
346
See E/CN.4/2001/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/46, chap. II, sect. A.
343

709

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, justice,
equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and
universal human rights and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance;
5. Reaffirms the importance of the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion and
protection of human rights and for the achievement of the objectives of the fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
6. Considers that international cooperation in the field of human rights, in conformity with the purposes
and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations and international law, should make an effective and
practical contribution to the urgent task of preventing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
7. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms should be guided by the principles of universality, non-selectivity, cooperation and genuine dialogue,
objectivity and transparency, in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter;
8. Emphasizes the need for a cooperative approach on the part of all stakeholders to resolving human rights
issues in international forums;
9. Also emphasizes the role of international cooperation in support of national efforts and in increasing the
capacities of Member States in the field of human rights through, inter alia, the enhancement of their cooperation
with human rights mechanisms, including through the provision of technical assistance, upon the request of and in
accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned;
10. Calls upon Member States, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations to continue to
carry out a constructive dialogue and consultations for the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and encourages non-governmental organizations to
contribute actively to this endeavour;
11. Urges States to take measures necessary to enhance bilateral, regional and international cooperation
aimed at addressing the adverse impact of consecutive and compounded global crises, such as financial and
economic crises, food crises, climate change and natural disasters, on the full enjoyment of human rights;
12. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and procedures to continue to pay
attention to the importance of mutual cooperation, understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and
protection of all human rights;
13. Recalls the seminar on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights held in
2013, with the participation of States, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and other
stakeholders, including academic experts and civil society;
14. Also recalls the high-level panel discussion on the theme “Enhancement of international cooperation in
the field of human rights” held during the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council, in March 2015;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, to consult States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations on ways and means, as
well as on obstacles and challenges and possible proposals to overcome them, for the enhancement of international
cooperation and genuine dialogue in the United Nations human rights machinery, including the Human Rights
Council;
16. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-first session.

710

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/154
A/RE S/70 /154

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)347

70/154. The right to food
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations and its importance for the promotion and protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming also all previous resolutions and decisions on the right to food adopted within the framework of
the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,348 which provides that everyone has the right to a
standard of living adequate for her or his health and well-being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the
Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition,349 the United Nations Millennium Declaration,350 in particular Millennium
Development Goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by 2015, and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,351 in particular the Sustainable Development Goals on ending hunger, achieving food security and
improved nutrition and promoting sustainable agriculture and on ending poverty in all its forms everywhere,
Recalling also the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,352 in
which the fundamental right of every person to be free from hunger is recognized,
Bearing in mind the Rome Declaration on World Food Security, the World Food Summit Plan of Action and
the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002,353
Reaffirming the importance of the concrete recommendations contained in the Voluntary Guidelines to
Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security,
adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004,354 as
well as the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action, adopted in Rome on
21 November 2014,355

_______________
347

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
348
Resolution 217 A (III).
349
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
350
Resolution 55/2.
351
Resolution 70/1.
352
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
353
A/57/499, annex.
354
E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.
355
World Health Organization, document EB 136/8, annexes I and II.

711

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food Security contained in the Declaration
of the World Summit on Food Security, adopted in Rome on 16 November 2009,356
Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that
they must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and economic environment, at both the
national and the international levels, is the essential foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to
food and nutrition security and poverty eradication,
Reiterating, as set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security, the Declaration of the World Food
Summit and the Rome Declaration on Nutrition, that food should not be used as an instrument of political or
economic pressure, and reaffirming in this regard the importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well
as the necessity of refraining from unilateral measures that are not in accordance with international law and the
Charter and that endanger food and nutrition security,
Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its resources and capacities to achieve its
individual goals in implementing the recommendations contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security
and the World Food Summit Plan of Action as well as in the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for
Action and, at the same time, cooperate regionally and internationally in order to organize collective solutions to
global issues of food and nutrition security in a world of increasingly interlinked institutions, societies and
economies where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities are essential,
Recognizing the complex character of the global food crisis, in which the right to adequate food has been
threatened to be violated on a substantial scale, as a combination of several major factors, such as the global
financial and economic crisis, environmental degradation, desertification and the impacts of global climate change,
as well as natural disasters and the lack in many countries of the appropriate technology, investment and capacitybuilding necessary to confront its impact, particularly in developing countries, least developed countries and small
island developing States, and the need for coherence and collaboration between international institutions at the
global level,
Resolved to act to ensure that the human rights perspective is taken into account at the national, regional and
international levels in measures to address the impacts of the global food crisis,
Stressing that improving access to productive resources and investment in rural development is essential for
eradicating hunger and poverty, in particular in developing countries, through, inter alia, the promotion of
investments in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order to reduce
vulnerability to droughts and tackle water scarcity, as well as in programmes, practices and policies to scale up
agroecological approaches,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters, diseases and pest infestations, as well
as the negative impact of climate change, and their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted in
substantial loss of life and livelihood and threatened agricultural production and food and nutrition security, in
particular in developing countries,
Emphasizing that a multisectoral approach that integrates nutrition across all sectors, including agriculture,
health, water and sanitation, social protection and education, as well as a gender perspective, is critical to achieving
global food and nutrition security and the realization of the right to food,
Recalling the endorsement of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security357 by the Committee on World Food Security at its
thirty-eighth session, held on 11 May 2012, and by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations at its 144th session,

_______________
356
357

712

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also the Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems,358 which were
endorsed by the Committee on World Food Security at its forty-first session, held from 13 to 18 October 2014,
Stressing the importance of the Second International Conference on Nutrition, hosted by the World Health
Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Rome from 19 to 21 November
2014, and of its outcome documents, the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action,
Stressing also the need to increase official development assistance devoted to agriculture, both in real terms
and as a share of total official development assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the protection and preservation of agrobiodiversity in guaranteeing food
security and the right to food for all,
Noting the cultural values of dietary and eating habits in different cultures, and recognizing that food plays an
important role in defining the identity of individuals and communities and is a cultural component that describes and
gives value to a territory and its inhabitants,
Recognizing the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as the key United
Nations agency for rural and agricultural development and its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to
achieve the full realization of the right to food, including through its provision of technical assistance to developing
countries in support of the implementation of national priority frameworks,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”, and recalling the commitment therein to work together to promote sustained and inclusive
economic growth, social development and environmental protection and thereby to benefit all, endorsed by the
General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012,
Recalling also the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030359 and its guiding principles,
which, inter alia, recognize the importance of promoting regular disaster preparedness and response and recovery
exercises, with a view to ensuring rapid and effective response to disasters and related displacement, including
access to essential food and non-food relief supplies, as appropriate to local needs, as well as of fostering
collaboration across global and regional mechanisms and institutions for the implementation and coherence of
instruments and tools relevant to disaster risk reduction, such as for climate change, biodiversity, sustainable
development, poverty eradication, environment, agriculture, health, food and nutrition and others, as appropriate,
Acknowledging the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis established by the SecretaryGeneral, and supporting the Secretary-General in his continuing efforts in this regard, including continued
engagement with Member States and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right to food,
1. Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human dignity and therefore requires the
adoption of urgent measures at the national, regional and international levels for its elimination;
2. Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food, consistent with
the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully
develop and maintain his or her physical and mental capacities;
3. Considers it intolerable that, as estimated by the United Nations Children’s Fund, more than one third of
the children who die every year before the age of 5 die from hunger-related illness and that, as estimated by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, about 795 million people in the world remain
undernourished due to the lack of sufficient food for conducting an active and healthy life, including as one of the
effects derived from the global food crisis, while, according to the latter organization, the planet could produce
enough food to feed everyone around the world;
4. Expresses its concern at the fact that the effects created by the world food crisis still continue to have
serious consequences for the poorest and most vulnerable people, particularly in developing countries, which have
_______________
358
359

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/20, appendix D.
Resolution 69/283, annex II.

713

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

been further aggravated by the impacts of the world financial and economic crisis, and at the particular effects of this
crisis on many net food-importing countries, especially least developed countries;
5. Expresses its deep concern that, according to the report of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, entitled The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2015, the number of hungry people in the world
remains unacceptably high and the vast majority of hungry people live in developing countries;
6. Expresses its concern that women and girls are disproportionately affected by hunger, food and nutrition
insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender inequality and discrimination, that in many countries, girls are
twice as likely as boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases and that it is estimated that
almost twice as many women as men suffer from malnutrition;
7. Encourages all States to take action to address gender inequality and discrimination against women, in
particular when they contribute to the malnutrition of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and
equal realization of the right to food and that women have equal access to resources, including income, land and
water and their ownership and agricultural inputs, as well as full and equal access to health care, education, science
and technology, to enable them to feed themselves and their families, and in this regard stresses the need to
empower women and strengthen their role in decision-making;
8. Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right to food to continue to
mainstream a gender perspective in the fulfilment of her mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and all other United Nations bodies and mechanisms addressing the right to
food and food insecurity to continue to integrate a gender perspective into their relevant policies, programmes and
activities;
9. Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and nutritious food are inclusive of and
accessible to persons with disabilities;
10. Calls upon all States and, if appropriate, relevant international organizations to take measures and
support programmes that are aimed at combating undernutrition in mothers, in particular during pregnancy, and in
children, and the irreversible effects of chronic undernutrition in early childhood, in particular from birth to the age
of 2 years;
11. Also calls upon all States and, where appropriate, relevant international organizations to implement
policies and programmes to reduce and eliminate preventable mortality and morbidity, as a result of malnutrition, of
children under 5 years of age, and in this regard urges States to disseminate the technical guidance prepared by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in collaboration with the World Health
Organization360 and to apply it, as appropriate, in the design, implementation, evaluation and monitoring of laws,
policies, programmes, budgets and mechanisms for remedy and redress aimed at eliminating preventable mortality
and morbidity of children under 5 years of age;
12. Encourages all States to take steps, with a view to progressively achieving the full realization of the right
to food, including steps to promote the conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to
enjoy fully the right to food, and to create and adopt national plans to combat hunger;
13. Recognizes the advances reached through South-South cooperation in developing countries and regions
in connection with food security and the development of agricultural production for the full realization of the right
to food;
14. Stresses that improving access to productive resources and public investment in rural development is
essential for eradicating hunger and poverty, in particular in developing countries, including through the promotion
of investment, including private investment, in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management
technologies in order to reduce vulnerability to droughts and to tackle water scarcity;
15. Recognizes the critical contribution made by the fisheries sector to the realization of the right to food and
to food security and the contribution of small-scale fishers to the local food security of coastal communities;
_______________
360

714

A/HRC/27/31.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

16. Also recognizes that 70 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas, where nearly half a billion family
farmers are located, and that these people are especially vulnerable to food insecurity given the increasing cost of
inputs and the fall in farm incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is an increasing
challenge for poor producers; that sustainable and gender-sensitive agricultural policies are important tools for
promoting land and agrarian reform, rural credit and insurance, technical assistance and other associated measures
to achieve food security and rural development; and that support by States for small farmers, fishing communities
and local enterprises, including through the facilitation of access for their products to national and international
markets and empowerment of small producers, particularly women, in value chains, is a key element for food
security and the provision of the right to food;
17. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including through national efforts supported by
international partnerships to stop desertification and land degradation and through investments and public policies
that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this regard calls for the full implementation of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa;361
18. Urges States that have not yet done so to favourably consider becoming parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity362 and to consider becoming parties to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for
Food and Agriculture363 as a matter of priority;
19. Recalls the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,364 acknowledges that many
indigenous organizations and representatives of indigenous peoples have expressed in different forums their deep
concerns over the obstacles and challenges they face in achieving the full enjoyment of the right to food, and calls
upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the disproportionately high level of hunger and
malnutrition among indigenous peoples and the continuous discrimination against them;
20. Welcomes the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as
the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held on 22 and 23 September 2014,365 and the commitment to
developing, in conjunction with the indigenous peoples concerned and where appropriate, policies, programmes and
resources to support indigenous peoples’ occupations, traditional subsistence activities, economies, livelihoods, food
security and nutrition;
21. Notes the need to further examine various concepts, such as “food sovereignty”, and their relation with
food security and the right to food, bearing in mind the need to avoid any negative impact on the enjoyment of the
right to food for all people at all times;
22. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international organizations, within their respective
mandates, to take fully into account the need to promote the effective realization of the right to food for all,
including in the ongoing negotiations in different fields;
23. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment as well as international assistance, upon the
request of and in cooperation with the affected countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to
food, and in particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their homes and land
because of hunger or humanitarian emergencies affecting their enjoyment of the right to food;
24. Takes note with appreciation of the growing movement, in different regions of the world, towards the
adoption of framework laws, national strategies and measures in support of the full realization of the right to food
for all;
25. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the allocation and utilization of technical and
financial resources from all sources, including external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce national
actions to implement sustainable food security policies;
_______________
361

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
363
Ibid., vol. 2400, No. 43345.
364
Resolution 61/295, annex.
365
Resolution 69/2.
362

715

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

26. Calls for the conclusion and a successful, development-oriented outcome of the Doha Round of trade
negotiations of the World Trade Organization as a contribution to creating international conditions that permit the
full realization of the right to food;
27. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their international policies of a political and
economic nature, including international trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to food in
other countries;
28. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action against Hunger and Poverty, and
recommends the continuation of efforts aimed at identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against
hunger and poverty, as well as non-communicable diseases;
29. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in 1996 to halve the number of persons
who are undernourished are not being fulfilled, while recognizing the efforts of Member States in this regard, and
once again invites all international financial and development institutions, as well as the relevant United Nations
agencies and funds, to give priority to and provide the funding necessary to realize the right to food, as set out in the
Rome Declaration on World Food Security, and to achieve the aims of Goal 2 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development351 and other food and nutrition-related targets;
30. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the goal that all people at all times will have
access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and
healthy life, is part of a comprehensive effort to improve public health, including the response to the spread of
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other communicable diseases;
31. Urges States to give adequate priority in their development strategies and expenditures to the realization
of the right to food;
32. Stresses the importance of international cooperation and development assistance as an effective
contribution both to the expansion and improvement of agriculture and its environmental sustainability, food
production, breeding projects on diversity of crops and livestock and institutional innovations such as community
seed banks, farmer field schools and seed fairs, and to the provision of humanitarian food assistance in activities
related to emergency situations for the realization of the right to food and the achievement of sustainable food
security, while recognizing that each country has the primary responsibility for ensuring the implementation of
national programmes and strategies in this regard;
33. Also stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights should consider implementing that agreement in a manner that is supportive of food
security, while being mindful of the obligation of Member States to promote and protect the right to food;
34. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders to support
national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to the food crises currently occurring across different regions, and
expresses its deep concern that funding shortfalls are forcing the World Food Programme to cut operations across
different regions, including Southern Africa;
35. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, to continue to promote policies and projects that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that
partners respect the right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support strategies of Member States
aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to avoid any actions that could have a negative impact on its
realization;
36. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur,366 which underlines, inter
alia, the adverse impact of climate change on the right to food;
37. Recognizes the importance of giving due consideration to the adverse impact of climate change and to
the full realization of the right to food, and looks forward to the outcome to be reached in Paris at the twenty-first
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;
_______________
366

716

A/70/287.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

38. Reiterates its support for the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, and requests the
Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide all the
human and financial resources necessary for its effective fulfilment;
39. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in
promoting the right to adequate food, in particular its general comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food
(article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights),367 in which the Committee
affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate food is indivisibly linked to the inherent dignity of the human person,
indispensable for the fulfilment of other human rights enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights and
inseparable from social justice, requiring the adoption of appropriate economic, environmental and social policies, at
both the national and the international levels, oriented to the eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of all human
rights for all;
40. Recalls general comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on
the right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the Covenant),368 in which the Committee noted, inter alia, the importance of
ensuring sustainable access to water resources for human consumption and agriculture in realization of the right to
adequate food;
41. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate
Food in the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations in November 2004,354 represent a useful tool to promote the realization of the right to food for
all, contribute to the achievement of food security, and thus provide an additional instrument in the attainment of
internationally agreed development goals and to support national Governments in the implementation of food
security and nutrition policies, programmes and legal frameworks;
42. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in her task, to supply all
necessary information requested by her and to give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of
the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable her to fulfil her mandate more effectively;
43. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session an interim
report on the implementation of the present resolution and to continue her work, including by examining the
emerging issues with regard to the realization of the right to food within her mandate;
44. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, treaty bodies, civil
society actors and non-governmental organizations, as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the fulfilment of her mandate through, inter alia, the submission of comments and suggestions on
ways and means of realizing the right to food;
45. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its seventy-first session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 70/155
A/RE S/70 /155

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),369 by a recorded vote of 148 to 6, with 33 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,

_______________
367

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and corrigendum (E/2000/22 and Corr.1), annex V.
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.
369
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: China, Cuba (on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries), El Salvador and South Sudan.
368

717

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Japan, Palau, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine

70/155. The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in particular, the determination to promote
social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom and, to that end, to employ international mechanisms
for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,370 as well as the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights371 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,371
Recalling also the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and
social fields,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986, which confirmed that the right to development is an inalienable human right
and that equality of opportunity for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who make up
nations, and that the individual is the central subject and beneficiary of development,
Stressing the importance of the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna in 1993, and that the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action372 reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and inalienable
right and an integral part of fundamental human rights and the individual as the central subject and beneficiary of
development,
Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality for everyone, as set out in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the General Assembly on 8 September 2000,373
Deeply concerned that the majority of indigenous peoples in the world live in conditions of poverty, and
recognizing the critical need to address the negative impact of poverty and inequity on indigenous peoples by
ensuring their full and effective inclusion in development and poverty eradication programmes,
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples and its outcome document,374
Reaffirming the universality, indivisibility, interrelatedness, interdependence and mutually reinforcing nature
of all civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights, including the right to development,
Expressing deep concern over the lack of substantial progress in the trade negotiations of the World Trade
Organization, and calling upon all members of the World Trade Organization to redouble their efforts to promptly
_______________
370

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
372
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
373
Resolution 55/2.
374
Resolution 69/2.
371

718

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

conclude the negotiations on the Doha Development Agenda,375 taking into account that international trade is an
engine for inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction and contributes to the promotion of sustainable
development,
Recalling the outcome of the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008, on the theme “Addressing the opportunities and challenges of globalization
for development”,376
Recalling also all its previous resolutions, Human Rights Council resolutions and those of the Commission on
Human Rights on the right to development, in particular Commission resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998377 on the
urgent need to make further progress towards the realization of the right to development,
Recalling further the outcome of the eleventh session of the Working Group on the Right to Development of
the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva from 26 to 30 April 2010, as contained in the report of the Working
Group378 and as referred to in the report of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights,379
Recalling the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012, and the previous summits and conferences at which the States members of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries stressed the need to operationalize the right to development as a priority,
including through the elaboration of a convention on the right to development by the relevant machinery, taking into
account the recommendations of relevant initiatives,
Reiterating its continuing support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development380 as a development
framework for Africa,
Expressing its appreciation for the efforts of the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group on the Right to
Development and the members of the high-level task force on the implementation of the right to development in
completing the 2008–2010 three-phase road map established by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 4/4 of
30 March 2007,381
Deeply concerned about the negative impacts of the global economic and financial crises on the realization of
the right to development,
Recognizing that, while development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, the lack of development
may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of internationally recognized human rights,
Recognizing also that Member States should cooperate with one another in ensuring development and
eliminating obstacles to development, that the international community should promote effective international
cooperation for the realization of the right to development and the elimination of obstacles to development and that
lasting progress towards the implementation of the right to development requires effective development policies at
the national level, as well as equitable economic relations and a favourable economic environment at the
international level,
Recognizing further that poverty is an affront to human dignity,
Recognizing that extreme poverty and hunger are among the greatest global threats and require the collective
commitment of the international community for their eradication, pursuant to Millennium Development Goal 1 and
Sustainable Development Goals 1 and 2, and therefore calling upon the international community, including the
Human Rights Council, to contribute towards achieving that goal,
_______________
375

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
See TD/442 and Corr.1 and 2.
377
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A.
378
A/HRC/15/23.
379
A/HRC/15/24.
380
A/57/304, annex.
381
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. III, sect. A.
376

719

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that historical injustices, inter alia, have contributed to the poverty, underdevelopment,
marginalization, social exclusion, economic disparity, instability and insecurity that affect many people in different
parts of the world, in particular in developing countries,
Recognizing further that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is one
of the critical elements in the promotion and realization of the right to development and is the greatest global
challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, which requires a multifaceted and
integrated approach, and committed to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner,
Emphasizing that all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, are
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Emphasizing also that the right to development should be central to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development,382
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, reaffirming that the Declaration on
the Right to Development informed the 2030 Agenda, along with other relevant international instruments, and
underlining the fact that the Sustainable Development Goals can be realized only through a credible, effective and
universal commitment to the means of implementation by all stakeholders,
Stressing that the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Right to Development presents a unique
opportunity for the international community to demonstrate and reiterate its unequivocal commitment to the right to
development, recognizing the high profile that it deserves, and redoubling its efforts to implement this right,
1. Takes note of the consolidated report of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights concerning the promotion and realization of the right to development;383
2. Recognizes the significance of all the events held to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration on the Right to Development,384 including the panel discussion on the theme “The way forward in the
realization of the right to development: between policy and practice”, held during the eighteenth session of the
Human Rights Council;
3. Acknowledges the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the right to
development at the international level while urging all States to undertake at the national level the necessary policy
formulation and to institute the measures required for the implementation of the right to development as an integral
part of all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
4. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Working Group on the Right to Development, as renewed
by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 9/3 of 24 September 2008,385 and recognizes the need for renewed
efforts towards intensifying deliberations in the Working Group to fulfil its mandate at the earliest, while welcoming
the commencement of the second reading of the draft criteria and corresponding operational subcriteria;
5. Reaffirms the recommendations adopted by the Working Group at its fourteenth session,386 and calls for
their immediate, full and effective implementation by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other relevant actors, noting also the efforts under way within the framework of the Working
Group with a view to completing the tasks entrusted to it by the Council in its resolution 4/4;381
6. Emphasizes the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006
establishing the Human Rights Council, and in this regard calls upon the Council to implement the agreement to
continue to act to ensure that its agenda promotes and advances sustainable development and the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, and also in this regard to lead the raising of the right to development, as set out in
_______________
382

Resolution 70/1.
A/HRC/30/22.
384
Resolution 41/128, annex.
385
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53/Add.1), chap. I.
386
A/HRC/24/37.
383

720

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

paragraphs 5 and 10 of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,372 to the same level as and on a par with
all other human rights and fundamental freedoms;
7. Stresses that the views, criteria and corresponding operational subcriteria, once considered, revised and
endorsed by the Working Group, should be used, as appropriate, in the elaboration of a comprehensive and coherent
set of standards for the implementation of the right to development;
8. Emphasizes the importance of the Working Group taking appropriate steps to ensure respect for and
practical application of the above-mentioned standards, which could take various forms, including the elaboration of
guidelines on the implementation of the right to development, and evolve into a basis for the consideration of an
international legal standard of a binding nature through a collaborative process of engagement;
9. Recalls the request made to the Working Group to consider at its seventeenth session a document, to be
produced by its Chair-Rapporteur, containing a set of standards for the implementation of the right to development
based on relevant United Nations resolutions and documents, including the Declaration on the Right to
Development, relevant international conventions and decisions as well as internationally agreed development goals
and United Nations resolutions, in consultation with Member States, relevant international organizations and other
stakeholders;
10. Also recalls that the above-mentioned document would be prepared without prejudice to the ongoing
discussions on the criteria and operational subcriteria, in the context of which the Working Group shall complete its
second reading at its seventeenth session and decide on further action thereafter, with the objective of elaborating a
comprehensive and coherent set of standards for the implementation of the right to development;
11. Decides to convene a two-day formal meeting of the Working Group, after its seventeenth session, to
consider further and discuss the document containing the draft set of standards;
12. Stresses the importance of the core principles contained in the conclusions of the Working Group at its
third session387 that are congruent with the purpose of international human rights instruments, such as equality, nondiscrimination, accountability, participation and international cooperation, as critical to mainstreaming the right to
development at the national and international levels, and underlines the importance of the principles of equity and
transparency;
13. Also stresses that it is important that the Chair-Rapporteur and the Working Group, in the discharge of
their mandates, take into account the need:
(a) To promote the democratization of the system of international governance in order to increase the
effective participation of developing countries in international decision-making;
(b) To also promote effective partnerships such as the New Partnership for Africa’s Development380 and
other similar initiatives with the developing countries, particularly the least developed countries, for the purpose of
the realization of their right to development, including the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
(c) To strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the right to development at the
international level, while urging all States to undertake at the national level the necessary policy formulation and to
institute the measures required for the implementation of the right to development as an integral part of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and also while urging all States to expand and deepen mutually beneficial
cooperation in ensuring development and eliminating obstacles to development in the context of promoting
effective international cooperation for the realization of the right to development, bearing in mind that lasting
progress towards the implementation of the right to development requires effective development policies at the
national level and a favourable economic environment at the international level;
(d)
priority;

To consider ways and means to continue to ensure the operationalization of the right to development as a

(e) To mainstream the right to development in the policies and operational activities of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies, funds and programmes, as well as in the policies and strategies of the international
_______________
387

See E/CN.4/2002/28/Rev.1, sect. VIII.A.

721

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

financial and multilateral trading systems, bearing in mind in this regard that the core principles of the international
economic, commercial and financial spheres, such as equity, non-discrimination, transparency, accountability,
participation and international cooperation, including effective partnerships for development, are indispensable in
achieving the right to development and preventing discriminatory treatment arising from political or other noneconomic considerations in addressing the issues of concern to the developing countries;
14. Encourages the Human Rights Council to continue to consider how to ensure follow-up to the work of
the former Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights on the right to development, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Commission on
Human Rights and in compliance with decisions to be taken by the Council;
15. Reaffirms the commitment to implement the goals and targets set out in all the outcome documents of
the major United Nations conferences and summits and their review processes, in particular those relating to the
realization of the right to development, recognizing that the realization of the right to development is critical to
achieving the objectives, goals and targets set in those outcome documents;
16. Also reaffirms that the realization of the right to development is essential to the implementation of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, which regards all human rights as universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, places the human person at the centre of development and recognizes that, while
development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, lack of development may not be invoked to justify the
abridgement of internationally recognized human rights;
17. Stresses that the primary responsibility for the promotion and protection of all human rights lies with the
State, and reaffirms that States have the primary responsibility for their own economic and social development and
that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
18. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to create national and international conditions favourable
to the realization of the right to development, as well as their commitment to cooperate with one another to that end;
19. Expresses concern about the increasing cases of human rights violations and abuses by some
transnational corporations and other business enterprises, underlines the need to ensure that appropriate protection,
justice and remedies are provided to the victims of human rights violations and abuses resulting from their activities,
and underscores the fact that these entities must contribute to the means of implementation for the realization of the
right to development;
20. Reaffirms the need for an international environment that is conducive to the realization of the right to
development;
21. Stresses the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the right to
development at the international and national levels, and calls upon all States to institute the measures required for
the implementation of the right to development as an integral part of all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
22. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing obstacles impeding the full realization
of the right to development at both the national and international levels;
23. Affirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and challenges, the process of globalization
remains deficient in achieving the objectives of integrating all countries into a globalized world, stresses the need for
policies and measures at the national and global levels to respond to the challenges and opportunities of
globalization if this process is to be made fully inclusive and equitable, recognizes that globalization has brought
disparities between and within countries and that issues such as trade and trade liberalization, transfer of technology,
infrastructure development and market access should be managed effectively in order to mitigate the challenges of
poverty and underdevelopment and to make the right to development a reality for everyone;
24. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the international community, the gap between
developed and developing countries remains unacceptably wide, that most of the developing countries continue to
face difficulties in participating in the globalization process and that many risk being marginalized and effectively
excluded from its benefits;
25. Expresses its deep concern, in this regard, about the negative impact on the realization of the right to
development due to the further aggravation of the economic and social situation, in particular of developing
countries, as a result of the ongoing international energy, food and financial crises, as well as the increasing
722

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

challenges posed by global climate change and the loss of biodiversity, which have increased vulnerabilities and
inequalities and have adversely affected development gains, in particular in developing countries;
26. Recalls the commitment in the United Nations Millennium Declaration373 of halving the number of
people living in poverty by 2015, notes with concern that some developing countries have failed to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard invites Member States and the international community to take
proactive measures aimed at creating a conducive environment to contribute to the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular increasing international cooperation, including partnership
and commitment, between developed and developing countries towards achieving the goals;
27. Urges developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete efforts towards meeting the
targets of 0.7 per cent of their gross national product for official development assistance to developing countries and
0.15 to 0.2 per cent of their gross national product to least developed countries, and encourages developing countries
to build on the progress achieved in ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help to meet
development goals and targets;
28. Recognizes the need to address market access for developing countries, including in the sectors of
agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in particular those of interest to developing countries;
29. Calls once again for the implementation of a desirable pace of meaningful trade liberalization, including
in areas under negotiation in the World Trade Organization, the implementation of commitments on
implementation-related issues and concerns, a review of special and differential treatment provisions, with a view to
strengthening them and making them more precise, effective and operational, the avoidance of new forms of
protectionism, and capacity-building and technical assistance for developing countries as important issues in making
progress towards the effective implementation of the right to development;
30. Recognizes the important link between the international economic, commercial and financial spheres
and the realization of the right to development, stresses in this regard the need for good governance and for
broadening the base of decision-making at the international level on issues of development concern and the need to
fill organizational gaps, as well as to strengthen the United Nations system and other multilateral institutions, and
also stresses the need to broaden and strengthen the participation of developing countries and countries with
economies in transition in international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
31. Also recognizes that good governance and the rule of law at the national level assist all States in the
promotion and protection of human rights, including the right to development, and agrees on the value of the
ongoing efforts being made by States to identify and strengthen good governance practices, including transparent,
responsible, accountable and participatory government, that are responsive and appropriate to their needs and
aspirations, including in the context of agreed partnership approaches to development, capacity-building and
technical assistance;
32. Further recognizes the important role and the rights of women and the application of a gender
perspective as a cross-cutting issue in the process of realizing the right to development, and notes in particular the
positive relationship between the education of women and their equal participation in the civil, cultural, economic,
political and social activities of the community and the promotion of the right to development;
33. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, girls and boys alike, in all policies and
programmes and for ensuring the promotion and protection of those rights, especially in areas relating to health,
education and the full development of their capacities;
34. Recalls the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and
AIDS, adopted on 10 June 2011 at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on HIV and AIDS,388 stresses
that further and additional measures must be taken at the national and international levels to fight HIV and AIDS
and other communicable diseases, taking into account ongoing efforts and programmes, and reiterates the need for
international assistance in this regard;
_______________
388

Resolution 65/277, annex.

723

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

35. Welcomes the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases, adopted on 19 September 2011,389 with its particular focus on
development and other challenges and social and economic impacts, particularly for developing countries;
36. Recalls the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”;390
37. Also recalls the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,391 which entered into force on
3 May 2008, and stresses the need to take into consideration the rights of persons with disabilities and the
importance of international cooperation in support of national efforts in the realization of the right to development;
38. Stresses its commitment to indigenous peoples in the process of the realization of the right to
development, reaffirms the commitment to promote their rights in the areas of education, employment, vocational
training and retraining, housing, sanitation, health and social security, in accordance with recognized international
human rights obligations, and taking into account, as appropriate, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 61/295 of 13 September 2007, and in this
regard recalls the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples, held in 2014;
39. Recognizes the need for strong partnerships with civil society organizations and the private sector in
pursuit of poverty eradication and development, as well as for corporate social responsibility;
40. Emphasizes the urgent need to take concrete and effective measures to prevent, combat and criminalize
all forms of corruption at all levels, to prevent, detect and deter in a more effective manner international transfers of
illicitly acquired assets and to strengthen international cooperation in asset recovery, consistent with the principles of
the United Nations Convention against Corruption,392 particularly chapter V thereof, stresses the importance of a
genuine political commitment on the part of all Governments through a firm legal framework, and in this context
urges States to sign and ratify the Convention as soon as possible and States parties to implement it effectively;
41. Also emphasizes the need to strengthen further the activities of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the promotion and realization of the right to development, including by
ensuring the effective use of the financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its mandate, and calls upon the
Secretary-General to provide the Office with the necessary resources;
42. Reaffirms the request to the High Commissioner, in mainstreaming the right to development, to
effectively undertake activities aimed at strengthening the global partnership for development among Member
States, development agencies and the international development, financial and trade institutions and to reflect those
activities in detail in his next report to the Human Rights Council;
43. Calls upon the United Nations funds and programmes, as well as the specialized agencies, to
mainstream the right to development in their operational programmes and objectives, and stresses the need for the
international financial and multilateral trading systems to mainstream the right to development in their policies and
objectives;
44. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, United
Nations organs and bodies, the specialized agencies, funds and programmes, international development and
financial institutions, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-governmental organizations;
45. Supports the decision of the Human Rights Council, as part of the activities to commemorate the
thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Right to Development, to request the High Commissioner to seek the
views of Member States in preparing a paper on the realization and implementation of the right to development, as
elaborated in the Declaration, in particular its article 4;
_______________
389

Resolution 66/2, annex.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
391
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
392
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
390

724

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

46. Decides to convene a one-day high-level segment of the General Assembly, in the margins of the general
debate of the Assembly at its seventy-first session, in order to commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of the
Declaration on the Right to Development;
47. Encourages Member States, individually and collectively, to convene events with their own resources
for the commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Right to Development;
48. Also encourages Member States to give particular consideration to the right to development in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
49. Notes that the theme of the Human Rights Council high-level panel on human rights mainstreaming, to
be held during the thirty-first session of the Council, in March 2016, will be “The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and human rights, with an emphasis on the right to development”;
50. Encourages relevant bodies of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, including
United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, relevant international organizations, including
the World Trade Organization and relevant stakeholders, including civil society organizations, to give due
consideration to the right to development in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
to contribute further to the work of the Working Group on the Right to Development and to cooperate with the High
Commissioner in the fulfilment of his mandate with regard to the implementation of the right to development;
51. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session
and an interim report to the Human Rights Council on the implementation of the present resolution, including
efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international levels in the promotion and realization of the right to
development, and invites the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group to present an oral report and to engage in an
interactive dialogue with the Assembly at its seventy-first session.
RESOLUTION 70/156
A/RE S/70 /156

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),393 by a recorded vote of 133 to 54, with no abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: None

_______________
393

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Brazil, China, Cuba (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries) and South Sudan.

725

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

70/156. Human rights and cultural diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,394 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights395 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,395 as well as other pertinent human
rights instruments,
Recalling also its resolutions 54/160 of 17 December 1999, 55/91 of 4 December 2000, 57/204 of
18 December 2002, 58/167 of 22 December 2003, 60/167 of 16 December 2005, 62/155 of 18 December 2007,
64/174 of 18 December 2009, 66/154 of 19 December 2011 and 68/159 of 18 December 2013, and recalling further
its resolutions 54/113 of 10 December 1999, 55/23 of 13 November 2000 and 60/4 of 20 October 2005 concerning
the United Nations Year of Dialogue among Civilizations,
Noting that numerous instruments within the United Nations system promote cultural diversity, as well as the
conservation and development of culture, in particular the Declaration of the Principles of International Culture
Cooperation proclaimed on 4 November 1966 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its fourteenth session,396
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,397 which highlighted the importance of preserving and
protecting a rich cultural diversity and reflected different experiences and perspectives in this regard,
Recalling that, as stated in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the annex to its
resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, States have the duty to cooperate with one another, irrespective of the
differences in their political, economic and social systems, in the various spheres of international relations, in the
promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and in the
elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and all forms of religious intolerance,
Welcoming the adoption, by its resolution 56/6 of 9 November 2001, of the Global Agenda for Dialogue
among Civilizations,
Welcoming also the contribution of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review
Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009, and the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, held on
22 September 2011, to the promotion of respect for cultural diversity,
Welcoming further the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization,398 together with its Action Plan,399 adopted on 2 November 2001 by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirty-first
session, in which member States invited the United Nations system and other intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations concerned to cooperate with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in the promotion of the principles set forth in the Declaration and its Action Plan, with a view to
enhancing the synergy of actions in favour of cultural diversity,
Recalling the Ministerial Meeting on Human Rights and Cultural Diversity of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Tehran on 3 and 4 September 2007,

_______________
394

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
396
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Fourteenth Session, Paris,
1966, Resolutions.
397
A/70/167.
398
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-first Session, Paris,
15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25, annex I.
399
Ibid., annex II.
395

726

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with
the same emphasis, and that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical,
cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their political,
economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Expressing concern over the adverse impacts of lack of respect for and recognition of cultural diversity on
human rights, justice, friendship and the fundamental right to development,
Recognizing that cultural diversity and the pursuit of cultural development by all peoples and nations are a
source of mutual enrichment for the cultural life of humankind,
Recognizing also the contribution that diverse cultures have been making to the development and promotion
of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Taking into account that a culture of peace actively fosters non-violence and respect for human rights and
strengthens solidarity among peoples and nations and dialogue between cultures,
Reaffirming that discriminatory treatment against different cultures and religions is detrimental to the principle
of the equality of human beings,
Recognizing that all cultures and civilizations share a common set of universal values,
Recognizing also that the promotion of the rights of indigenous people and their cultures and traditions will
contribute to the respect for and observance of cultural diversity among all peoples and nations,
Considering that tolerance of cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic diversities, as well as dialogue among
and within civilizations, is essential for peace, understanding and friendship among individuals and people of
different cultures and nations of the world, while manifestations of cultural prejudice, intolerance and xenophobia
towards different cultures and religions generate hatred, violence and extremism among peoples and nations
throughout the world,
Recognizing in each culture a dignity and value that deserve recognition, respect and preservation, and
convinced that, in their rich variety and diversity, and in the reciprocal influences that they exert on one another, all
cultures form part of the common heritage belonging to all humankind,
Convinced that the promotion of cultural pluralism and tolerance towards and dialogue among various
cultures and civilizations would contribute to the efforts of all peoples and nations to enrich their cultures and
traditions by engaging in a mutually beneficial exchange of knowledge and intellectual, moral and material
achievements,
Acknowledging the diversity of the world, recognizing that all cultures and civilizations contribute to the
enrichment of humankind, acknowledging the importance of respect and understanding for religious and cultural
diversity throughout the world, and, in order to promote international peace and security, committing itself to
advancing human welfare, freedom and progress everywhere, as well as to encouraging tolerance, respect, dialogue
and cooperation among different cultures, civilizations and peoples,
1. Affirms the importance for all peoples and nations to hold, develop and preserve their cultural heritage
and traditions in a national and international atmosphere of peace, tolerance and mutual respect;
2. Emphasizes the important contribution of culture to development and the achievement of national
development objectives and internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals;
3. Welcomes the adoption on 25 September 2015 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,400 in
which Member States acknowledged the natural and cultural diversity of the world and recognized that all cultures
and civilizations can contribute to, and are crucial enablers of, sustainable development;
_______________
400

Resolution 70/1.

727

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Recognizes the importance given to cultural diversity in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
including in Sustainable Development Goal 4, related to ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and
promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all;
5. Also recognizes the right of everyone to take part in cultural life and to enjoy the benefits of scientific
progress and its applications;
6. Affirms that the international community should strive to respond to the challenges and opportunities
posed by globalization in a manner that ensures respect for the cultural diversity of all;
7. Expresses its determination to prevent and mitigate cultural homogenization in the context of
globalization, through increased intercultural exchange guided by the promotion and protection of cultural diversity;
8. Affirms that intercultural dialogue essentially enriches the common understanding of human rights and
that the benefits to be derived from the encouragement and development of international contacts and cooperation in
the cultural fields are important;
9. Welcomes the recognition at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance of the necessity of respecting and maximizing the benefits of diversity within and among all
nations in working together to build a harmonious and productive future by putting into practice and promoting
values and principles such as justice, equality and non-discrimination, democracy, fairness and friendship, tolerance
and respect within and among communities and nations, in particular through public information and educational
programmes to raise awareness and understanding of the benefits of cultural diversity, including programmes in
which the public authorities work in partnership with international and non-governmental organizations and other
sectors of civil society;
10. Emphasizes that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations on the basis of equal dignity should
be enhanced, through supporting efforts made at the international level towards reducing confrontation, suppressing
xenophobia and promoting respect for diversity, and in that regard also emphasizes that States should oppose all
attempts at uniculturalism or the imposition of particular models of social or cultural systems and promote dialogue
among civilizations, a culture of peace and interfaith dialogue, which will contribute towards peace, security and
development;
11. Welcomes the activities of the Non-Aligned Movement Centre for Human Rights and Cultural Diversity
in Tehran, and acknowledges the important role that the Centre plays in the promotion of the universality of all
human rights as well as their realization;
12. Recognizes that respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all enhances cultural pluralism,
contributing to a wider exchange of knowledge and understanding of cultural background, advancing the
application and enjoyment of universally accepted human rights throughout the world and fostering stable, friendly
relations among peoples and nations worldwide;
13. Emphasizes that the promotion of cultural pluralism and tolerance at the national, regional and
international levels is important for enhancing respect for cultural rights and cultural diversity;
14. Also emphasizes that tolerance and respect for diversity facilitate the universal promotion and protection
of human rights, including gender equality and the enjoyment of all human rights by all, and underlines the fact that
tolerance and respect for cultural diversity and the universal promotion and protection of human rights are mutually
supportive;
15. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, justice,
equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and
universal human rights, and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance;
16. Calls upon States, relevant international organizations and non-governmental organizations to support
and embark on intercultural initiatives on human rights in order to promote all human rights, thereby enriching their
universality;
728

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Urges States to ensure that their political and legal systems reflect the multicultural diversity within their
societies and, where necessary, to improve democratic institutions so that they are more fully participatory and avoid
marginalization and exclusion of, and discrimination against, specific sectors of society;
18. Calls upon States, international organizations and United Nations agencies, and invites civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, to recognize and promote respect for cultural diversity for the purpose of
advancing the objectives of peace, development and universally accepted human rights;
19. Stresses the necessity of freely using the media and new information and communications technologies
to create the conditions for a renewed dialogue among cultures and civilizations;
20. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to bear in
mind fully the issues raised in the present resolution in the course of its activities for the promotion and protection of
human rights;
21. Also requests the Office of the High Commissioner, and invites the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, to support initiatives aimed at promoting intercultural dialogue on human
rights;
22. Urges relevant international organizations to conduct studies on how respect for cultural diversity
contributes to fostering international solidarity and cooperation among all nations;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution,
including efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international levels regarding the recognition and
importance of cultural diversity among all peoples and nations in the world and taking into account the views of
Member States, relevant United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations, and to submit the report to
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session;
24. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its seventy-second session under the sub-item
entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 70/157
A/RE S/70 /157

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)401

70/157. Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter of the United Nations to promote and
encourage universal respect for and observance of all human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as
to, inter alia, religion or belief,
Reaffirming also the obligation of States to prohibit discrimination and violence on the basis of religion or
belief and to implement measures to guarantee the equal and effective protection of the law,
Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Reaffirming that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights402 provides, inter alia, that everyone
shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, which shall include freedom to have or
_______________
401

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Burundi, Central African Republic,
China, Congo, Egypt (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation), Eritrea, Ghana, Lesotho, New Zealand, South Sudan and Thailand.
402
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

729

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to adopt a religion or belief of one’s choice and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or
private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching,
Reaffirming also the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and full
respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information can play in strengthening democracy and combating
religious intolerance, and reaffirming further that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression carries with it
special duties and responsibilities, in accordance with article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,
Expressing deep concern at those acts that advocate religious hatred and thereby undermine the spirit of
tolerance,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group,
Condemning the criminal acts committed by terrorist and extremist groups and movements against persons
based on their religion or belief, and deeply regretting attempts to link these acts to any one specific religion
or belief,
Reaffirming that violence can never be an acceptable response to acts of intolerance on the basis of religion
or belief,
Welcoming Human Rights Council resolutions 16/18 of 24 March 2011,403 19/25 of 23 March 2012,404 22/31
of 22 March 2013405 and 28/29 of 27 March 2015406 and General Assembly resolutions 67/178 of 20 December
2012, 68/169 of 18 December 2013 and 69/174 of 18 December 2014,
Recalling its adoption of resolutions 69/140 of 15 December 2014 on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace and 69/312 of 6 July 2015 on the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations,
Deeply concerned about continuing incidents of intolerance, discrimination and violence against persons
based on their religion or belief in all regions of the world,
Deploring any advocacy of discrimination or violence on the basis of religion or belief,
Strongly deploring all acts of violence against persons on the basis of their religion or belief, as well as any
such acts directed against their homes, businesses, properties, schools, cultural centres or places of worship,
Strongly deploring also all attacks on and in religious places, sites and shrines in violation of international law,
in particular human rights law and international humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of relics and
monuments,
Deeply concerned about the prevalence of impunity in some instances, and the lack of accountability in some
cases, in addressing violence against persons on the basis of religion or belief in public and private spheres, and
stressing the importance of making necessary efforts to raise awareness to address the spread of hate speech against
persons on the basis of religion or belief,
Concerned about actions that wilfully exploit tensions or target individuals on the basis of their religion
or belief,
Expressing deep concern at the instances of intolerance, discrimination and acts of violence occurring in the
world, including cases motivated by discrimination against persons belonging to religious minorities, in addition to
the negative projection of the followers of religions and the enforcement of measures that specifically discriminate
against persons on the basis of religion or belief,
_______________
403

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
405
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
406
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
404

730

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing concern at the growing manifestations of intolerance based on religion or belief, which can
generate hatred and violence among individuals from and within different nations and which may have serious
implications at the national, regional and international levels, and in this regard emphasizing the importance of
respect for religious and cultural diversity, as well as interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue aimed at
promoting a culture of tolerance and respect among individuals, societies and nations,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of people of all religions or beliefs to humanity and the contribution that
dialogue among religious groups can make towards an improved awareness and understanding of the common
values shared by all humankind,
Underlining the fact that States, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and
the media have an important role to play in promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity and
in the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or belief,
Underlining also the importance of raising awareness about different cultures and religions or beliefs and of
education in the promotion of tolerance, which involves the acceptance by the public of and its respect for religious
and cultural diversity, including with regard to religious expression, and underlining further the fact that education,
in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of
discrimination based on religion or belief,
Recognizing that working together to enhance the implementation of existing legal regimes that protect
individuals against discrimination and hate crimes, increasing interreligious, interfaith and intercultural efforts and
expanding human rights education are important first steps in combating incidents of intolerance, discrimination and
violence against individuals on the basis of religion or belief,
Recalling its resolution 68/127, entitled “A world against violence and violent extremism”, adopted by
consensus on 18 December 2013, welcoming the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization in promoting intercultural dialogue, the work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations,
the work of the Anna Lindh Euro-Mediterranean Foundation for Dialogue between Cultures in Alexandria, Egypt,
and the work of the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue
in Vienna, and recalling also its resolution 65/5 of 20 October 2010 on World Interfaith Harmony Week, proposed
by King Abdullah II of Jordan,
Welcoming, in this regard, all international, regional and national initiatives aimed at promoting interreligious,
intercultural and interfaith harmony and combating discrimination against individuals on the basis of religion or
belief, noting the initiative of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide on the role
of religious leaders in preventing incitement that could lead to atrocity crimes and the draft declaration of its forum
held in Fez, Morocco, on 23 and 24 April 2015, the launch of “Appeal for Peace 2015” at the twenty-eighth annual
international, interreligious gathering of religious leaders from 60 countries on the theme “Peace is always possible:
religions and cultures in dialogue”, held in Tirana from 6 to 8 September 2015, and the Istanbul Process for
Combating Intolerance, Discrimination and Incitement to Hatred and/or Violence on the Basis of Religion or Belief,
and taking note of the initiative of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and its
outcome document, the Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred
that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, adopted in Rabat on 5 October 2012,407
Taking note with appreciation of the continuation of the organization of workshops and meetings within the
framework of the Istanbul Process and the promotion of effective implementation of Human Rights Council
resolution 16/18 to counter global violence, religious discrimination and intolerance, in particular the recent fifth
implementation meeting of the Process, hosted by the General Secretariat of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on 3 and 4 June 2015,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;408

_______________
407
408

A/HRC/22/17/Add.4, appendix.
A/70/415.

731

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Expresses deep concern at the continued serious instances of derogatory stereotyping, negative profiling
and stigmatization of persons based on their religion or belief, as well as programmes and agendas pursued by
extremist individuals, organizations and groups aimed at creating and perpetuating negative stereotypes about
religious groups, in particular when condoned by Governments;
3. Expresses concern that the number of incidents of religious intolerance, discrimination and related
violence, as well as of negative stereotyping of individuals on the basis of religion or belief, continues to rise around
the world, which may have serious implications at the national, regional and international levels, condemns, in this
context, any advocacy of religious hatred against individuals that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility
or violence, and urges States to take effective measures, as set forth in the present resolution and consistent with
their obligations under international human rights law, to address and combat such incidents;
4. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any other means;
5. Recognizes that the open public debate of ideas, as well as interreligious, interfaith and intercultural
dialogue, at the local, national and international levels, can be among the best protections against religious
intolerance and can play a positive role in strengthening democracy and combating religious hatred, and expresses
its conviction that a continuing dialogue on these issues can help to overcome existing misperceptions;
6. Also recognizes the strong need for global awareness about the possible serious implications of
incitement to discrimination and violence, which may have serious implications at the national, regional and
international levels, and urges all Member States to make renewed efforts to develop educational systems that
promote all human rights and fundamental freedoms that enhance tolerance for religious and cultural diversity,
which is fundamental to promoting tolerant, peaceful and harmonious multicultural societies;
7. Calls upon all States to take the following actions, as called for by the Secretary-General of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to foster a domestic environment of religious tolerance, peace and respect by:
(a) Encouraging the creation of collaborative networks to build mutual understanding, promoting dialogue
and inspiring constructive action towards shared policy goals and the pursuit of tangible outcomes, such as servicing
projects in the fields of education, health, conflict prevention, employment, integration and media education;
(b) Creating an appropriate mechanism within Governments to, inter alia, identify and address potential
areas of tension between members of different religious communities and assisting with conflict prevention and
mediation;
(c)

Encouraging the training of government officials in effective outreach strategies;

(d) Encouraging the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities the causes of discrimination and
developing strategies to counter those causes;
(e) Speaking out against intolerance, including advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence;
(f)

Adopting measures to criminalize incitement to imminent violence based on religion or belief;

(g) Understanding the need to combat denigration and the negative religious stereotyping of persons, as well
as incitement to religious hatred, by strategizing and harmonizing actions at the local, national, regional and
international levels through, inter alia, education and awareness-raising;
(h) Recognizing that the open, constructive and respectful debate of ideas, as well as interreligious, interfaith
and intercultural dialogue, at the local, national, regional and international levels, can play a positive role in
combating religious hatred, incitement and violence;
8.

Also calls upon all States:

(a) To take effective measures to ensure that public functionaries, in the conduct of their public duties, do
not discriminate against an individual on the basis of religion or belief;
732

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(b) To foster religious freedom and pluralism by promoting the ability of members of all religious
communities to manifest their religion and to contribute openly and on an equal footing to society;
(c) To encourage the representation and meaningful participation of individuals, irrespective of their religion
or belief, in all sectors of society;
(d) To make a strong effort to counter religious profiling, which is understood to be the invidious use of
religion as a criterion in conducting questioning, searches and other investigative law enforcement procedures;
9. Further calls upon all States to adopt measures and policies to promote full respect for and protection of
places of worship and religious sites, cemeteries and shrines and to take protective measures in cases where they are
vulnerable to vandalism or destruction;
10. Calls for strengthened international efforts to foster a global dialogue for the promotion of a culture of
tolerance and peace at all levels, based on respect for human rights and diversity of religions and beliefs;
11. Encourages all States to consider providing updates on efforts made in this regard as part of ongoing
reporting to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and in this respect requests the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to include those updates in his reports to the Human Rights
Council;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report
that includes information provided by the High Commissioner on steps taken by States to combat intolerance,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons, based on
religion or belief, as set forth in the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/158
A/RE S/70 /158

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)409

70/158. Freedom of religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it proclaimed the Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling also article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,410 article 18 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights411 and other relevant human rights provisions,
Recalling further its previous resolutions on freedom of religion or belief and on the elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief, including resolution 69/175 of 18 December 2014,
and Human Rights Council resolution 28/18 of 27 March 2015,412
Recognizing the important work carried out by the Human Rights Committee in providing guidance with
respect to the scope of freedom of religion or belief,

_______________
409

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
410
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
411
Resolution 217 A (III).
412
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.

733

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting the conclusions and recommendations of the expert workshops organized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and contained in the Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of
advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence,
adopted in Rabat on 5 October 2012,413
Considering that religion or belief, for those who profess either, is one of the fundamental elements in their
conception of life and that freedom of religion or belief, as a universal human right, should be fully respected and
guaranteed,
Seriously concerned at continuing acts of intolerance and violence based on religion or belief against
individuals, including against persons belonging to religious communities and religious minorities around the world,
and at the increasing number and intensity of such incidents, which are often of a criminal nature and may have
international characteristics,
Deeply concerned at the limited progress that has been made in the elimination of all forms of intolerance
and of discrimination based on religion or belief, and believing that further intensified efforts are therefore required
to promote and protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief and to eliminate all forms
of hatred, intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief, as noted at the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from
31 August to 8 September 2001, as well as at the Durban Review Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to
24 April 2009,
Recalling that States have the primary responsibility to promote and protect human rights, including the
human rights of persons belonging to religious minorities, including their right to exercise their religion or belief
freely,
Concerned that official authorities sometimes tolerate or encourage acts of violence, or credible threats of
violence, against persons belonging to religious communities and religious minorities,
Concerned also at the increasing number of laws and regulations that limit the freedom of thought, conscience
and religion or belief and at the implementation of existing laws in a discriminatory manner,
Convinced of the need to urgently address the rapid rise in various parts of the world of religious extremism
that affects the human rights of individuals, in particular persons belonging to religious communities and religious
minorities, the situations of violence and discrimination that affect many individuals, particularly women and
children, on the basis of or in the name of religion or belief or in accordance with cultural and traditional practices,
and the misuse of religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the principles set out in the Charter of the United
Nations and in other relevant instruments of the United Nations,
Seriously concerned about all attacks on religious places, sites and shrines that violate international law, in
particular international human rights law and international humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of
relics and monuments,
Emphasizing that States, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies, the media
and civil society as a whole have an important role to play in promoting tolerance and respect for religious and
cultural diversity and in the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion
or belief,
Underlining the importance of education, including human rights education, in the promotion of tolerance,
which involves the acceptance by the public of, and its respect for, diversity, including with regard to religious
expression, and underlining also the fact that education, in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful
way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or belief,
1. Stresses that everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, which
includes the freedom to have or not to have, or to adopt, a religion or belief of one’s own choice and the freedom,
_______________
413

734

A/HRC/22/17/Add.4, appendix.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in teaching,
practice, worship and observance, including the right to change one’s religion or belief;
2. Emphasizes that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief applies equally to all
persons, regardless of their religion or belief and without any discrimination as to their equal protection by the law;
3. Strongly condemns violations of freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief as well as all
forms of intolerance, discrimination and violence based on religion or belief;
4. Recognizes with deep concern the overall rise in instances of discrimination, intolerance and violence,
regardless of the actors, directed against members of many religious and other communities in various parts of the
world, including cases motivated by Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and Christianophobia and prejudices against
persons of other religions or beliefs;
5. Reaffirms that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion or belief as this may have
adverse consequences for the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or belief of all members of the religious
communities concerned;
6. Strongly condemns violence and acts of terrorism, which are increasing in number and intensity,
targeting individuals, including persons belonging to religious minorities, on the basis of or in the name of religion
or belief;
7. Recalls that States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish acts of
violence against persons belonging to religious minorities, regardless of the perpetrator, and that failure to do so may
constitute a human rights violation;
8. Emphasizes that freedom of religion or belief and freedom of expression are interdependent, interrelated
and mutually reinforcing, and stresses the role that these rights can play in the fight against all forms of intolerance
and of discrimination based on religion or belief;
9. Strongly condemns any advocacy of hatred based on religion or belief that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any
other means;
10. Expresses concern at the persistence of institutionalized social intolerance and discrimination practised
against many on the grounds of religion or belief, and emphasizes that legal procedures pertaining to religious or
belief-based groups and places of worship are not a prerequisite for the exercise of the right to manifest one’s
religion or belief and that such procedures, when legally required at the national or local level, should be nondiscriminatory in order to contribute to the effective protection of the right of all persons to practise their religion or
belief, either individually or in community with others and in public or private;
11. Recognizes with concern the situation of persons in vulnerable situations, including persons deprived of
their liberty, refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons, children, persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and migrants, as regards their ability to freely exercise their right to
freedom of religion or belief;
12. Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee, restrictions on the freedom to manifest
one’s religion or belief are permitted only if limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety,
order, health or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, are non-discriminatory and are applied in a
manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief;
13. Expresses deep concern at continued obstacles to the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or
belief as well as the increasing number of instances of intolerance, discrimination and violence based on religion or
belief, including:
(a) Acts of violence and intolerance directed against individuals based on their religion or belief, including
religious persons and persons belonging to religious minorities and other communities in various parts of the world;
(b) The rise of religious extremism in various parts of the world that affects the human rights of individuals,
including persons belonging to religious minorities;
735

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(c) Incidents of hatred, discrimination, intolerance and violence based on religion or belief, which may be
associated with or manifested by the derogatory stereotyping, negative profiling and stigmatization of persons based
on their religion or belief;
(d) Attacks on or destruction of religious places, sites and shrines that violate international law, in particular
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, as they have more than material significance for
the dignity and lives of persons holding spiritual or religious beliefs;
(e) Instances, both in law and practice, that constitute violations of the human right to freedom of religion or
belief, including of the individual right to publicly express one’s spiritual and religious beliefs, taking into account
the relevant articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,410 as well as other international
instruments;
(f) Constitutional and legislative systems that fail to provide adequate and effective guarantees of freedom
of thought, conscience and religion or belief to all without distinction;
14. Urges States to step up their efforts to protect and promote freedom of thought, conscience and religion
or belief, and to this end:
(a) To ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide adequate and effective guarantees of
freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief to all without distinction by, inter alia, providing access to
justice, including by facilitating legal assistance and effective remedies in cases where the right to freedom of
thought, conscience and religion or belief or the right to freely choose and practise one’s religion or belief is
violated, paying particular attention to persons belonging to religious minorities;
(b) To implement all accepted universal periodic review recommendations related to the promotion and
protection of freedom of religion or belief;
(c) To ensure that no one within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction is deprived of the right to life,
liberty and security of person because of religion or belief, to provide adequate protection to persons at risk of
violent attack on the grounds of their religion or belief, to ensure that no one is subjected to torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or arbitrary arrest or detention on that account and to bring to justice
all perpetrators of violations of these rights;
(d) To end violations of the human rights of women and to devote particular attention to appropriate
measures modifying or abolishing existing laws, regulations, customs and practices that discriminate against
women, including in the exercise of their right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, and to foster
practical ways to ensure equality between men and women;
(e) To ensure that existing legislation is not implemented in a discriminatory manner or does not result in
discrimination based on religion or belief, that no one is discriminated against on the basis of his or her religion or
belief when accessing, inter alia, education, medical care, employment, humanitarian assistance or social benefits
and that everyone has the right and the opportunity to have access, on general terms of equality, to public services in
their country, without any discrimination based on religion or belief;
(f) To review, whenever relevant, existing registration practices in order to ensure that such practices do not
limit the right of all persons to manifest their religion or belief, either alone or in community with others and in
public or private;
(g) To ensure that no official documents are withheld from the individual on the grounds of religion or belief
and that everyone has the right to refrain from disclosing information concerning their religious affiliation in such
documents against their will;
(h) To ensure, in particular, the right of all persons to worship, assemble or teach in connection with a
religion or belief, their right to establish and maintain places for these purposes and the right of all persons to seek,
receive and impart information and ideas in these areas;
(i) To ensure that, in accordance with appropriate national legislation and in conformity with international
human rights law, the freedom of all persons and members of groups to establish and maintain religious, charitable
or humanitarian institutions is fully respected and protected;
(j) To ensure that all public officials and civil servants, including members of law enforcement bodies, and
personnel of detention facilities, the military and educators, in the course of fulfilling their official duties, respect
736

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

freedom of religion or belief and do not discriminate for reasons based on religion or belief, and that they receive all
necessary and appropriate awareness-raising, education or training on respect for freedom of religion or belief;
(k) To take all necessary and appropriate action, in conformity with international standards of human rights,
to combat hatred, discrimination, intolerance and acts of violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by
intolerance based on religion or belief, as well as incitement to hostility and violence, with particular regard to
persons belonging to religious minorities in all parts of the world;
(l) To promote, through education and other means, mutual understanding, tolerance, non-discrimination
and respect in all matters relating to freedom of religion or belief by encouraging, in society at large, a wider
knowledge of the diversity of religions and beliefs and of the history, traditions, languages and cultures of the
various religious minorities existing within their jurisdiction;
(m) To prevent any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on religion or belief that impairs the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis and to detect signs
of intolerance that may lead to discrimination based on religion or belief;
15. Welcomes and encourages initiatives by the media to promote tolerance and respect for religious and
cultural diversity and the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or
belief, and stresses the importance of unhindered participation in the media and in public discourse for all persons,
regardless of their religion or belief;
16. Stresses the importance of a continued and strengthened dialogue in all its forms, including among and
within religions or beliefs, and with broader participation, including of women, to promote greater tolerance, respect
and mutual understanding, and welcomes different initiatives in this regard, including the Alliance of Civilizations
initiative and the programmes led by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
17. Welcomes and encourages the continuing efforts of all actors in society, including non-governmental
organizations and bodies and groups based on religion or belief, to promote the implementation of the Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,414 and further
encourages their work in promoting freedom of religion or belief, in highlighting cases of religious intolerance,
discrimination and persecution and in promoting religious tolerance;
18. Recommends that States, the United Nations and other actors, including non-governmental organizations
and bodies and groups based on religion or belief, in their efforts to promote freedom of religion or belief, ensure the
widest possible dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief in as many different languages as possible, and promote its
implementation;
19. Takes note with appreciation of the work and the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on freedom of religion or belief on the rights of the child and his or her parents in the area of
freedom of religion or belief,415 and encourages States to consider addressing violations and abuses highlighted in
the interim report, including the forcible abduction and conversion of children from religious minorities;
20. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, to respond favourably to his
requests to visit their countries and to provide all information and follow-up necessary for the effective fulfilment of
his mandate;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special Rapporteur receives the resources necessary to
fully discharge his mandate;
22. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session;
23. Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance at its seventyfirst session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
_______________
414
415

Resolution 36/55.
See A/70/286.

737

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/159
A/RE S/70 /159

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),416 by a recorded vote of 135 to 53, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Greece

70/159. Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and expressing, in particular, the
need to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,417 as well as the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,418 the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001,419 the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference, adopted on
24 April 2009,420 and the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, entitled “United against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”, of 22 September 2011,421
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights422 and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,422
_______________
416

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
417
Resolution 217 A (III).
418
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
419
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
420
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
421
Resolution 66/3.
422
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

738

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration423 and the outcome documents of the twenty-third424
and twenty-fourth425 special sessions of the General Assembly, held in New York from 5 to 10 June 2000 and in
Geneva from 26 June to 1 July 2000, respectively,
Recalling also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”,
Recalling further its resolutions 66/154 of 19 December 2011, 67/165 of 20 December 2012, 68/168 of
18 December 2013 and 69/173 of 18 December 2014,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/17 of 14 April 2005 on globalization and its impact
on the full enjoyment of all human rights,426
Recalling also Human Rights Council resolutions 21/5 of 27 September 2012427 on the contribution of the
United Nations system as a whole to the advancement of the business and human rights agenda and the
dissemination and implementation of the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the
United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,428 26/9 of 26 June 2014429 on the elaboration of an
international legally binding instrument on transnational corporations and other business enterprises with respect to
human rights and 26/22 of 27 June 2014429 on human rights and transnational corporations and other business
enterprises,
Recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with
the same emphasis,
Realizing that globalization affects all countries differently and makes them more exposed to external
developments, positive as well as negative, inter alia, in the field of human rights,
Realizing also that globalization is not merely an economic process, but that it also has social, political,
environmental, cultural and legal dimensions, which have an impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Emphasizing the need to fully implement the global partnership for development and enhance the momentum
generated by the 2005 World Summit in order to operationalize and implement the commitments made in the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the 2005 World Summit, in the
economic, social and related fields, and reaffirming in particular the commitment contained in paragraphs 19 and 47
of the 2005 World Summit Outcome430 to promote fair globalization and the development of the productive sectors
in developing countries to enable them to participate more effectively in and benefit from the process of
globalization,
Realizing the need to undertake a thorough, independent and comprehensive assessment of the social,
environmental and cultural impact of globalization on societies,
Recognizing in each culture a dignity and value that deserve recognition, respect and preservation, convinced
that, in their rich variety and diversity and in the reciprocal influences that they exert on one another, all cultures
_______________
423

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
425
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
426
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2),
chap. II, sect. A.
427
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
428
A/HRC/17/31, annex.
429
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. V, sect. A.
430
Resolution 60/1.
424

739

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

form part of the common heritage belonging to all humankind, and aware of the risk that globalization poses more
of a threat to cultural diversity if the developing world remains poor and marginalized,
Recognizing also that multilateral mechanisms have a unique role to play in meeting the challenges and
opportunities presented by globalization,
Realizing the need to consider the challenges and opportunities linked to globalization with a view to
addressing such challenges and building on possible opportunities in order to achieve the full enjoyment of all
human rights,
Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the importance of international, regional and
bilateral cooperation and the need to protect the human rights of migrants, particularly at a time when migration
flows have increased in the globalized economy,
Expressing grave concern at the negative impact of international financial turmoil on social and economic
development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly in the light of the continuing global
financial and economic crisis, which may have an adverse impact on the ability of Member States to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and recognizing that developing countries are in a more vulnerable
situation when facing such impact and that regional economic cooperation and development strategies and
programmes can play a role in mitigating such impact,
Expressing deep concern at the negative impact of the continuing global food and energy crises and climate
change challenges on social and economic development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights for all,
Recognizing that globalization should be guided by the fundamental principles that underpin the corpus of
human rights, such as equity, participation, accountability, non-discrimination, transparency, inclusivity and equality
at both the national and the international levels, respect for diversity, tolerance and international cooperation and
solidarity,
Emphasizing that the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the full realization and effective
enjoyment of human rights and that its immediate alleviation and eventual elimination must remain a high priority
for the international community,
Acknowledging that there is greater acceptance that the increasing debt burden faced by the most indebted
developing countries is unsustainable and constitutes one of the principal obstacles to achieving sustainable
development and poverty eradication and that, for many developing countries, excessive debt servicing has severely
constrained their capacity to promote social development and to provide basic services to realize economic, social
and cultural rights,
Strongly reiterating the determination to ensure the timely and full realization of the sustainable development
goals and objectives agreed at the major United Nations conferences and summits, including those agreed at the
United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 sustainable development agenda, which aim to galvanize
efforts towards poverty eradication,
Gravely concerned at the inadequacy of measures to narrow the widening gap between the developed and the
developing countries, and within countries, which has contributed to, inter alia, deepening poverty and has adversely
affected the full enjoyment of all human rights, in particular in developing countries,
Emphasizing that transnational corporations and other business enterprises have a responsibility to respect all
human rights,
Emphasizing also that human beings strive for a world that is respectful of human rights and cultural diversity
and that, in this regard, they work to ensure that all activities, including those affected by globalization, are
consistent with those aims,
1. Welcomes the adoption by the Heads of State and Government and High Representatives, meeting at
United Nations Headquarters in New York from 25 to 27 September 2015, of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;431
_______________
431

740

Resolution 70/1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Recognizes that, while globalization, through its impact on, inter alia, the role of the State, may affect
human rights, the promotion and protection of all human rights is first and foremost the responsibility of the State;
3. Emphasizes that development should be at the centre of the international economic agenda and that
coherence between national development strategies and international obligations and commitments is imperative for
an enabling environment for development and an inclusive and equitable globalization;
4. Reaffirms that narrowing the gap between rich and poor, both within and between countries, is an
explicit goal at the national and international levels, as part of the effort to create an enabling environment for the
full enjoyment of all human rights;
5. Also reaffirms the commitment to create an environment at both the national and the global levels that is
conducive to development and to the eradication of poverty by, inter alia, promoting good governance within each
country and at the international level, eliminating protectionism, enhancing transparency in the financial, monetary
and trading systems and committing to an open, equitable, rules-based, predictable and non-discriminatory
multilateral trading and financial system;
6. Recognizes the impacts that the global financial and economic crisis is still having on the ability of
countries, particularly developing countries, to mobilize resources for development and to address the impact of this
crisis, and in this context calls upon all States and the international community to alleviate, in an inclusive and
development-oriented manner, any negative impacts of this crisis on the realization and the effective enjoyment of
all human rights;
7. Also recognizes that, while globalization offers great opportunities, the fact that its benefits are very
unevenly shared and its costs unevenly distributed represents an aspect of the process that affects the full enjoyment
of all human rights, in particular in developing countries;
8. Welcomes the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on globalization and
its impact on the full enjoyment of human rights,432 which focuses on the liberalization of agricultural trade and its
impact on the realization of the right to development, including the right to food, and takes note of the conclusions
and recommendations contained therein;
9. Reaffirms the international commitment to eliminating hunger and to securing food for all, today and
tomorrow, and reiterates that the relevant United Nations organizations should be assured the resources needed to
expand and enhance their food assistance and support social safety net programmes designed to address hunger and
malnutrition, when appropriate, through the use of local or regional purchase;
10. Calls upon Member States, relevant agencies of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
organizations and civil society to promote inclusive, equitable and environmentally sustainable economic growth for
managing globalization so that poverty is systematically reduced and the international development targets are
achieved;
11. Recognizes that the responsible operations of transnational corporations and other business enterprises
can contribute to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, in
particular economic, social and cultural rights;
12. Also recognizes that only through broad and sustained efforts, including policies and measures at the
global level to create a shared future based upon our common humanity in all its diversity, can globalization
be made fully inclusive and equitable and have a human face, thus contributing to the full enjoyment of all
human rights;
13. Underlines the urgent need to establish an equitable, transparent and democratic international system to
strengthen and broaden the participation of developing countries in international economic decision-making and
norm-setting;
_______________
432

E/CN.4/2002/54.

741

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Affirms that globalization is a complex process of structural transformation, with numerous
interdisciplinary aspects, which has an impact on the enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights, including the right to development;
15. Also affirms that the international community should strive to respond to the challenges and
opportunities posed by globalization in a manner that promotes and protects human rights while ensuring respect for
the cultural diversity of all;
16. Underlines, therefore, the need to continue to analyse the consequences of globalization for the full
enjoyment of all human rights;
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,433 and requests him to continue to seek further the
views of Member States and relevant agencies of the United Nations system and to submit to the General Assembly
at its seventy-first session a substantive report on the subject based on those views, including recommendations on
ways to address the impact of globalization on the full enjoyment of all human rights.
RESOLUTION 70/160
A/RE S/70 /160

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)434

70/160. International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 61/177 of 20 December 2006, by which it adopted and opened for signature,
ratification and accession the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance,
Recalling its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a body of principles for all States,
Recalling also all its other resolutions on the matter, including resolution 69/169 of 18 December 2014,
as well as relevant resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council, including resolution 27/1 of
25 September 2014,435
Recalling further its resolution 68/165 of 18 December 2013 on the right to the truth, as well as Human Rights
Council resolution 27/3 of 25 September 2014 on the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence,435
Recalling its resolution 68/268 of 9 April 2014 on strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the
human rights treaty body system,
Recalling also that no one shall be subjected to enforced disappearance,
Recalling further that no exceptional circumstance whatsoever may be invoked as a justification for enforced
disappearance,
Recalling that no one shall be held in secret detention,
_______________
433

A/70/154.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
435
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1
and 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
434

742

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Deeply concerned, in particular, by the increase in enforced or involuntary disappearances in various regions
of the world, including arrest, detention and abduction, when these are part of or amount to enforced
disappearances, and by the growing number of reports concerning harassment, ill-treatment and intimidation of
witnesses of disappearances or relatives of persons who have disappeared,
Recalling that the Convention sets out the right of victims to know the truth regarding the circumstances of the
enforced disappearance, the progress and results of the investigation and the fate of the disappeared person, and sets
forth State party obligations to take appropriate measures in this regard,
Recalling also that the Convention defines the victim of enforced disappearance as the disappeared person and
any individual who has suffered harm as the direct result of an enforced disappearance,
Acknowledging that the widespread or systematic practice of enforced disappearance is recognized in the
Convention as a crime against humanity, as defined in applicable international law,
Stressing the importance of the work of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances,
Acknowledging the valuable work of the International Committee of the Red Cross in promoting compliance
with international humanitarian law in this field,
1. Welcomes the fifth anniversary of the entry into force of the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance;436
2. Recognizes the importance of the Convention, the ratification and the implementation of which will be a
significant contribution to ending impunity and to promoting and protecting all human rights for all;
3. Welcomes the fact that 95 States have signed the Convention and 51 have ratified or acceded to it, and
calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention as a matter of
priority, as well as to consider the option provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention regarding the
Committee on Enforced Disappearances;
4.

Also welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;437

5. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
increase their intensive efforts to assist States in becoming parties to the Convention, including by supporting the
actions of States to ratify the Convention, providing technical and capacity-building assistance to States and civil
society and raising awareness about the Convention, with a view to achieving universal adherence;
6. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, to continue to
make efforts to disseminate information on the Convention, to promote understanding of it and to assist States
parties in implementing their obligations under this instrument;
7. Welcomes the work achieved by the Committee, and encourages all States parties to the Convention to
submit their reports, to support and promote the work of the Committee and to implement its recommendations;
8. Recognizes the importance of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance438 as a body of principles for all States designed to punish enforced disappearances, to prevent their
commission and to help victims of such acts and their families to seek fair, prompt and adequate reparation;
9. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Working Group and the Committee, within the
framework of their respective mandates, and encourages further cooperation in the future;
10. Takes note with interest of all the general comments of the Working Group, including the most recent
comments on children439 and women440 affected by enforced disappearances, and recognizes in this regard that
_______________
436

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
A/70/261.
438
Resolution 47/133.
439
A/HRC/WGEID/98/1 and Corr.1.
440
A/HRC/WGEID/98/2.
437

743

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

enforced disappearances have special consequences for women and vulnerable groups, especially children, as
they most often bear the serious economic hardships that usually accompany such disappearances and, when
subjected to enforced disappearances themselves, may become particularly vulnerable to sexual and other forms
of violence;
11. Welcomes the fact that the Committee held its annual meeting with the Working Group, as an
opportunity to take stock of the activities of the two parallel organs, which are complementary and reinforce each
other within the framework of their respective mandates;
12. Decides to devote one high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly, within existing resources, at
its seventy-first session to the commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention, and
requests the President of the General Assembly to conduct consultations with Member States in order to determine
the modalities for that meeting;
13. Invites the Chair of the Committee and the Chair of the Working Group to address and engage in an
interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its seventy-first and seventy-second sessions under the item
entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first and seventysecond sessions a report on the status of the Convention and the implementation of the present resolution;
15. Decides to give its full consideration to the subject matter at its seventy-second session.
RESOLUTION 70/161
A/RE S/70 /161

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),441 by a recorded vote of 127 to 14, with 41 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Zambia
Against: Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea, Iraq,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen

_______________
441

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay and Vanuatu.

744

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

70/161. Human rights defenders in the context of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Guided also by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,442 the International Covenants on Human
Rights443 and other relevant instruments,
Recalling its resolution 53/144 of 9 December 1998, by which it adopted by consensus the Declaration on the
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,
Recalling also all other previous resolutions on this subject, including its resolutions 66/164 of 19 December
2011 and 68/181 of 18 December 2013 and Human Rights Council resolutions 22/6 of 21 March 2013444 and 25/18
of 28 March 2014,445
Reaffirming the importance of the Declaration and its implementation, and that promoting respect and support
for the activities of human rights defenders is essential to the overall enjoyment of human rights,
Welcoming the steps taken by some States to promote and give full effect to the Declaration, as well as by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and some regional organizations in making the Declaration
available and known to all stakeholders at the national and local levels in their respective languages, and underlining
the need to promote and give effect to the Declaration, including through its translation into the various languages
and its further dissemination with a view to its implementation in all regions,
Emphasizing the important role that individuals and civil society institutions, including non-governmental
organizations, groups and national human rights institutions, play at the local, national, regional and international
levels in the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Recognizing the substantial role that human rights defenders can play in supporting efforts to strengthen
conflict prevention, peace and development through dialogue, openness, participation and justice, including by
monitoring, reporting on and contributing to the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recognizing also the vital work of human rights defenders in promoting, protecting and advocating the
realization of economic, social and cultural rights, and concerned that threats and attacks against human rights
defenders, and hindrance of their work, have a negative impact on the realization of these rights, including as they
relate to environmental and land issues as well as development,
Mindful that domestic law and administrative provisions and their application should not hinder, but enable the
work of human rights defenders, including by avoiding any criminalization or stigmatization of the important
activities and legitimate role of human rights defenders and the communities of which they are a part or on whose
behalf they work, and by avoiding impediments, obstructions, restrictions or selective enforcement thereof contrary
to the obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law,
Reaffirming that States have the primary responsibility and are under the obligation to protect all human rights
and fundamental freedoms of all persons,
Reaffirming also that national legislation consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and other
international obligations of the State in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms is the juridical
framework within which human rights defenders conduct their activities,
_______________
442

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
444
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
445
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
443

745

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Gravely concerned that national security and counter-terrorism legislation as well as measures in other areas,
such as laws regulating civil society organizations, are in some instances misused to target human rights defenders
or hinder their work, endangering their safety in a manner contrary to international law,
Recognizing the urgent need to address, and to take concrete steps to prevent and stop, the use of legislation
which hinders or limits unduly the ability of human rights defenders to exercise their work, including by reviewing
and, where necessary, amending relevant legislation and its implementation in order to ensure compliance with the
obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law,
Gravely concerned by the considerable and increasing number of allegations and communications of a serious
nature received by special procedures of the Human Rights Council on the risks faced by human rights defenders,
including women human rights defenders, and the prevalence of impunity for violations and abuses against them in
many countries, where they face threats, harassment and attacks and suffer insecurity, including through restrictions
on the rights to freedom of opinion, expression, association or peaceful assembly, abuse of criminal or civil
proceedings, or acts of intimidation and reprisal intended to prevent their cooperation with the United Nations and
other international bodies in the field of human rights,
Gravely concerned also about incidents of human rights defenders being subjected to attacks, threats and other
abuses by non-State actors, and underlining the need for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons,
including human rights defenders, to be respected and protected,
Welcoming the steps taken by some States, including in follow-up to relevant resolutions, the universal
periodic review under the Human Rights Council, special procedures, treaty bodies and regional human rights
mechanisms, towards the improvement of dialogue between authorities and civil society and towards the adoption
of national policies and legislation that serve to create a safe and enabling environment and to protect human rights
defenders, in particular from being prosecuted, in contravention of the obligations and commitments of States under
international human rights law, for peaceful activities, and against threats, harassment, intimidation, duress, arbitrary
detention or arrest, enforced disappearance, violence and attacks by State and non-State actors,
Recognizing that dissenting views, including views on government and corporate policies related to or with an
impact on human rights, may be expressed peacefully and communicated freely in society, online and offline, in
accordance with the obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law, and thereby
emphasizing the importance of respecting all human rights of all, and stressing in this regard the importance of
independent voices of civic activity, human rights education and independent, impartial and competent national
judicial systems,
Stressing in particular that information and communications technologies are important tools for the
promotion of human rights and reporting on human rights violations and abuses, and concerned that such
technologies are increasingly being used to monitor and hamper the work of human rights defenders,
Strongly reaffirming that everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and
strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels, as laid out in the Declaration,
1. Stresses that the right of everyone to promote and strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms without retaliation or fear thereof is an essential element in building and
maintaining sustainable, open and democratic societies;
2. Calls upon all States to take all measures necessary to ensure the rights and safety of human rights
defenders who exercise the rights to freedom of opinion, expression, peaceful assembly and association, which are
essential for the promotion and protection of human rights;
3. Welcomes the work and takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the situation of human rights defenders;446
4. Urges States to acknowledge through public statements, policies or laws the important and legitimate
role of individuals, groups and organs of society, including human rights defenders, in the promotion of human
_______________
446

746

A/70/217.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

rights, democracy and the rule of law, as essential components of ensuring their recognition and protection,
including by condemning publicly all cases of violence and discrimination against human rights defenders,
including women human rights defenders, underlining that such practices can never be justified;
5. Strongly condemns the violence against and the targeting, criminalization, intimidation, torture,
disappearance and killing of any individuals, including human rights defenders, for reporting and seeking
information on human rights violations and abuses, and stresses the need to combat impunity by ensuring that those
responsible for violations and abuses against human rights defenders, including against their legal representatives,
associates and family members, are promptly brought to justice through impartial investigations;
6. Condemns all acts of intimidation and reprisal by State and non-State actors against individuals, groups
and organs of society, including against human rights defenders and their legal representatives, associates and family
members, who seek to cooperate, are cooperating or have cooperated with subregional, regional and international
bodies, including the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms, in the field of human rights;
7. Urges non-State actors to respect and promote the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
persons and to refrain from undermining the capacity of human rights defenders, including women human rights
defenders, to operate free from hindrance and insecurity;
8. Calls upon States to take concrete steps to prevent and put an end to the arbitrary arrest and detention of
human rights defenders, and in this regard strongly urges the release of persons detained or imprisoned, in violation
of the obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law, for exercising their human rights
and fundamental freedoms, such as the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association,
including in relation to cooperation with the United Nations or other international mechanisms in the area of human
rights;
9. Reaffirms the urgent need to respect, protect, facilitate and promote the work of those promoting and
defending economic, social and cultural rights, as a vital factor contributing towards the realization of those rights,
including as they relate to environmental and land issues as well as development;
10. Calls upon all States to create and maintain a safe and enabling environment for the realization of human
rights and specifically to ensure that:
(a) The promotion and protection of human rights are not criminalized or met with limitations in
contravention of the obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law;
(b) Human rights defenders, their family members, associates and legal representatives are not prevented
from enjoying universal human rights owing to their work, including by ensuring that all legal provisions,
administrative measures and policies affecting them, including those aimed at preserving public safety, public order
and public morals, are minimally restrictive, clearly defined, determinable, non-retroactive and compatible with the
obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law;
(c) Measures to combat terrorism and preserve national security are in compliance with their obligations
and commitments under international law, in particular under international human rights law, and do not jeopardize
the safety or arbitrarily hinder the work of individuals, groups and organs of society engaged in promoting and
defending human rights, while clearly identifying which offences qualify as terrorist acts by defining transparent
and foreseeable criteria;
(d) Where legislation and procedures governing the registration and funding of civil society organizations
exist, they are transparent, non-discriminatory, expeditious, inexpensive, allow for the possibility to appeal and
avoid requiring re-registration, with national legislation being in compliance with international human rights law;
(e) Procedural safeguards, including in criminal cases, are in place in accordance with international human
rights law in order to eliminate unreliable evidence, unwarranted investigations and procedural delays, thereby
effectively contributing to the expeditious closing of unsubstantiated cases, including against human rights
defenders, and individuals are afforded the opportunity to lodge complaints directly with the appropriate authority,
and respecting, inter alia, the right to be informed promptly and in detail of charges, the right to the presumption of
innocence, the right to a fair and public hearing, the right to choose and communicate with counsel in confidence,
the right to present witnesses and evidence and cross-examine prosecution witnesses and the right to appeal;
747

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(f) Information, such as evidence of serious violations of human rights, held by public authorities is not
unnecessarily classified or otherwise withheld from the public, and States adopt transparent, clear and expedient
laws and policies that provide for the effective disclosure of information held by public authorities and a general
right to request and receive such information, for which public access should be granted, except within narrow and
clearly defined limitations;
(g) Provisions do not prevent public officials from being held accountable, and penalties for defamation are
limited in order to ensure proportionality and reparation commensurate with the harm done;
(h) Information and communications technologies are not used in a manner that amounts to arbitrary or
unlawful interference with the privacy of individuals or the intimidation of human rights defenders;
11. Recognizes that, in the exercise of the rights and freedoms referred to in the Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,447 human rights defenders, acting individually and in association with
others, shall be subject only to such limitations as are in accordance with applicable international obligations and are
determined by law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of
others and of meeting the just requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a democratic society;
12. Encourages States to develop and put in place sustainable public policies or programmes that support
and protect human rights defenders at all stages of their work in a comprehensive manner;
13. Reaffirms the utility and benefit of consultations and dialogue with human rights defenders related to
public policies and programmes, including for protection purposes, and encourages States to appoint focal points or
to employ other relevant mechanisms for human rights defenders within the public administration;
14. Continues to express particular concern about systemic and structural discrimination and violence faced
by women human rights defenders of all ages, and reiterates its strong call upon States to take appropriate, robust
and practical steps to protect them and to integrate a gender perspective into their efforts to create a safe and
enabling environment for the defence of human rights, as called for by the General Assembly in its
resolution 68/181;
15. Expresses concern about stigmatization and discrimination that target or affect individuals and
associations defending the rights of persons belonging to minorities or espousing minority beliefs or views, or other
groups vulnerable to discrimination, and calls upon States to ensure that legislation does not target the activities of
individuals and associations defending the rights of persons belonging to minorities or espousing minority beliefs;
16. Reaffirms the right of everyone, individually and in association with others, to unhindered access to and
communication with international bodies, in particular the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms in the
field of human rights, including the Human Rights Council, its special procedures, the universal periodic review
mechanism and the treaty bodies, as well as regional human rights mechanisms;
17. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on cooperation with the United Nations, its
representatives and mechanisms in the field of human rights;
18. Welcomes the efforts made by States to investigate allegations of intimidation or reprisal and to bring
perpetrators to justice, and encourages Governments to support such efforts;
19. Strongly calls upon all States:
(a) To refrain from, and ensure adequate protection from, any act of intimidation or reprisal against human
rights defenders who cooperate, have cooperated or seek to cooperate with international institutions, including their
family members and associates;
(b) To end impunity for acts of intimidation or reprisal by bringing the perpetrators to justice and by
providing an effective remedy for their victims;
_______________
447

748

Resolution 53/144, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(c) To avoid legislation and practices that have the effect of undermining the right reaffirmed in
paragraph 16 of the present resolution;
20. Encourages all relevant regional organizations to consider the situation of human rights defenders and to
develop and employ appropriate and effective measures for their protection, inter alia, by addressing violations and
abuses by State and non-State actors;
21. Encourages leaders in all sectors of society and in their respective communities, including political,
military, social and religious leaders and leaders in business and the media, to express public support for the
important and legitimate role of human rights defenders in society, including women human rights defenders, and in
any cases of violence and discrimination against them to take a clear stance in rejection of such practices;
22. Underscores the responsibility of all transnational and other business enterprises to respect human rights,
including the rights of human rights defenders to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association, and
participation in public affairs, which are essential for the promotion and protection of human rights, including
economic, social and cultural rights and the right to development, urges enterprises to identify and address any
adverse human rights impacts related to their activities through meaningful consultation with potentially affected
groups and other relevant stakeholders in a manner consistent with the Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,448 and underlines the
importance of accountability, including of all transnational and other business enterprises, including their provision
of, or cooperation in, remediation;
23. Underlines the value of national human rights institutions, established and operating in accordance with
the Paris Principles,449 in the continued monitoring of existing legislation and consistently informing the State about
its impact on the activities of human rights defenders, including by making relevant and concrete recommendations;
24. Encourages national human rights institutions to pay due attention to the situation of human rights
defenders, including through consultations with relevant stakeholders on issues such as legislation, policies and
administrative measures that affect the defence of human rights, and to develop and support the documentation of
violations and abuses against human rights defenders in a comprehensive manner;
25. Encourages the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the special
procedures, within their respective mandates, to continue the efforts related to the protection of human rights
defenders, as laid out in relevant resolutions, including by offering technical assistance for the consideration of
States in bringing their legislation and its application into line with the obligations and commitments of States under
international human rights law;
26. Encourages United Nations bodies, agencies and other entities, within their respective mandates and in
cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner and the Special Rapporteur, to address the situation of
human rights defenders in their work in order to contribute to the effective implementation of the Declaration;
27. Requests all concerned United Nations agencies and organizations, within their mandates, to provide all
possible assistance and support to the Special Rapporteur for the effective fulfilment of his or her mandate,
including in the context of country visits and through suggestions on ways and means of ensuring the protection of
human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders;
28. Urges States to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in the performance of his or her
mandate, including by responding without undue delay to the communications transmitted to them by the Special
Rapporteur, and reiterates its call upon States to give favourable consideration to the requests of the Special
Rapporteur to visit their countries and to enter into a constructive dialogue with respect to the follow-up and
implementation of recommendations, so as to enable the Special Rapporteur to fulfil his or her mandate even more
effectively;
_______________
448
449

A/HRC/17/31, annex.
Resolution 48/134, annex.

749

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

29. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue to report annually on his or her activities to the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council, in accordance with the mandate, and invites the Special Rapporteur to
take into account progress on the implementation of the present resolution in his or her reporting;
30. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
RESOLUTION 70/162
A/RE S/70 /162

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)450

70/162. The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,451 and recalling relevant international human rights
treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights452 and the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,453 as well as the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949454 and the Additional Protocols thereto,455
Recalling its resolution 68/163 of 18 December 2013 on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity, in
which it proclaimed 2 November as the International Day to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists, as well as
its resolution 69/185 of 18 December 2014 on the same issue,
Welcoming the latest report of the Secretary-General on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity,456
and recalling his previous report on this topic,457
Taking note with appreciation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue
of Impunity, endorsed by the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on 12 April 2012, in
which United Nations agencies, funds and programmes were invited to work with Member States towards a free
and safe environment for journalists and media workers in both conflict and non-conflict situations, with a view to
strengthening peace, democracy and development worldwide,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 21/12 of 27 September 2012458 and 27/5 of 25 September
2014 on the safety of journalists, 26/13 of 14 July 2014 on the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human
rights on the Internet460 and 27/12 of 25 September 2014 on the World Programme for Human Rights Education,459
as well as Security Council resolutions 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006 and 2222 (2015) of 27 May 2015,
459

_______________
450

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
451
Resolution 217 A (III).
452
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
453
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
454
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
455
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
456
A/70/290.
457
A/69/268.
458
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
459
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
460
Ibid., Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. V, sect. A.

750

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note with appreciation of the summary report on the panel discussion of the Human Rights Council on
the issue of the safety of journalists, held on 11 June 2014, submitted to the Council at its twenty-seventh session,461
as well as the 2015 publication of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization entitled
World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development,
Taking note of all relevant reports of the special procedures of the Human Rights Council with regard to the
safety of journalists, as well as the reports of the Special Rapporteurs on the promotion and protection of the right to
freedom of opinion and expression462 and on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,463 submitted to the
Council at its twenty-ninth session, and the interactive dialogue thereon,
Commending the role and the activities of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization with regard to the safety of
journalists and the issue of impunity, and their facilitation of the commemoration of the International Day to End
Impunity for Crimes against Journalists, in consultation with relevant entities within the United Nations system,
Governments and relevant stakeholders,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Office of the High Commissioner on good practices
concerning the safety of journalists, submitted to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fourth session,464 as well
as its report on the right to privacy in the digital age, submitted to the Council at its twenty-seventh session,465
Mindful that the right to freedom of opinion and expression is a human right guaranteed to all, in accordance
with article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and that it constitutes one of the essential foundations of a democratic society and one of the basic
conditions for its progress and development,
Acknowledging that journalism is continuously evolving to include input from media institutions, private
individuals and a range of organizations that seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, online as
well as offline, in the exercise of freedom of opinion and expression, in accordance with article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, thereby contributing to the shaping of public debate,
Recognizing the importance of freedom of expression and of free media, online as well as offline, in building
inclusive and peaceful knowledge societies and democracies and in fostering intercultural dialogue, peace and good
governance, as well as understanding and cooperation,
Recognizing also that the work of journalists often puts them at specific risk of intimidation, harassment and
violence,
Noting the good practices of different countries aimed at the protection of journalists, as well as, inter alia,
those designed for the protection of human rights defenders that can, where applicable, be relevant to the protection
of journalists,
Recognizing the efforts by States to review and, where necessary, amend laws, policies and practices that limit
the ability of journalists to perform their work independently and without undue interference and to bring them fully
in line with their obligations under international law,
Emphasizing the role of international cooperation in support of national efforts to prevent attacks and violence
against journalists and in raising the capacities of States in the field of human rights, including in preventing attacks
and violence against journalists, including through the provision of technical assistance, upon the request of and in
accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned,
Recognizing that the number of people whose lives are influenced by the way information is presented is
significant and that journalism influences public opinion,

_______________
461

A/HRC/27/35.
A/HRC/29/32.
463
A/HRC/29/37 and Add.1–7.
464
A/HRC/24/23.
465
A/HRC/27/37.
462

751

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind that impunity for attacks against journalists remains one of the greatest challenges to the
safety of journalists and that ensuring accountability for crimes committed against journalists is a key element in
preventing future attacks,
Recalling, in this regard, that journalists, media professionals and associated personnel engaged in dangerous
professional missions in areas of armed conflict shall be considered as civilians and shall be respected and protected
as such, provided that they take no action adversely affecting their status as civilians,
Deeply concerned by all human rights violations and abuses committed in relation to the safety of journalists
and media workers, including killing, torture, enforced disappearance, arbitrary arrest and arbitrary detention,
expulsion, intimidation, harassment, threats and other forms of violence,
Expressing deep concern at the increased number of journalists and media workers who have been killed,
tortured or detained in recent years as a direct result of their profession,
Expressing deep concern also at the growing threat to the safety of journalists posed by non-State actors,
including terrorist groups and criminal organizations,
Acknowledging the specific risks faced by women journalists in the exercise of their work, and underlining in
this context the importance of taking a gender-sensitive approach when considering measures to address the safety
of journalists,
Acknowledging also the particular vulnerability of journalists to becoming targets of unlawful or arbitrary
surveillance or interception of communications in violation of their rights to privacy and to freedom of expression,
1. Condemns unequivocally all attacks and violence against journalists and media workers, such as torture,
extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrest and arbitrary detention, as well as intimidation and
harassment in both conflict and non-conflict situations;
2. Strongly condemns the prevailing impunity for attacks and violence against journalists, and expresses
grave concern that the vast majority of these crimes go unpunished, which in turn contributes to the recurrence of
these crimes;
3. Calls upon States to implement more effectively the applicable legal framework for the protection of
journalists and media workers in order to combat the pervasive impunity, including through enforcement
mechanisms with the capacity to pay systematic attention to their safety;
4. Urges the immediate and unconditional release of journalists and media workers who have been taken
as hostages or who have become victims of enforced disappearances;
5. Calls upon all States to pay attention to the safety of journalists covering events in which persons are
exercising their rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression, taking into account their specific role,
exposure and vulnerability;
6. Encourages States to take the opportunity of the proclamation of 2 November as the International Day
to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists to raise awareness regarding the issue of the safety of journalists and
to launch concrete initiatives in this regard;
7. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in consultation with
relevant entities of the United Nations system, and mindful of the provisions of the annex to Economic and Social
Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980, to continue to facilitate the implementation of the International Day in
collaboration with Governments and relevant stakeholders;
8. Urges Member States to do their utmost to prevent violence, threats and attacks against journalists and
media workers, to ensure accountability through the conduct of impartial, speedy, thorough, independent and
effective investigations into all alleged violence, threats and attacks against journalists and media workers falling
within their jurisdiction, to bring perpetrators, including those who command, conspire to commit, aid and abet or
cover up such crimes to justice, and to ensure that victims and their families have access to appropriate remedies;
9. Calls upon States to create and maintain, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment for
journalists to perform their work independently and without undue interference, including by means of (a)
legislative measures; (b) supporting the judiciary in considering training and awareness-raising and supporting
752

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

training and awareness-raising among law enforcement officers and military personnel, as well as among journalists
and civil society, regarding international human rights and humanitarian law obligations and commitments relating
to the safety of journalists; (c) the regular monitoring and reporting of attacks against journalists; (d) publicly and
systematically condemning violence and attacks; and (e) dedicating the resources necessary to investigate and
prosecute such attacks and to develop and implement strategies for combating impunity for attacks and violence
against journalists, including by using, where appropriate, good practices such as those identified in Human Rights
Council resolution 27/5;459
10. Also calls upon States to ensure that measures to combat terrorism and preserve national security are in
compliance with their obligations under international law and do not arbitrarily hinder the work and safety of
journalists;
11. Stresses the need to ensure better cooperation and coordination at the international and regional levels,
including through technical assistance and capacity-building, with regard to helping to improve the safety of
journalists at the national and local levels;
12. Calls upon States to cooperate with relevant United Nations entities, in particular the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as international and regional human rights mechanisms,
including the relevant special procedures of the Human Rights Council, and to share information on a voluntary
basis on the status of investigations into attacks and violence against journalists;
13. Invites the relevant agencies, organizations, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to
actively exchange information, including through already identified focal points, about the implementation of the
United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, in cooperation with Member
States and under the overall coordination of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session and to
the Human Rights Council at its thirty-seventh session on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity.
RESOLUTION 70/163
A/RE S/70 /163

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)466

70/163. National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, the
most recent of which was resolution 68/171 of 18 December 2013, and those of the Commission on Human Rights
and the Human Rights Council concerning national institutions and their role in the promotion and protection of
human rights, the most recent of which were Council resolutions 20/14 of 5 July 2012,467 23/17 of 13 June 2013468
and 27/18 of 25 September 2014,469

_______________
466

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
467
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. IV, sect. A.
468
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
469
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II.

753

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in the creation and strengthening of independent,
pluralistic national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights (the Paris Principles),470
Reaffirming the important role that such national institutions play and will continue to play in promoting and
protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, strengthening participation, in particular of civil society
organizations, and promoting the rule of law and developing and enhancing public awareness of those rights and
freedoms,
Recalling its resolution 69/168 of 18 December 2014 on the role of the Ombudsman, mediator institutions and
other national human rights institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations, in particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in assisting the development of independent and effective national human rights
institutions, guided by the Paris Principles, and recognizing also in this regard the potential for strengthened and
complementary cooperation among the United Nations, the International Coordinating Committee of National
Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and those national institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June l993,471 which reaffirmed the important and constructive role played by national human rights
institutions, in particular in their advisory capacity to the competent authorities and their role in preventing and
remedying human rights violations, in disseminating information on human rights and in education in human rights,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and mutually
reinforcing and that all human rights must be treated in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the
same emphasis,
Bearing in mind the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and
religious backgrounds, and that all States, regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, have the duty
to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling the programme of action adopted by national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights at their meeting held in Vienna in June 1993 during the World Conference on Human Rights, in which it was
recommended that United Nations activities and programmes should be reinforced to meet the requests for
assistance from States wishing to establish or strengthen their national institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights472 and on the process currently utilized by the International Coordinating Committee
of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to accredit national institutions in
compliance with the Paris Principles,473
Welcoming the strengthening in all regions of regional cooperation among national human rights institutions,
and noting with appreciation the continuing work of the Network of African National Human Rights Institutions,
the Network of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in the Americas, the AsiaPacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions and the European Network of National Human Rights
Institutions,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;474

_______________
470

Resolution 48/134, annex.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
472
A/HRC/27/39.
473
A/HRC/16/77.
474
A/70/347.
471

754

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Reaffirms the importance of the development of effective, independent and pluralistic national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, in accordance with the Paris Principles;470
3. Recognizes the role of independent national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights in working together with Governments to ensure full respect for human rights at the national level, including
by contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to the recommendations resulting from the international human
rights mechanisms;
4. Welcomes the increasingly important role of national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights in supporting cooperation between their Governments and the United Nations in the promotion and
protection of human rights;
5. Underlines the value of national human rights institutions, established and operating in accordance with
the Paris Principles, in the continued monitoring of existing legislation and in consistently informing the State about
the impact of such legislation on the activities of human rights defenders, including by making relevant and concrete
recommendations;
6. Recognizes the role that national human rights institutions can play in preventing and addressing cases of
reprisals as part of supporting the cooperation between their Governments and the United Nations in the promotion
of human rights, including by contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to recommendations made by
international human rights mechanisms;
7. Also recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,471 it is the
right of each State to choose the framework for national institutions that is best suited to its particular needs at the
national level in order to promote human rights in accordance with international human rights standards;
8. Encourages Member States to establish effective, independent and pluralistic national institutions or,
where they already exist, to strengthen them for the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, as outlined in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
9. Welcomes the growing number of States establishing or considering the establishment of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, and welcomes in particular the growing number of
States that have accepted recommendations to establish national institutions compliant with the Paris Principles
made through the universal periodic review and, where relevant, by treaty bodies and special procedures;
10. Encourages national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights established by
Member States to continue to play an active role in preventing and combating all violations of human rights as
enumerated in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and relevant international human rights
instruments;
11. Stresses that national human rights institutions and their respective members and staff should not face
any form of reprisal or intimidation, including political pressure, physical intimidation, harassment or unjustifiable
budgetary limitations, as a result of activities undertaken in accordance with their respective mandates, including
when taking up individual cases or when reporting on serious or systematic violations in their countries, and calls
upon States to promptly and thoroughly investigate cases of alleged reprisal or intimidation against members or staff
of national human rights institutions or against individuals who cooperate or seek to cooperate with them;
12. Recognizes the role played by national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights in
the Human Rights Council, including its universal periodic review mechanism, in both preparation and follow-up,
and the special procedures, as well as in the human rights treaty bodies, in accordance with Council resolutions 5/1
and 5/2 of 18 June 2007475 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005;476
13. Welcomes the strengthening of opportunities for national human rights institutions compliant with the
Paris Principles to contribute to the work of the Human Rights Council, as stipulated in the Council review outcome
_______________
475

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2),
chap. II, sect. A.
476

755

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

document annexed to Council resolution 16/21 of 25 March 2011477 adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 65/281 of 17 June 2011, and encourages and welcomes the increasing use made by national human rights
institutions of these participatory opportunities;
14. Also welcomes the contribution of national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles
to the work of the United Nations, including of the Commission on the Status of Women, the Conference of States
Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing and
the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of
the human rights treaty body system;
15. Encourages national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles to continue to
participate in and to contribute to deliberations in all relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes in
accordance with their respective mandates, including the discussions on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;478
16. Encourages all relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes, in accordance with their respective
mandates, including the Commission on the Status of Women, the Conference of States Parties to the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, including the high-level political forum on sustainable development, to further enhance
the participation of national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles and to allow for their
contribution to these United Nations mechanisms and processes, bearing in mind the relevant provisions dealing
with their participation contained in General Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, Human Rights Council
resolutions 5/1, 5/2 and 16/21 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/74;
17. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, within their respective mandates and in accordance with the
treaties establishing these mechanisms, to provide for ways to ensure the effective and enhanced participation by
national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles at all relevant stages of their work;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide support to national human rights institutions
compliant with the Paris Principles as they engage with relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes, with
full respect for their respective mandates, and with a view to enabling their most effective contributions, in order to
further the implementation of international human rights obligations and commitments;
19. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms and relevant United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes to work, within their respective mandates, with Member States and national institutions in the
promotion and protection of human rights with respect to, inter alia, projects in the area of good governance and the
rule of law, welcomes in this regard the efforts made by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to develop partnerships in support of national institutions, including the tripartite partnership between the United
Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights,
and in this respect encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms and relevant United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes to enhance their interaction with national human rights institutions, including facilitating
their access to relevant information and documentation;
20. Stresses the importance of the financial and administrative independence and stability of national human
rights institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, and notes with satisfaction the efforts of those
States that have provided their national institutions with more autonomy and independence, including by giving
them an investigative role or enhancing such a role, and encourages other Governments to consider taking similar
steps;
21. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to give high priority to requests from Member States for
assistance in the establishment and strengthening of national human rights institutions;
22. Underlines the importance of the autonomy and independence of ombudsman institutions, encourages
increased cooperation between national human rights institutions and regional and international associations of
_______________
477
478

756

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
Resolution 70/1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

ombudsmen, and also encourages ombudsman institutions to actively draw on the standards enumerated in
international instruments and the Paris Principles to strengthen their independence and increase their capacity to act
as national human rights protection mechanisms;
23. Commends the high priority given by the Office of the High Commissioner to work on national human
rights institutions, encourages the High Commissioner, in view of the expanded activities relating to national
institutions, to ensure that appropriate arrangements are made and budgetary resources provided to continue and
further extend activities in support of national institutions, and invites Governments to contribute additional
voluntary funds to that end;
24. Welcomes the important role played by the International Coordinating Committee, in close cooperation
with the Office of the High Commissioner, in assisting Governments, when requested, in the establishment and
strengthening of national human rights institutions in accordance with the Paris Principles, in assessing the conformity
of national human rights institutions with the Paris Principles and in providing technical assistance to strengthen
national human rights institutions, upon request, with a view to enhancing their compliance with the Paris Principles,
and calls upon Member States and other stakeholders, including United Nations agencies, to follow up on the
recommendations of the Subcommittee on Accreditation of the International Coordinating Committee, with a view
to enabling national human rights institutions to fully comply with the Paris Principles in both law and practice;
25. Encourages national institutions, including ombudsman and mediator institutions, to seek accreditation
status through the International Coordinating Committee;
26. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate steps to promote the exchange of information and
experience concerning the establishment and effective operation of national human rights institutions and to support
the work of the International Coordinating Committee and its regional coordinating networks in this regard,
including through support for the relevant technical assistance programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the assistance necessary for holding international
and regional meetings of national institutions, including meetings of the International Coordinating Committee, in
cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/164
A/RE S/70 /164

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)479

70/164. Measures to enhance the promotion and protection of the human rights and dignity of older persons
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,480 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,481 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,481 the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,482 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities483 and
other relevant human rights instruments,
_______________
479

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Austria, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brazil, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Indonesia, Israel, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Slovenia, Turkey, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
480
Resolution 217 A (III).
481
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
482
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
483
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.

757

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,484
Recalling its resolution 57/167 of 18 December 2002, in which it endorsed the Political Declaration485 and the
Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002,486 its resolution 58/134 of 22 December 2003, in which it
took note, inter alia, of the road map for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and its resolution 60/135
of 16 December 2005 and subsequent resolutions on the follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing, and
recalling also Human Rights Council resolutions 21/23 of 28 September 2012487 and 24/20 of 27 September
2013488 on the human rights of older persons,
Noting with appreciation the work of the Independent Expert on the enjoyment of all human rights by older
persons, appointed by the Human Rights Council,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up to the International Year
of Older Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing489 and the report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the human rights of older persons,490
Noting with appreciation the work of the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing,491 and recognizing the
valuable contributions of Member States, as well as relevant bodies and organizations of the United Nations system,
intergovernmental and relevant non-governmental organizations, national human rights institutions and invited
panellists, during the six working sessions of the Working Group,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,492 and stressing the need to ensure
that no one is left behind, including older persons,
Noting the developments at the regional level towards the protection and promotion of the human rights of
older persons, such as the Inter-American Convention on the Protection of Human Rights of Older Persons,
Noting also that, between 2015 and 2030, the number of persons aged 60 years or over in the world is
projected to grow by 56 per cent, from 901 million to 1.4 billion,493 and recognizing that the increase in the number
of older people will be the greatest and the most rapid in the developing world,
Recognizing the essential contribution that older men and women can make to the functioning of societies and
to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda,
Concerned at the multiple forms of discrimination that may affect older persons and at the high incidence of
poverty among them, especially older women, persons with disabilities, persons of African descent, indigenous
peoples, persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, rural persons, persons living on
the streets and refugees, among other groups,
Noting that older women outnumber older men, and noting with concern that older women often face multiple
forms of discrimination or can be victims of violence, resulting from their gender-based roles in society,
compounded by their age or disability or on other grounds, which affects the enjoyment of their human rights,
Recognizing that, at the international level, the diversity of policies, standards and mechanisms aimed at
protecting and promoting the rights of older persons may lead to a lack of consistent protection of their rights,

_______________
484

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex I.
486
Ibid., annex II.
487
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
488
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
489
A/70/185.
490
E/2012/51 and Corr.1.
491
See A/AC.278/2015/2.
492
Resolution 70/1.
493
See Department of Economic and Social Affairs, World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables
(ESA/P/WP.241).
485

758

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that the current approach at the international level regarding the promotion and protection of
the rights and dignity of older persons may lead, on some occasions, to gaps in reporting on, and monitoring of,
existing treaty obligations towards older persons,
Recognizing further that the issues related to ageing are often not sufficiently visible and that further progress
needs to be made in the effective enjoyment and realization of all human rights of older persons, while
acknowledging the importance of strengthening efforts to increase the visibility of and sensitize the population to
those issues and to address ways to ensure the effective integration of older persons into society,
Noting that the various efforts made to increase cooperation and integration and the increasing awareness of
and sensitivity to ageing issues since the adoption of the Madrid Plan of Action by Governments, relevant bodies of
the United Nations system and civil society, including non-governmental organizations and the private sector,
should be further strengthened in order to better promote full and effective participation by and opportunities for
older persons in economic, social, cultural and political life,
Noting also that the situation of older persons presents a number of particular and urgent human rights
challenges related to the enjoyment of their civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights that deserve in-depth
analysis,
1. Recognizes the challenges related to the enjoyment of all human rights that older persons face in areas
such as prevention of and protection against violence and abuse, social protection, food and nutrition, housing,
employment, legal capacity, access to justice, health services, including physical and mental health support, and
long-term and palliative care services, and that those challenges require in-depth analysis and action to better
address them;
2. Also recognizes that the challenges faced by many older persons impede their social, economic and
cultural participation and the full enjoyment of their human rights;
3. Calls upon all States to promote and ensure the full realization of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms of older persons, including by taking measures to combat age discrimination, neglect, abuse and violence,
and to address issues related to social integration and adequate health care, bearing in mind the crucial importance of
strengthening intergenerational partnerships and solidarity;
4. Recognizes that the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002,486 remains the only
international instrument exclusively devoted to older persons, and that measures towards achieving its objectives
should be strengthened so as to improve its positive impact on the promotion and protection of the human rights and
dignity of older persons;
5. Also recognizes that there is no binding international human rights instrument exclusively devoted to
older persons, notes the importance of strengthening the implementation of current arrangements at the national and
international levels to protect the human rights of older persons, and encourages Member States to continue
discussions to explore all alternative measures to improve the protection of the human rights of older persons, and to
mainstream their human rights throughout existing mechanisms, policies and programmes;
6. Encourages Governments to actively address, through national, regional and international efforts, issues
that affect older persons and to ensure that the social integration of older persons and the promotion and protection
of their human rights form an integral part of development policies at all levels;
7. Invites Member States to continue to share their national experiences in developing and implementing
policies and programmes aimed at strengthening the promotion and protection of the human rights of older persons,
including within the framework of the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing established by the General Assembly
in paragraph 28 of its resolution 65/182 of 21 December 2010;
8. Recommends that States parties to existing international human rights instruments, where appropriate,
address the situation of older persons more explicitly in their reports, and encourages treaty body monitoring
mechanisms and special procedures mandate holders, in accordance with their mandates, to pay more attention to
the situation of older persons in their dialogue with Member States, in their consideration of reports and in their
country missions;
9. Encourages Member States to ensure that older persons have access to information about their rights so
as to enable them to participate fully and justly in their societies and to claim full enjoyment of all human rights;
759

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Invites relevant bodies and organizations of the United Nations system, including relevant human rights
mandate holders and treaty bodies and the regional commissions, as well as intergovernmental and relevant nongovernmental organizations with an interest in the matter, to continue to make contributions to the work entrusted to
the Open-ended Working Group, as appropriate;
11. Encourages Member States to continue to contribute to the work of the Open-ended Working Group, in
particular by presenting measures to enhance the promotion and protection of the human rights and dignity of older
persons, such as best practices, lessons learned and possible content for a multilateral legal instrument, as
appropriate, in order to enable it to fulfil its existing mandate;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide all necessary support to the Open-ended Working
Group, within existing resources, for the organization of a seventh working session, in 2016.
RESOLUTION 70/165
A/RE S/70 /165

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)494

70/165. Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons
The General Assembly,
Recalling that internally displaced persons are persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged
to flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a result of or in order to avoid the
effects of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural or human-made
disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally recognized State border,495
Recognizing that internally displaced persons are to enjoy, in full equality, the same rights and freedoms under
international and domestic law as do other persons in their country,
Deeply disturbed by the alarmingly high numbers of internally displaced persons throughout the world, for
reasons including violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, armed
conflict, persecution, violence and other reasons, including terrorism, as well as natural and human-made disasters,
who receive inadequate protection and assistance, and conscious of the serious challenges that this is creating for the
international community,
Recognizing that natural disasters are a cause of internal displacement, and concerned about factors, such as
climate change, that are expected to exacerbate the impact of natural hazards and climate-related events,
Recognizing also that the risk of becoming displaced as a result of a natural disaster has doubled in the last
four decades and that the consequences of hazards can be prevented or substantially mitigated by integrating disaster
risk reduction strategies into national development policies and programmes,
Recognizing further that internally displaced persons can be exposed to increased vulnerability when their host
communities are affected by natural disasters,
Conscious of the human rights, humanitarian and development dimensions, as well as the possible
peacebuilding dimension, of internal displacement, including in long-term displacement situations, the often
heightened vulnerability of women and children as well as older persons and persons with disabilities and the
responsibilities of States and the international community to further strengthen their protection and assistance,
_______________
494

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
495
See Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex), introduction, para. 2.

760

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

including by respecting and protecting the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all internally displaced
persons, with a view to finding durable solutions,
Emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility to provide protection and assistance to internally
displaced persons within their jurisdiction, without discrimination, as well as to address the root causes of the
displacement problem and support solutions in appropriate cooperation with the international community,
Reaffirming that all persons, including those who are internally displaced, have the right to freedom of
movement and residence and should be protected against arbitrary displacement,
Noting the need for increased awareness by the international community of the issue of internal displacement
worldwide, including the situation of millions living in protracted situations of displacement, many of them outside
camp settings and in urban areas, and the urgency of providing adequate humanitarian assistance to and protection
for internally displaced persons, ensuring protection from landmines and other explosive remnants of war,
supporting local host communities, addressing the root causes of displacement, and finding durable solutions for
internally displaced persons in their countries and addressing possible obstacles in this regard, and recognizing that
durable solutions include voluntary return in safety and with dignity, as well as voluntary local integration in the
areas to which persons have been displaced or voluntary settlement in another part of the country, without prejudice
to the right of internally displaced persons to leave their country or to seek asylum,
Emphasizing that ensuring durable solutions for internally displaced persons, including the right of voluntary
return in safety and with dignity, should be approached from a humanitarian and development perspective,
Recalling the relevant norms of international law, including international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law, and recognizing that the protection of internally displaced persons
has been strengthened by identifying, reaffirming and consolidating specific standards for their protection, in
particular through the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement,496
Recalling also the relevance of international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions of 1949497
and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977,498 as a vital legal framework for the protection of and assistance to
civilians in armed conflict and under foreign occupation, including internally displaced persons,
Recognizing that violations of international humanitarian law can cause displacement, and recalling that
displacement could be reduced if international humanitarian law was respected by all parties to armed conflict, in
particular the fundamental principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution, as well as the prohibition of
forced displacement of the civilian population, unless the security of the civilians involved or imperative military
reasons so demand,499
Welcoming the increasing dissemination, promotion, application and integration into domestic laws and
policies of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement when dealing with situations of internal displacement,
Deploring practices of forced displacement and their negative consequences for the enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms by large groups of populations, and recalling the relevant provisions of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court that define the deportation or forcible transfer of population as a crime
against humanity and the unlawful deportation, transfer or ordering of the displacement of the civilian population as
war crimes,500
Expressing its appreciation to those Governments and intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental
organizations that have supported and facilitated the work of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the human rights of internally displaced persons, and of his predecessor, the former Representative of the
Secretary-General on the human rights of internally displaced persons and, according to their roles and
responsibilities, have helped to provide protection and assistance to internally displaced persons,
_______________
496

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
498
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
499
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17513, arts. 13 and 17.
500
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544, art. 7, paras. 1 (d) and 2 (d), and art. 8, paras. 2 (a) (vii) and 2 (e) (viii).
497

761

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the continuing cooperation between the Special Rapporteur and national Governments and the
relevant offices and agencies of the United Nations as well as with other international and regional organizations,
and encouraging further strengthening of this collaboration in order to promote better strategies for, protection of,
assistance to and durable solutions for internally displaced persons,
Acknowledging with appreciation the important and independent contribution of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement and other humanitarian agencies in protecting and assisting internally displaced
persons, in cooperation with national Governments and relevant international bodies,
Welcoming the priorities set by the Special Rapporteur as contained in his report to the Human Rights Council
at its sixteenth session501 and the two strategic objectives of supporting Governments in developing national
instruments and institutions on internal displacement and facilitating viable durable solutions for internally displaced
persons, including through the engagement of development actors,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993,502 regarding the need to develop global strategies to address the problem of internal
displacement, and recalling also all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
Recalling also its resolution 68/180 of 18 December 2013 and Human Rights Council resolution 23/8 of
13 June 2013,503
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 and the guiding principles contained in the annex
thereto, other relevant General Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions and agreed conclusions of
the Council, reaffirming also the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming further the need for all actors engaged in the provision of humanitarian
assistance in situations of complex emergencies and natural disasters to promote and fully respect these principles,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
human rights of internally displaced persons504 and the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Commends the Special Rapporteur for the activities undertaken so far, for the catalytic role that he plays
in raising the level of awareness about the plight of internally displaced persons and for his ongoing efforts to
address their development and other specific needs, including through the mainstreaming of the human rights of
internally displaced persons into all relevant parts of the United Nations system;
3. Encourages the Special Rapporteur, through continuous dialogue with Governments and all
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, to continue his analysis of the root causes of
internal displacement and of the needs and human rights of those who are displaced, measures of prevention,
including early warning, and ways to strengthen protection and assistance, as well as durable solutions for internally
displaced persons, including addressing possible obstacles to the exercise of land and property rights for internally
displaced persons, and, in the latter regard, to use in his activities the Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally
Displaced Persons of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee,505 and also encourages the Special Rapporteur to
continue to advocate the needs of host communities and to promote comprehensive strategies, taking into account
the primary responsibility of States for the protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons within their
jurisdiction;
4. Recognizes the adverse effects of climate change as contributors to environmental degradation and
extreme weather events, which may, in certain instances, among other factors, contribute to human displacement,
and in this regard notes the global consultation of the Nansen Initiative, held in Geneva on 12 and 13 October 2015,
at which, inter alia, issues relevant to internal displacement were discussed, and encourages the Special Rapporteur,
in close collaboration with States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to continue to
_______________
501

A/HRC/16/43.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
503
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
504
A/70/334.
505
A/HRC/13/21/Add.4.
502

762

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

explore the human rights implications and dimensions of disaster-induced internal displacement, with a view to
supporting Member States in their efforts to build local resilience and capacity to prevent displacement or to provide
assistance and protection to those who are forced to flee;
5. Also recognizes that internal displacement is not only a humanitarian but also a development challenge,
calls upon States to provide durable solutions and address possible obstacles in this regard, and to include the needs,
vulnerabilities and capacities of internally displaced persons in their national development plans, and in this regard
takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur to the Human Rights Council on the human
rights of internally displaced persons in the context of the post-2015 development agenda;506
6. Urges all countries to integrate the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development507 into their respective
national policies and development frameworks, as appropriate, and recalls that the 2030 Agenda seeks to address the
needs of the most vulnerable, including internally displaced persons;
7. Requests Member States to strengthen their efforts to ensure the protection of and better assistance to
internally displaced persons, in particular to address the challenges of long-term displacement, by adopting and
implementing gender-responsive policies and strategies, in accordance with national and regional frameworks,
while recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement496 as an important international framework for
the protection of internally displaced persons, and in this regard recognizes the central role of national and local
authorities and institutions in addressing the specific needs of internally displaced persons and in finding solutions to
displacement through, inter alia, continued and enhanced international support, upon request, for the capacitybuilding of States;
8. Encourages strengthened international cooperation, in particular between humanitarian and
development actors, including through the provision of resources, coherent multi-year planning that addresses longterm displacement and expertise to assist affected countries, in particular developing countries, in their national
efforts and policies related to assistance, protection, resilience-building and rehabilitation for internally displaced
persons and host communities, as appropriate, and the integration of the human rights and needs of internally
displaced persons into both rural and urban development strategies, as well as the participation of both internally
displaced persons and host communities in the design and implementation of those strategies;
9. Recognizes that Member States have the primary responsibility to promote durable solutions for their
internally displaced persons, thus contributing to their national, economic and social development processes, and
encourages the international community, the United Nations system, the Special Rapporteur, relevant international
and regional organizations and donor countries to continue to support international, regional and national efforts to
meet the needs of internally displaced persons on the basis of solidarity, the principles of international cooperation
and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, to ensure that humanitarian assistance, early recovery and
development assistance efforts are appropriately funded;
10. Welcomes the initiatives undertaken by regional organizations, such as the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Organization of American States and the Council of
Europe, to address the protection, assistance and development needs of internally displaced persons and to find
durable solutions for them, and encourages regional organizations to strengthen their activities and their cooperation
with the Special Rapporteur;
11. Expresses deep concern at the threat caused by landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices to internally displaced persons fleeing conflict, impeding, in certain instances, their voluntary
return, local integration and resettlement and the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance;
12. Welcomes the adoption and entry into force of the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention), which builds on the Protocol on the
Protection of and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and the Protocol on the Property Rights of Returning
Persons adopted by the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and which marks a significant step
_______________
506
507

A/HRC/29/34.
Resolution 70/1.

763

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

towards strengthening the national and regional normative framework for the protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons in Africa, encourages African States to sign and/or ratify the Convention, and
encourages other regional mechanisms to develop their own regional normative frameworks for the protection of
internally displaced persons;
13. Calls upon all parties to armed conflict to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, and international human rights law, as applicable, with a view to preventing forced displacement and promoting
the protection of civilians, and calls upon Governments to take measures to respect and protect the human rights of
all internally displaced persons, without distinction of any kind, in accordance with their applicable obligations
under international law;
14. Expresses particular concern that many internally displaced children, particularly girls, lack access to
education in all phases of displacement owing to attacks against schools, damaged or destroyed school buildings,
insecurity, loss of documentation, language barriers and discrimination, calls upon States, in cooperation with all
other relevant actors, including humanitarian and development agencies and donors, to ensure the right to a quality
education, including primary and secondary education, for internally displaced children, without discrimination of
any kind, as well as to support existing schools to enable them to include internally displaced persons, calls upon all
parties to armed conflict to respect the civilian character of schools and other educational institutions and to refrain
from undertaking actions that could adversely affect the protection of these buildings against direct attacks, and
strongly condemns all attacks, as well as threats of attack, against schools, in contravention of international
humanitarian law;
15. Also expresses particular concern about the full range of threats, violations and abuses of human rights
and violations of international humanitarian law experienced by many internally displaced persons, including
women and children, who are particularly vulnerable or specifically targeted especially for sexual and gender-based
violence and sexual exploitation and abuse, trafficking in persons, forced recruitment and abduction, encourages the
continued commitment of the Special Rapporteur to promote action to address their particular assistance and
protection needs, and calls upon States, in cooperation with international agencies and other stakeholders, to provide
protection and assistance to internally displaced persons who are victims of the above-mentioned violations and
abuses, as well as other groups of internally displaced persons with special needs, such as severely traumatized
individuals, older persons and persons with disabilities, taking into account all relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council;
16. Emphasizes the importance of communication and consultation with internally displaced persons and
host communities by Governments and other relevant actors, in accordance with their specific mandates, during all
phases of displacement, as well as the participation of internally displaced persons, where appropriate, in policies,
programmes and activities pertaining to them, taking into account the primary responsibility of States for the
protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction;
17. Calls upon States, in cooperation with international agencies and other stakeholders, to provide for and
support, in particular, the full and meaningful participation of internally displaced women at all levels of decisionmaking processes and in all activities that have a direct impact on their lives, in all aspects of internal displacement,
including the promotion and protection of human rights, the prevention of human rights violations and the design
and implementation of durable solutions, peace processes, peacebuilding, transitional justice, post-conflict
reconstruction and development;
18. Notes the importance of taking the human rights and the specific protection and assistance needs of
internally displaced persons into consideration, when appropriate, in peace processes, and emphasizes that durable
solutions for internally displaced persons, including through voluntary return, sustainable reintegration and
rehabilitation processes and their active participation, as appropriate, in the peace process are necessary elements of
effective peacebuilding;
19. Welcomes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in this regard, and continues to urge the
Commission to intensify its efforts, within its mandate, in cooperation with national and transitional Governments
and in consultation with the relevant United Nations entities, to incorporate the rights and the specific needs of
internally displaced persons, including their voluntary return in safety and with dignity, reintegration and
rehabilitation, as well as related land and property issues, when advising on or proposing country-specific
peacebuilding strategies for post-conflict situations in cases under consideration;
764

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

20. Encourages the international community to provide technical cooperation to States affected by
displacement, upon their request, including for the training of staff members of institutions in charge of registration
and development of national laws and policies on internal displacement and issues related to land and property
restitution and compensation;
21. Welcomes the fact that an increasing number of States, United Nations organizations and regional and
non-governmental organizations are applying the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as a standard, and
encourages all relevant actors to make use of the Guiding Principles when dealing with situations of internal
displacement;
22. Also welcomes the use of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement by the Special Rapporteur in
his dialogue with Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other relevant actors,
and requests him to continue his efforts to further the dissemination, promotion, application and integration into
domestic laws and policies of the Guiding Principles and to provide support for efforts to promote capacity-building
and the use of the Guiding Principles, as well as the development of domestic legislation and policies;
23. Expresses its appreciation for the fact that an increasing number of States have adopted domestic
legislation and policies dealing with all stages of displacement, encourages States to continue to do so in an
inclusive and non-discriminatory way, consistent with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, including
through the identification of national focal points within Governments for issues of internal displacement and the
allocation of budget resources, and encourages the international community and national actors to provide financial
support and cooperation to Governments, upon request, in this regard;
24. Urges all Governments to continue to facilitate the activities of the Special Rapporteur, in particular
Governments with situations of internal displacement, and to respond favourably to requests from the Special
Rapporteur for visits so as to enable him to continue and enhance dialogue with Governments in addressing
situations of internal displacement, and thanks those Governments that have already done so;
25. Invites Governments to give serious consideration, in dialogue with the Special Rapporteur, to the
recommendations and suggestions addressed to them, in accordance with his mandate, and to inform him of
measures taken thereon;
26. Calls upon Governments to provide protection and assistance, including reintegration and development
assistance, to internally displaced persons and to facilitate the efforts of the relevant United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations in this regard by further improving the access of humanitarian personnel and the
delivery of supplies and equipment to internally displaced persons and by maintaining the civilian and humanitarian
character of camps and settlements for internally displaced persons, where they exist, as well as by taking the steps
necessary to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel so that they may efficiently perform their task
of assisting internally displaced persons;
27. Emphasizes the central role of the Emergency Relief Coordinator for the coordination of, protection of
and assistance to internally displaced persons, inter alia, through the inter-agency cluster system, welcomes
continued initiatives taken in order to ensure better protection, assistance and development strategies for internally
displaced persons, as well as better coordination of activities regarding them, and emphasizes the need to strengthen
the capacities of national and local authorities, United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to meet the
immense humanitarian challenges of internal displacement;
28. Encourages all relevant United Nations organizations and humanitarian assistance, human rights and
development organizations to enhance their collaboration and coordination through the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee and United Nations country teams in countries with situations of internal displacement and to provide all
possible assistance and support to the Special Rapporteur, and requests the continued participation of the Special
Rapporteur in the work of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
29. Encourages Member States, humanitarian agencies, donors, development actors and other providers of
development assistance to continue to work together, in close cooperation with the Special Rapporteur, to provide a
more predictable response to the needs of internally displaced persons, including long-term development assistance
for the implementation of durable solutions, takes note of the decision of the Policy Committee of the SecretaryGeneral of 4 October 2011 endorsing the preliminary framework on ending displacement in the aftermath of
conflict, notes the rolling out of the decision in select countries, and calls for United Nations agencies implementing
the decision to cooperate closely with the Special Rapporteur in that regard and to use the Inter-Agency Standing
765

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Committee Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons in a manner that complements the
decision of the Policy Committee;
30. Notes with appreciation the increased attention paid to the issue of internally displaced persons in
humanitarian response plans, and encourages further efforts in this regard;
31. Expresses deep concern at the insufficient funding levels of humanitarian appeals, and in this respect
urges all relevant actors to provide the relevant United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations with
sufficient and predictable resources to ensure adequate support for those who are forcibly displaced;
32. Notes with appreciation the increasing role of national human rights institutions in assisting internally
displaced persons and in promoting and protecting their human rights;
33. Recognizes the need to collect reliable disaggregated data, including data disaggregated by sex, age and
location, on internally displaced persons and the impact of long-term displacement on host communities in order to
improve policy, programming and response to internal displacement and, in this respect, the relevance of the interagency Joint Internally Displaced Person Profiling Service and the global database on internally displaced persons
maintained by the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre;
34. Encourages Governments, members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, United Nations
humanitarian coordinators and country teams to ensure the provision of reliable data on internal displacement
situations by collaborating with the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre, requesting the support of the Joint
Internally Displaced Person Profiling Service and providing financial resources, as appropriate, in these respects;
35. Welcomes the call in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030508 to integrate postdisaster reconstruction into the economic and social sustainable development of affected areas, as well as temporary
settlements where the displaced live, to promote regular disaster preparedness, response and recovery exercises with
a view to ensuring rapid and effective response to disasters and related displacement and to promote transboundary
cooperation to build resilience and reduce disaster risk, including displacement risk;
36. Also welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General to hold the World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May 2016, and notes the opportunity the Summit presents, inter alia, to strengthen
the partnerships between Member States and humanitarian and development actors in addressing the emergency
and long-term needs of internally displaced persons;
37. Further welcomes the initiative to hold the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III) in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016, and notes the importance of addressing, as
appropriate, the particular needs and vulnerabilities of internally displaced persons in urban settings;
38. Encourages Governments, United Nations agencies and other stakeholders to promote an inclusive
approach to durable solutions that addresses the needs of internally displaced persons and their host communities,
including the promotion of opportunities to fully harness the human potential of the displaced populations by
promoting self-sufficiency through income-generating activities and sustainable livelihood opportunities;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Special Rapporteur, from within existing
resources, with all assistance necessary to strengthen and carry out his mandate effectively, and encourages the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in close cooperation with the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and all other relevant United Nations offices and agencies, to
continue to support and cooperate with the Special Rapporteur;
40. Encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue to seek the contributions of States, relevant organizations
and institutions in order to create a more stable basis for his work;
41. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first and seventysecond sessions a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
42. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of protection of and assistance to internally
displaced persons at its seventy-second session.
_______________
508

766

Resolution 69/283, annex II.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/166
A/RE S/70 /166

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)509

70/166. Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities annexed to that resolution, and
bearing in mind article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights510 as well as other relevant
existing international and regional standards and national legislation,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the effective promotion of the Declaration, as well as Human
Rights Council resolutions 6/15 of 28 September 2007511 and 19/23 of 23 March 2012,512 by which the Council
established and renewed the mandate of the Forum on Minority Issues, 16/6 of 24 March 2011513 and 25/5 of
27 March 2014514 on the mandate of the Independent Expert on minority issues, 18/3 of 29 September 2011 on the
panel to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration515 and 22/4 of 21 March 2013
on the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,516
Affirming that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities and dialogue between these minorities and the rest of society, as well as the constructive
and inclusive development of practices and institutional arrangements to accommodate diversity within societies,
contribute to political and social stability and the prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts involving the rights
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,517 of which the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development518 is an integral part, recalling
that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets seek to realize the human rights of all, and stressing the need for
Member States to integrate the 2030 Agenda into their respective national policies and development frameworks, as
appropriate, to promote the effective implementation, follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda, in order to ensure
that no one is left behind,
Expressing concern at the frequency and severity of disputes and conflicts involving persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in many countries and their often tragic consequences, and that
such persons often suffer disproportionately from the effects of conflicts resulting in the violation of their human
_______________
509

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay.
510
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
511
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I, sect. A.
512
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
513
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
514
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
515
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
516
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
517
Resolution 70/1.
518
Resolution 69/313, annex.

767

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

rights and are particularly vulnerable to displacement through, inter alia, population transfers, revocation of
previously held identity documents, refugee flows and forced relocation,
Emphasizing the important role that national institutions can play in the promotion and protection of the rights
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities as well as in early warning and
awareness-raising measures to address problems regarding minority situations,
Emphasizing also the need for reinforced efforts to meet the goal of the full realization of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, including by addressing economic and social
conditions and marginalization, as well as to end any type of discrimination against them,
Emphasizing further the importance of recognizing and addressing multiple, aggravated and intersecting
forms of discrimination against persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and the
compounded negative impact upon the enjoyment of their rights,
Emphasizing the fundamental importance of human rights education, training and learning as well as of
dialogue, including intercultural and interfaith dialogue, and interaction among all relevant stakeholders and
members of society on the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities as an integral part of the development of society as a whole, including the sharing
of best practices such as for the promotion of mutual understanding of minority issues, managing diversity by
recognizing plural identities and promoting inclusive and stable societies as well as social cohesion therein,
Acknowledging that the United Nations has an important role to play regarding the protection of the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia, taking due account of, and
giving effect to, the Declaration,
Welcoming the publication of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights entitled
Promoting and Protecting Minority Rights: A Guide for Advocates, which provides information on main actors
working on the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in the United
Nations and in key regional organizations and which constitutes a valuable tool for advocates working on this issue
worldwide,
Recognizing the important role played by the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on minority
issues in promoting the implementation of the Declaration,
1. Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities may exercise fully and effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any
discrimination and in full equality before the law, as proclaimed in the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,519 and draws attention to the relevant
provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,520 including the provisions on forms of multiple
discrimination;
2. Urges States and the international community to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as set out in the Declaration, including through the
encouragement of conditions for the promotion of their identity, the provision of adequate education and the
facilitation of their participation in all aspects of the political, economic, social, religious and cultural life of society
and in the economic progress and development of their country, without discrimination, and to apply a gender
perspective while doing so;
3. Urges States to take all appropriate measures, inter alia, constitutional, legislative, administrative and
other measures, for the promotion and implementation of the Declaration, and appeals to States to cooperate
bilaterally and multilaterally, in particular on the exchange of best practices and lessons learned, in accordance
_______________
519
520

768

Resolution 47/135, annex.
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

with the Declaration, in order to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities;
4. Calls upon States, with a view to enhancing the implementation of the Declaration and to ensuring the
realization of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, to take
appropriate measures by, inter alia:
(a) Reviewing any legislation, policy or practice that has a discriminatory or disproportionately negative
effect on persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities with a view to considering its
amendment;
(b) Developing awareness-raising and training initiatives, including for public officials, judges, prosecutors
and law enforcement officials, on the rights contained in the Declaration;
(c) Dedicating departments, sections or focal points within existing institutions or considering the
establishment of specialized national institutions or agencies to address the rights of persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
(d) Undertaking initiatives to ensure that persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities are aware of and able to exercise their rights as set out in the Declaration and in other international human
rights obligations and commitments;
5. Recommends that States and other relevant actors ensure to the fullest extent possible that the
Declaration is translated into all minority languages and disseminated widely;
6. Also recommends that States ensure that all measures taken with a view to implementing the Declaration
are, to the fullest extent possible, developed, designed, implemented and reviewed with the full, effective and equal
participation of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
7. Calls upon States to give special attention to the situation and specific needs of women, children, older
persons and persons with disabilities belonging to minorities while promoting and protecting the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
8. Encourages States, in their follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to include aspects relating to persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities in their national plans of action and, in this context, to take forms of multiple discrimination
fully into account;
9. Calls upon States to integrate the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as well as effective non-discrimination and equality for all, into
strategies for the prevention and resolution of conflicts involving these minorities, while ensuring their full and
effective participation in the design, implementation and evaluation of such strategies;
10. Recommends that States adopt holistic, inclusive and non-discriminatory security and policing strategies,
which are important elements in preventing and combating discrimination, including racial profiling, and violence
against persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and encourages States to develop
and implement these strategies in consultation with the minority communities and incorporate them into wider law
enforcement and protection strategies and ensure equal and effective access to justice;
11. Condemns all acts of violence specifically targeting persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities;
12. Recognizes that women and girls belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities can
be exposed to both gender-based violence and violence on the grounds of their belonging to minorities in conflict
and post-conflict situations, urges States to take special measures to protect them from all forms of violence,
including rape and other forms of sexual violence, and stresses the importance of their empowerment;
769

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

13. Calls upon States to take all appropriate measures to ensure the protection and care of children
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities who are at risk of or have experienced violence, in
accordance with relevant obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child;521
14. Expresses its appreciation for the successful completion, in November 2014, of the seventh session of
the Forum on Minority Issues, on the theme “Preventing and addressing violence and atrocity crimes targeted
against minorities”, which, through the widespread participation of stakeholders, provided an important platform for
promoting dialogue on this topic and, as part of its outcome, produced recommendations to prevent violence and
related crimes, to address ongoing violence and for post-violence situations,522 and encourages States to take into
consideration the relevant recommendations of the Forum;
15. Invites States, United Nations mechanisms, bodies, specialized agencies, funds and programmes,
regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and national human rights institutions as well as
academics and experts on minority issues to continue to participate actively in the sessions of the Forum;
16. Reaffirms that the universal periodic review, as well as the United Nations human rights treaty bodies,
constitute important mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in
that regard calls upon States to effectively follow up on accepted universal periodic review recommendations related
to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and further encourages
States parties to give serious consideration to the follow-up to treaty body recommendations on the matter;
17. Commends the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on minority issues for the work that
has been done and the important role played in raising the level of awareness of and in giving added visibility to the
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and for her guiding role in the
preparations for and the work of the Forum, which contributes to efforts to improve cooperation and coordination
among all United Nations mechanisms relating to the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
18. Calls upon all States to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in the performance of the tasks
and duties mandated to her, to provide her with all the necessary information requested and to seriously consider
responding promptly and favourably to the requests of the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries in order to
enable her to fulfil her duties effectively;
19. Encourages the specialized agencies, regional organizations, national human rights institutions and nongovernmental organizations to develop regular dialogue and cooperation with the mandate holder as well as to
continue to contribute to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities;
20. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to promote, within his
mandate, the implementation of the Declaration, and to engage in a dialogue with Governments for that purpose and
regularly update and disseminate widely the United Nations Guide for Minorities;
21. Welcomes the inter-agency cooperation among United Nations agencies, funds and programmes on
minority issues, led by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and urges them to
further increase their coordination and cooperation by, inter alia, developing policies on the promotion and
protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities, drawing also on relevant outcomes of the Forum and
taking into account the work of relevant regional organizations;
22. Takes note in particular, in this regard, of the initiatives and activities of the United Nations network on
racial discrimination and the protection of minorities, coordinated by the Office of the High Commissioner and
aimed at enhancing dialogue and cooperation between relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
and invites the network to continue to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on minority issues and the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and to
consult and engage with persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and civil
society actors;
_______________
521
522

770

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
A/HRC/28/77.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

23. Invites the High Commissioner to continue to seek voluntary contributions to facilitate the effective
participation of representatives of non-governmental organizations and persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities, in particular those from developing countries, in minority-related activities
organized by the United Nations, in particular the activities of its human rights bodies and of the Forum, and in
doing so to give particular attention to ensuring the participation of young people and women;
24. Welcomes, in this regard, the decision of the Human Rights Council to establish a special fund for the
participation of civil society and other relevant stakeholders in, inter alia, the Forum on Minority Issues,523 aiming to
facilitate the broadest possible participation of civil society representatives and other relevant stakeholders, with
particular attention being paid to participants from least developed countries, and calls upon States to support the
participation of civil society and other relevant stakeholders in the Forum and, to that end, to make voluntary
contributions to the special fund;
25. Calls upon the Secretary-General to make available, at the request of Governments concerned, qualified
expertise on minority issues, including in the context of the prevention and resolution of disputes and conflicts, to
assist in resolving existing or potential situations involving minorities;
26. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, as well as special procedures of the Human Rights Council, to
continue to give attention, within their respective mandates, to situations and rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and, in this regard, to take into consideration relevant recommendations
of the Forum;
27. Invites the United Nations mechanisms and bodies, the specialized agencies and regional organizations,
within their respective mandates, to continue to contribute to the protection and the prevention of violations of the
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, including by strengthening
cooperation in respect of information-gathering and improving the information flow between themselves and
with States;
28. Encourages regional intergovernmental bodies, within their respective regions, to promote greater
attention to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia,
actively raising awareness of and promoting the Declaration in their work, encouraging its implementation at the
national level and considering the creation of thematic and/or special mechanisms on this issue;
29. Encourages national human rights institutions to pay due attention to the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia, considering the establishment of, for instance, a
department, section or focal point within their secretariats to address those rights and to play a role in stopping
violence, including by monitoring situations of potential threats for persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities, and by investigating and reporting, in accordance with the principles relating to the status
of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles)524 and their respective
mandates, episodes of targeted violence against persons belonging to minorities, including, when necessary, to
regional and international bodies;
30. Encourages civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to promote awareness of the
Declaration and to review the extent to which it integrates the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities and the Declaration into its work, as well as to inform persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities about their rights;
31. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Special Rapporteur on minority issues and their special
focus on preventing and addressing violence and other serious crimes against persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities525 and on minorities and the criminal justice process;526
_______________
523

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. IV, decision 24/118.
Resolution 48/134, annex.
525
A/69/266.
526
A/70/212.
524

771

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

32. Requests the Special Rapporteur to report annually to the General Assembly and include
recommendations for effective strategies for the better implementation of the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
33. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the effective promotion of the Declaration;527
34. Takes note with appreciation of the “Guidance note of the Secretary-General on racial discrimination
and protection of minorities” providing guidance for the United Nations system on how to address racial
discrimination and the protection of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and
aimed at, inter alia, integrating their rights into the work of the United Nations system at the global, regional and
country levels, including through coordination mechanisms;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, including information on activities undertaken by Member States,
the Office of the High Commissioner, the Special Rapporteur, relevant United Nations entities and other relevant
stakeholders to enhance the implementation of the Declaration and to ensure the realization of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
36. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its seventy-second session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 70/167
A/RE S/70 /167

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)528

70/167. Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/105 of 4 December 2000 concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/34 B of 20 November 2000 and 55/233 of 23 December 2000, section III of
its resolution 55/234 of 23 December 2000, its resolution 56/253 of 24 December 2001 and its resolutions 58/176 of
22 December 2003, 59/183 of 20 December 2004, 60/151 of 16 December 2005, 61/158 of 19 December 2006,
62/221 of 22 December 2007, 63/177 of 18 December 2008, 64/165 of 18 December 2009, 66/162 of 19 December
2011 and 68/174 of 18 December 2013 on the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central
Africa,
Recalling further that the World Conference on Human Rights recommended that more resources be made
available for the strengthening of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights under the
programme of technical cooperation in the field of human rights of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights,529
Recalling the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,530
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,531
_______________
527

A/70/255.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Cameroon (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Economic Community of Central African States), Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia,
Madagascar, Mali, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, Tunisia and Uganda.
529
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
530
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 36, addendum (A/56/36/Add.1).
531
A/70/405.
528

772

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting the holding of the thirty-seventh, thirty-eighth, thirty-ninth and fortieth ministerial meetings of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, in N’Djamena from 19 to
23 December 2013, in Malabo from 29 July to 2 August 2014, in Bujumbura from 1 to 5 December 2014 and in
Luanda from 1 to 5 June 2015,
Taking note of the decision of the High Commissioner to launch a far-reaching organizational change initiative
in the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights with a view to better integrating work at
Headquarters and in the field,532
Noting the context of deteriorating security and humanitarian conditions in the subregion, and in particular the
challenges created by increasing and indiscriminate attacks and massive abuses of human rights by Boko Haram
against the civilian population in many countries of the Central African subregion and in the Lake Chad Basin
countries,531
Noting also that the effective presence of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the countries covered and continued dialogue with the authorities have generated an increased number of
requests for assistance from States,531
Mindful of the vastness and diversity of the needs in the field of human rights within the subregion, and taking
into account the need for sufficient funding of the Centre to fully realize its significant function and crucial role in
the subregion,531
1. Welcomes the activities of the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa at
Yaoundé;
2.

Notes with satisfaction the support provided for the establishment of the Centre by the host country;

3. Also notes with satisfaction the increasing activities of the Centre and the improved cooperation between
the Centre and the States members of the Economic Community of Central African States and Rwanda;
4. Encourages the Centre to take into account the requested activities, needs and demands of the countries
of the subregion in the implementation of its strategic thematic priorities for the period 2014–2017;
5. Also encourages the Centre to strengthen its cooperation and invest in relations with subregional
organizations and bodies, including the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the United Nations country teams of the subregion;
6. Encourages the Regional Representative and Director of the Centre to continue to hold regular briefings
for the ambassadors of Central African States based in Geneva and Yaoundé, as well as in countries of the subregion
during visits of the Regional Representative, with the aim of exchanging information on the activities of the Centre
and charting its direction;
7. Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to ensure the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly533 in order to provide
sufficient funds and human resources for the missions of the Centre;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner, taking note of the organizational change
initiative in the Office of the High Commissioner, to continue to provide additional funds and human resources
within the existing resources of the Office to enable the Centre to respond positively and effectively to the growing
needs in the promotion and protection of human rights and in developing a culture of democracy and the rule of law
in the Central African subregion;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
_______________
532
533

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 36 (A/70/36), chap. III.
Resolutions 61/158, 62/221, 63/177 and 64/165.

773

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/168
A/RE S/70 /168

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),534 by a recorded vote of 168 to none, with 15 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Angola, China, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Namibia, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe

70/168. Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and genuine elections and the
promotion of democratization
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that democracy is a universal value based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine
their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives,
Reaffirming also that, while democracies share common features, there is no single model of democracy and
that democracy does not belong to any country or region, and reaffirming further the necessity of due respect for
sovereignty and the right to self-determination,
Stressing that democracy, development and respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming that Member States are responsible for organizing, conducting and ensuring transparent, free and
fair electoral processes and that Member States, in the exercise of their sovereignty, may request that international
organizations provide advisory services or assistance for strengthening and developing their electoral institutions
and processes, including sending preliminary missions for that purpose,
Recognizing the importance of fair, periodic and genuine elections, including in new democracies and
countries undergoing democratization, in order to empower citizens to express their will and to promote successful
transition to long-term sustainable democracies,

_______________
534

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen and Zambia.

774

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that Member States are responsible for ensuring transparent, free and fair elections, free of
intimidation, coercion and tampering of vote counts, and that all such acts are sanctioned accordingly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in particular resolution 68/164 of 18 December 2013,
Recalling also all relevant Human Rights Council resolutions on the topic, including resolutions 19/11 of
22 March 2012,535 19/36 of 23 March 2012,535 22/10 of 21 March 2013536 and 24/8 of 26 September 2013,537
Reaffirming that United Nations electoral assistance and support for the promotion of democratization are
provided only at the specific request of the Member State concerned,
Noting with satisfaction that increasing numbers of Member States are using elections as a peaceful means of
discerning the will of the people, which builds confidence in representational governance and contributes to greater
national peace and stability, and which may contribute to regional peace and stability,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted on 10 December 1948,538 in particular the
principle that the will of the people, as expressed through periodic and genuine elections, shall be the basis of
government authority, as well as the right freely to choose representatives through periodic and genuine elections,
which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting
procedures,
Reaffirming the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,539 the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,540 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination541 and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,542 and reaffirming also that
no distinctions are permitted among citizens on any grounds, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political
or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status, or on the basis of disability, in the
enjoyment of the right to participate, directly or through freely chosen representatives, and to vote and to be elected
in genuine periodic elections, which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret ballot,
guaranteeing the free expression of the will of the electors,
Reaffirming also that the full and effective participation of women, on equal terms with men, at all levels of
decision-making is essential to the achievement of equality and social inclusion, sustainable development, peace and
democracy,
Stressing the importance, generally and in the context of promoting free and fair elections, of respect for the
freedoms of peaceful assembly and association and expression, including the freedom to seek, receive and impart
information, in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and noting in particular the
fundamental importance of access to information and media freedom, including through accessible and easy to
understand formats for new information and communications technologies,
Noting that some countries are beginning to use online technology for balloting purposes, and reaffirming the
right to privacy, according to which no one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her
privacy, family, home or correspondence, and the right to the protection of the law against such interference, as set
out in article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, and that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected online,
Recognizing the need for strengthening democratic processes, electoral institutions and national capacitybuilding in requesting countries, including the capacity to administer fair elections, promote voter education, the
_______________
535

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. III, sect. A.
536
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
537
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
538
Resolution 217 A (III).
539
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
540
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
541
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
542
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.

775

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

development of electoral expertise and technology and the participation of women on equal terms with men, take all
appropriate measures to ensure the effective and full participation of all persons with disabilities on an equal basis
with others, increase citizen participation and provide civic education, including to youth, in requesting countries in
order to consolidate and regularize the achievements of previous elections and support subsequent elections,
Noting the importance of ensuring orderly, open, fair and transparent democratic processes that protect the
rights to peaceful assembly, association and freedom of expression and opinion,
Noting also that the international community can contribute to the creation of conditions which could foster
stability and security throughout the pre-election, election and post-election periods in transitional and post-conflict
situations,
Reiterating that transparency is a fundamental basis for free and fair elections, which contribute to the
accountability of Governments to their citizens, which, in turn, is an underpinning of democratic societies,
Acknowledging, in this regard, the importance of international observation of elections for the promotion of
free and fair elections and its contribution to enhancing the integrity of election processes in requesting countries, to
promoting public confidence and electoral participation and to mitigating the potential for election-related
disturbances,
Acknowledging also that extending invitations regarding international electoral assistance and/or observation
is the sovereign right of Member States, and welcoming the decisions of those States that have requested such
assistance and/or observation,
Recalling its resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005, entitled “2005 World Summit Outcome”, in which it
welcomed the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Democracy Fund,
Welcoming the support provided by Member States to the electoral assistance activities of the United Nations,
inter alia, through the provision of electoral experts, including electoral commission staff, and observers, as well as
through contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for Electoral Assistance, the Democratic Governance
Thematic Trust Fund of the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Democracy Fund,
Recognizing that electoral assistance, particularly through appropriate, sustainable, accessible and costeffective electoral technology, can facilitate full access for persons with disabilities and supports the electoral
processes of developing countries,
Recognizing also the coordination challenges posed by the multiplicity of actors involved in electoral
assistance both within and outside the United Nations,
Welcoming the contributions made by international and regional organizations and also by non-governmental
organizations to enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization,
Recognizing the importance of the links that exist between development, peace, human rights, the rule of law,
democracy and good governance, including the holding of free and fair elections, and in this regard welcoming the
adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,543
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;544

2. Commends the electoral assistance provided upon request to Member States by the United Nations, and
requests that such assistance continue on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the evolving needs and legislation
of requesting countries to develop, improve and refine their electoral institutions and processes, including ensuring
full access to all stages of the elections process for persons with disabilities, recognizing that the responsibility for
organizing free and fair elections lies with Governments;
3. Reaffirms that the electoral assistance provided by the United Nations should continue to be carried out
in an objective, impartial, neutral and independent manner;
_______________
543
544

776

Resolution 70/1.
A/70/306.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Requests the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, in his role as United Nations focal point for
electoral assistance matters, to continue to regularly inform Member States about the requests received and the
nature of any assistance provided;
5. Requests that the United Nations continue its efforts to ensure, before undertaking to provide electoral
assistance to a requesting State, that there is adequate time to organize and carry out an effective mission providing
such assistance, including the provision of long-term technical cooperation, that conditions exist to allow a free and
fair election and that the results of the mission will be reported comprehensively and consistently;
6. Notes the importance of adequate resources for the administration of efficient and transparent elections
at the national and local levels, and recommends that Member States provide adequate resources for those elections,
including considering the possibility of establishing internal funding, where feasible;
7. Reaffirms the obligation of all States to take all appropriate measures to ensure that every citizen has the
effective right and opportunity to participate in elections on an equal basis;
8. Calls upon all States to ensure that persons with disabilities can effectively and fully participate in
political and public life on an equal basis with others, directly or through freely chosen representatives, including the
right and opportunity for persons with disabilities to vote and to be elected;
9. Also calls upon all States to enhance the political participation of women, accelerate the achievement of
equality between men and women and, in all situations, promote and protect the human rights of women with
respect to voting in elections and public referendums and being eligible for election to publicly elected bodies on
equal terms with men;
10. Recommends that, throughout the timespan of the entire electoral cycle, including before and after
elections, as appropriate, on the basis of a needs assessment and in accordance with the evolving needs of requesting
Member States, bearing in mind sustainability and cost-effectiveness, the United Nations continue to provide
technical advice and other assistance to requesting States and electoral institutions in order to help to strengthen their
democratic processes, also bearing in mind that the relevant office may provide additional assistance in the form of
mediation and good offices, upon the request of Member States;
11. Notes with appreciation the additional efforts being made to enhance cooperation with other
international, governmental and non-governmental organizations in order to facilitate more comprehensive and
needs-specific responses to requests for electoral assistance, encourages those organizations to share knowledge and
experience in order to promote best practices in the assistance they provide and in their reporting on electoral
processes, and expresses its appreciation to those Member States, regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations that have provided observers or technical experts in support of United Nations electoral assistance
efforts;
12. Acknowledges the aim of harmonizing the methods and standards of the many intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations engaged in observing elections, and in this regard expresses appreciation for the
Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation and the Code of Conduct for International Election
Observers, which elaborate guidelines for international electoral observation;
13. Recalls the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Trust Fund for Electoral
Assistance, and, bearing in mind that the Fund is currently close to depletion, calls upon Member States to consider
contributing to the Fund;
14. Encourages the Secretary-General, through the United Nations focal point for electoral assistance
matters and with the support of the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political Affairs of the
Secretariat, to continue to respond to the evolving nature of requests for assistance and the growing need for specific
types of medium-term expert assistance aimed at supporting and strengthening the existing capacity of the
requesting Government, in particular by enhancing the capacity of national electoral institutions;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Electoral Assistance Division with adequate human and
financial resources to allow it to carry out its mandate, including to enhance the accessibility and diversity of the
roster of electoral experts and the Organization’s electoral institutional memory, and to continue to ensure that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is able to respond, within its mandate and in
777

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

close coordination with the Division, to the numerous and increasingly complex and comprehensive requests from
Member States for advisory services;
16. Reiterates the need for ongoing comprehensive coordination, under the auspices of the United Nations
focal point for electoral assistance matters, between the Electoral Assistance Division, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support of the
Secretariat and the Office of the High Commissioner to ensure coordination and coherence and avoid duplication of
United Nations electoral assistance;
17. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to continue its democratic governance assistance
programmes in cooperation with other relevant organizations, in particular those that promote the strengthening of
democratic institutions and linkages between civil society and Governments;
18. Reiterates the role of civil society and the importance of its active engagement in the promotion of
democratization, and invites Member States to facilitate the full participation of civil society in electoral processes;
19. Also reiterates the importance of reinforced coordination within and outside the United Nations system,
and reaffirms the clear leadership role within the United Nations system of the United Nations focal point for
electoral assistance matters, including in ensuring system-wide coherence and consistency and in strengthening the
institutional memory and the development, dissemination and issuance of United Nations electoral assistance
policies;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution, in particular on the status of requests from Member States for electoral
assistance, and on his efforts to enhance support by the Organization for the democratization process in Member
States.
RESOLUTION 70/169
A/RE S/70 /169

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)545

70/169. The human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 64/292 of 28 July 2010, in which it recognized the right to safe and clean drinking
water and sanitation as a human right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights, and 68/157
of 18 December 2013, entitled “The human right to safe drinking water and sanitation”,
Reaffirming the previous resolutions of the Human Rights Council regarding the human right to safe drinking
water and sanitation, inter alia, Council resolutions 24/18 of 27 September 2013546 and 27/7 of 25 September 2014,547
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,548 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,549 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,549 the International Convention on the
_______________
545

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates and Uruguay.
546
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
547
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
548
Resolution 217 A (III).
549
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

778

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,550 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,551 the Convention on the Rights of the Child552 and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,553
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,554 including the reaffirmation of
commitments regarding the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation therein,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of June 1992555 and its resolution 66/288 of
27 July 2012, entitled “The future we want”, and emphasizing the critical importance of water and sanitation within
the three dimensions of sustainable development,
Reaffirming its resolutions 58/217 of 23 December 2003, by which it proclaimed the period from 2005 to
2015 the International Decade for Action, “Water for Life”, 61/192 of 20 December 2006, by which it established
2008 as the International Year for Sanitation, and 65/153 of 20 December 2010, by which it called upon Member
States to support “Sustainable sanitation: the five-year drive to 2015”, and recalling its resolution 65/154 of
20 December 2010, by which it declared 2013 the International Year of Water Cooperation,
Recalling the designation of 19 November as World Toilet Day, in the context of Sanitation for All, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 67/291 of 24 July 2013, in which the Assembly encouraged all Member States, as well
as the organizations of the United Nations system and international organizations and other stakeholders, to
approach the sanitation issue in a much broader context and to encompass all its aspects, including hygiene
promotion, the provision of basic sanitation services, sewerage and wastewater treatment and reuse in the context of
integrated water management,
Taking note of the relevant commitments and initiatives promoting the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation, including the Panama Declaration, adopted at the third Latin American Sanitation Conference, in 2013,
the Kathmandu Declaration, adopted at the fifth South Asian Conference on Sanitation, in 2013, the 2015 Dushanbe
Declaration of the High-level International Conference on the Implementation of the International Decade for
Action “Water for Life”, 2005–2015, the commitments made on the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation at the high-level meeting of the Sanitation and Water for All partnership in 2014 and the Ngor Declaration
on Sanitation and Hygiene, adopted at the fourth AfricaSan Conference, in 2015,
Recalling general comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on the
right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights)556 and the
statement on the right to sanitation of the Committee of 19 November 2010,557 as well as the reports of the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Welcoming the work of the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund in the 2015
update published by their Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation,558
Welcoming also the fact that, according to Joint Monitoring Programme reports of the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund, the target on safe drinking water of the Millennium
Development Goals was formally met, while being deeply concerned, however, that, according to the 2015 Joint
Monitoring Programme update, 663 million people still lack access to improved drinking water sources and that 8
out of 10 people still without improved drinking water sources live in rural areas,

_______________
550

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
552
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
553
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
554
Resolution 70/1.
555
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
556
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.
557
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 2 (E/2011/22), annex VI.
558
World Health Organization/United Nations Children’s Fund, Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water, Geneva, 2015.
551

779

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Deeply concerned that the world missed the sanitation component of Millennium Development Goal 7 by
almost 700 million people and that more than 2.4 billion people still do not have access to improved sanitation
facilities, including more than 946 million people who still practise open defecation, which is one of the clearest
manifestations of poverty and extreme poverty,
Deeply concerned also that women and girls often face particular barriers in accessing water and sanitation
and that they shoulder the main burden of collecting household water in many parts of the world, restricting their
time for other activities, such as education and leisure, or for women earning a livelihood,
Deeply concerned further that the lack of access to adequate water and sanitation services, including for
menstrual hygiene management, especially in schools, contributes to reinforcing the widespread stigma associated
with menstruation, negatively affecting gender equality and women’s and girls’ enjoyment of human rights,
including the right to education,
Deeply concerned that women and girls are particularly at risk and exposed to attacks, sexual and genderbased violence, harassment and other threats to their safety while collecting household water and when accessing
sanitation facilities outside of their homes or practising open defecation,
Deeply alarmed that, every year, almost 700,000 children under 5 years of age die as a result of water and
sanitation-related diseases, and underscoring that progress on reducing child mortality, morbidity and stunting is
linked to children’s and women’s access to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Deeply concerned that official figures do not fully capture the dimensions of drinking water availability,
safety, affordability of services and safe management of excreta and wastewater, as well as of inequality and
discrimination in the access to safe drinking water and sanitation and therefore underestimate the numbers of those
without access to safe and affordable drinking water and safely managed and affordable sanitation, and highlighting
in this context the need to adequately monitor the safety of drinking water and sanitation in order to obtain data that
capture those dimensions,
Deeply concerned also that inexistent or inadequate sanitation facilities as well as serious deficiencies in water
management and wastewater treatment can negatively affect water provision and sustainable access to safe drinking
water, and recognizing that, in progressively realizing the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation as well
as other human rights, States should increasingly pursue integrated approaches and strengthen their water resource
management, including by improving their wastewater treatment and by preventing and reducing surface and
groundwater pollution,
Affirming the importance of regional and international technical cooperation, where appropriate, as a means to
promote the progressive realization of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, without any prejudice
to questions of international water law, including international watercourse law,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States to ensure the promotion and protection of all human rights, which are
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated, and must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on
the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Recalling the understanding by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Special
Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation that the rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation are closely related, but have distinct features which warrant their separate treatment in order to address
specific challenges in their implementation and that sanitation too often remains neglected if not addressed as a
separate right, while being a component of the right to an adequate standard of living,
Recalling also that the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation are derived from the right to an
adequate standard of living and are inextricably related to the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health, as well as to the right to life and human dignity,
Acknowledging the importance of equal access to safe drinking water and sanitation as an integral component
of the realization of all human rights,
1. Affirms that the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation as components of the right to an
adequate standard of living are essential for the full enjoyment of the right to life and all human rights;
780

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Recognizes that the human right to safe drinking water entitles everyone, without discrimination, to have
access to sufficient, safe, acceptable, physically accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic use, and
that the human right to sanitation entitles everyone, without discrimination, to have physical and affordable access to
sanitation, in all spheres of life, that is safe, hygienic, secure, socially and culturally acceptable and that provides
privacy and ensures dignity, while reaffirming that both rights are components of the right to an adequate standard
of living;
3. Welcomes Goal 6 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,554 on ensuring the availability and
sustainable management of water and sanitation for all, which includes important dimensions related to the human
rights to safe drinking water and sanitation;
4. Also welcomes the work of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human right to
safe drinking water and sanitation, and takes note with appreciation, in particular, of his first reports on affordability
of water and sanitation services559 and on the analysis of the different types of water and sanitation services from the
perspective of the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation;560
5.

Calls upon States:

(a) To ensure the progressive realization of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation for all in a
non-discriminatory manner while eliminating inequalities in access, including for individuals belonging to groups at
risk and to marginalized groups, on the grounds of race, gender, age, disability, ethnicity, culture, religion and
national or social origin or on any other grounds, with a view to progressively eliminating inequalities based on
factors such as rural-urban disparities, residence in a slum, income levels and other relevant considerations;
(b) To give due consideration to the commitments regarding the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation when implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including through the full
implementation of Goal 6;
(c) To continuously monitor and regularly analyse the status of the realization of the human rights to safe
drinking water and sanitation;
(d) To identify patterns of failure to respect, protect or fulfil the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation for all persons without discrimination and to address their structural causes in policymaking and
budgeting within a broader framework, while undertaking holistic planning aimed at achieving sustainable universal
access, including in instances where the private sector, donors and non-governmental organizations are involved in
service provision;
(e) To promote both women’s leadership and their full, effective and equal participation in decision-making
on water and sanitation management and to ensure that a gender-based approach is adopted in relation to water and
sanitation programmes, including measures, inter alia, to reduce the time spent by women and girls in collecting
household water, in order to address the negative impact of inadequate water and sanitation services on the access of
girls to education and to protect women and girls from being physically threatened or assaulted, including from
sexual violence, while collecting household water and when accessing sanitation facilities outside of their home or
practising open defecation;
(f) To progressively eliminate open defecation by adopting policies to increase access to sanitation,
including for individuals belonging to vulnerable and marginalized groups;
(g) To approach the sanitation issue in a much broader context, taking into account the need to pursue
integrated approaches;
(h) To consult and coordinate with local communities and other stakeholders, including civil society and the
private sector, on adequate solutions to ensure sustainable access to safe drinking water and sanitation;
(i) To provide for effective accountability mechanisms for all water and sanitation service providers to
ensure that they respect human rights and do not cause human rights violations or abuses;
_______________
559
560

A/HRC/30/39.
A/70/203.

781

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Calls upon non-State actors, including business enterprises, both transnational and others, to comply
with their responsibility to respect human rights, including the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation,
including by cooperating with State investigations into allegations of abuses of the human rights to safe drinking
water and sanitation, and by progressively engaging with States to detect and remedy abuses of the human rights to
safe drinking water and sanitation;
7. Invites regional and international organizations to complement efforts by States to progressively realize
the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation;
8. Calls upon Member States to enhance global partnerships for sustainable development as a means to
achieve and sustain the Goal and the targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and highlights the
need to develop adequate follow-up and review of progress on the 2030 Agenda, including on ensuring availability
and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all;
9. Reaffirms that States have the primary responsibility to ensure the full realization of all human rights and
to endeavour to take steps, individually and through international assistance and cooperation, especially economic
and technical cooperation, to the maximum of their available resources, with a view to progressively achieving the
full realization of the rights to safe drinking water and sanitation by all appropriate means, including, in particular,
the adoption of legislative measures;
10. Stresses the important role of the international cooperation and technical assistance provided by States,
specialized agencies of the United Nations system and international and development partners, as well as by donor
agencies, and urges development partners to adopt a human rights-based approach when designing and
implementing development programmes in support of national initiatives and plans of action related to the rights to
safe drinking water and sanitation;
11.

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-second session.
RESOLUTION 70/170

A/RE S/70 /170

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.2, para. 155)561

70/170. Towards the full realization of an inclusive and accessible United Nations for persons
with disabilities
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,562 which it adopted on 13 December
2006 and which entered into force on 3 May 2008, a landmark convention affirming the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of persons with disabilities, and recognizing that it is both a human rights and a development
instrument,

_______________
561

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Yemen.
562
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.

782

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling its resolution 67/160 of 20 December 2012, in which it requested the Secretary-General to take
further actions to promote the rights of persons with disabilities in the United Nations system in accordance with the
Convention, including the retention and recruitment of persons with disabilities,
Recalling also its previous relevant resolutions, in which it requested the Secretary-General to continue to
improve full inclusion of persons with disabilities and continue the progressive implementation of standards and
guidelines with respect to the accessibility of facilities and services of the United Nations system, taking into
account the relevant provisions of the Convention,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the Secretary-General in this regard, including the opening of the
accessibility centres at the United Nations offices in New York and Bangkok,
Noting that improvement in accessibility has been a core goal of the capital master plan since the
commencement of the renovation of United Nations Headquarters, and recalling its resolution 69/250 of
29 December 2014, in which it requested the Secretary-General to continue to address issues related to the
accessibility of conference facilities as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventieth session,
Noting also that the Secretariat-wide Inter-Departmental Task Force on Accessibility has contributed to
promoting inclusive and accessible built environments, facilities, human resources, conferences and services at all
United Nations premises,
1. Affirms that the United Nations has an important role to play in protecting and promoting the rights of
persons with disabilities, including by taking all appropriate measures to ensure that it provides accessibility and
reasonable accommodation, bearing in mind that, in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,562
reasonable accommodation is defined as necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments not imposing a
disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in a particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the
enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to raise awareness about protecting and promoting the rights
of persons with disabilities and to improve relevant regulations, facilities and services within the United Nations
system, including its agencies, funds and programmes, and regional offices to create non-discriminatory and
accessible environments for persons with disabilities, including staff members, delegates and visitors with
disabilities, bearing in mind the full range of disabilities as defined in article 1 of the Convention, and encourages
Member States to support the Secretary-General in this regard;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to further promote awareness and understanding among United
Nations staff members towards persons with disabilities, including recognition of their full potential and their
contribution to the work of the United Nations;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a
comprehensive report, to be prepared from within existing resources, on:
(a) The status and application of existing regulations relating to reasonable accommodation and the status of
facilities and services relating thereto and areas that need improvement to ensure full accessibility, following
universal design, and reasonable accommodation within the United Nations system, including its agencies, funds
and programmes, and regional offices;
(b) Best practices and views of Member States, other international organizations and other relevant
stakeholders, including the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of persons with
disabilities, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, disabled persons’ organizations and United
Nations staff members with disabilities, on the provision of accessibility, following universal design, and reasonable
accommodation;
(c) Recommendations on how to better coordinate, facilitate and monitor practical accessibility measures in
order to provide reasonable accommodation, in a cost-effective manner, to meet the needs of persons with
disabilities for their participation in meetings, conferences and services at United Nations premises.
783

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/171
A/RE S/70 /171

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.2,
para. 155),563 by a recorded vote of 184 to 1, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining: Angola

70/171. United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and
the Arab Region
The General Assembly,
Guided by the fundamental and universal principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,564
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993,565 which reiterated the need to consider
the possibility of establishing regional and subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human
rights where they do not already exist,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/127 of 16 December 1977 and 51/102 of 12 December 1996 and all its
subsequent resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling further its resolutions 60/153 of 16 December 2005, 67/162 of 20 December 2012, 68/241 of
27 December 2013 and 69/171 of 18 December 2014 on the United Nations Human Rights Training and
Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March 1993566 and all its subsequent
resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Reaffirming that regional cooperation plays a fundamental role in promoting and protecting human rights and
should reinforce universal human rights, as contained in international human rights instruments, and their protection,

_______________
563

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Australia, Bahrain, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and
Yemen.
564
Resolution 217 A (III).
565
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
566
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1993/23 and Corr.2, 4 and 5),
chap. II, sect. A.

784

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting that the developments in the Middle East and North Africa have continued to generate growing
demand for the services of the Centre, and recognizing that the report of the Secretary-General567 indicates that
regular budget resources have been allocated to reinforce the staffing capacity of the Centre, thereby enabling it to
better respond to training and documentation demands in a more timely and adequate manner, and to help to fill the
gaps in terms of expertise and relevant Arabic-language training materials,
Mindful of the vastness and the diversity of the needs in the field of human rights within South-West Asia and
the Arab region, and taking into account the need for appropriate and sustainable funding of the Centre to fully
realize its significant function and crucial role in the region,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;567

2. Notes with appreciation the successful assistance that the United Nations Human Rights Training and
Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region has provided through human rights capacitybuilding activities, technical assistance programmes and training programmes on combating human trafficking,
human rights and media, human rights and diplomacy, human rights education and police training on human rights,
as well as support to national human rights institutions and regional consultations on the topics of United Nations
human rights mechanisms;
3. Underlines the Centre’s role as a source for regional expertise and the need to meet an increasing
number of requests for training and documentation, including in the Arabic language;
4. Notes that the increasing demand that has been placed on the Centre by Member States and other
stakeholders reveals a growing recognition of its role and impact on strengthening human rights capacities in the
region;
5. Encourages the continued engagement of the Centre to work with other United Nations regional offices
to strengthen its work and to avoid duplication;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report,
in accordance with existing rules and procedures, on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/172
A/RE S/70 /172

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.3,
para. 30),568 by a recorded vote of 119 to 19, with 48 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Against: Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People's Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Oman, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

_______________
567

A/70/414.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America.
568

785

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Abstaining: Angola, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia

70/172. Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms
and to fulfil the obligations that they have undertaken under the various international instruments,
Recalling all previous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and
the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including Assembly resolution 69/188 of 18 December 2014 and Council resolution 28/22 of 27 March 2015,569
and mindful of the need for the international community to strengthen its coordinated efforts aimed at achieving the
implementation of those resolutions,
Deeply concerned at the grave human rights situation, the pervasive culture of impunity and the lack of
accountability for human rights violations in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Stressing the importance of following up on the recommendations contained in the report of the commission
of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,570 and expressing grave concern at the
detailed findings contained therein,
Welcoming the decision of the Security Council to add the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to the list of issues of which the Council is seized and the holding of an open meeting of the Council on
22 December 2014 during which the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was
discussed,
Recalling the responsibility of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to protect its population from
crimes against humanity,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,571 regretting that he still has not been allowed to visit the
country and that he has received no cooperation from the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
and taking note also of the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea submitted in accordance with resolution 69/188,572
Mindful that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,573 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,573 the Convention on the
Rights of the Child574 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,575 and
recalling the concluding observations of the treaty bodies under the four treaties and the importance of giving them
consideration,
Noting with appreciation the signature of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities576 and the
ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography577 by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, encouraging the Government
_______________
569

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
A/HRC/25/63.
571
A/70/362.
572
A/70/393.
573
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
574
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
575
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
576
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
577
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
570

786

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to expedite the ratification of the Convention, and urging the
Government to fully respect the rights of persons with disabilities and children,
Acknowledging the participation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the second universal periodic
review process, noting the acceptance by the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of 113 out of
the 268 recommendations contained in the outcome of the review578 and its stated commitment to implement them and
look into the possibility of implementing a further 58 recommendations, and emphasizing the importance of the
implementation of the recommendations in order to address the grave human rights violations in the country,
Noting with appreciation the collaboration established between the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization in order to improve
the health situation in the country, and the collaboration established with the United Nations Children’s Fund to
improve the nutrition of children and the quality of children’s education,
Noting the activities undertaken by the United Nations Development Programme, on a modest scale, in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and encouraging the engagement of the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea with the international community to ensure that the programmes benefit the persons in
need of assistance,
Noting also the cooperation between the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
World Food Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations on food security assessments, underscoring the importance of those assessments in analysing
changes in the national, household and individual food security and nutritional situation and thereby in supporting
donor confidence in the targeting of aid programmes, noting further the letter of understanding signed by the
Government and the World Food Programme and the importance of further improvements in operating conditions,
bringing access and monitoring arrangements closer to international standards for all United Nations entities, and
noting with appreciation the work of international aid operators,
Taking note of the United Nations report entitled “Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 2015: needs and
priorities” and its call to address the critical humanitarian needs in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Noting the importance of the issue of international abductions and of the immediate return of all abductees,
taking note of the outcome of the government-level consultation between the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and Japan in May 2014, on the basis of which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commenced
investigations on all the Japanese nationals, and expecting the resolution of all issues related to the Japanese
nationals, in particular the return of all abductees, to be achieved at the earliest possible date,
Welcoming the panel discussion on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, including the issue of international abductions, enforced disappearances and related matters, held during the
thirtieth session of the Human Rights Council,
Noting the importance of the inter-Korean dialogue, which could contribute to the improvement of the human
rights and humanitarian situation in the country,
Welcoming the resumption of the reunions of separated families across the border in October 2015, and, given
that this is an urgent humanitarian concern of the entire Korean people, owing, in particular, to the advanced age of
many members of the separated families, hoping that necessary arrangements for further reunions on a larger scale
and a regular basis will be made by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea and
members of the Korean diaspora,
Underlining the efforts of the Secretary-General to contribute to improving inter-Korean relations and
promoting reconciliation and stability on the Korean Peninsula and the well-being of the Korean people,
1. Condemns the long-standing and ongoing systematic, widespread and gross violations of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including those which the commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, established by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 22/13 of 21 March
2013,579 has said may amount to crimes against humanity, and the continuing impunity for such violations;
_______________
578
579

A/HRC/27/10.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.

787

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2.

Expresses its very serious concern at:

(a) The persistence of continuing reports of violations of human rights, including the detailed findings made
by the commission of inquiry in its report,570 such as:
(i) Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including inhuman conditions
of detention; rape; public executions; extrajudicial and arbitrary detention; the absence of due process and the
rule of law, including fair trial guarantees and an independent judiciary; extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions; the imposition of the death penalty for political and religious reasons; collective punishments
extending up to three generations; and the extensive use of forced labour;
(ii) The existence of an extensive system of political prison camps, where a vast number of persons are
deprived of their liberty and subjected to deplorable conditions and where alarming violations of human rights
are perpetrated;
(iii) The forcible transfer of populations and the limitations imposed on every person who wishes to move
freely within the country and travel abroad, including the punishment of those who leave or try to leave the
country without permission, or their families, as well as punishment of persons who are returned;
(iv) The situation of refugees and asylum seekers expelled or returned to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and sanctions imposed on citizens of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who have been
repatriated from abroad, leading to punishments of internment, torture, other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment, sexual violence or the death penalty, and in this regard strongly urges all States to respect the
fundamental principle of non-refoulement, to treat those who seek refuge humanely and to ensure unhindered
access to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his Office, with a view to protecting the
human rights of those who seek refuge, and once again urges States parties to comply with their obligations
under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees580 and the 1967 Protocol thereto581 in relation to
refugees from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who are covered by those instruments;
(v) All-pervasive and severe restrictions on the freedoms of thought, conscience, religion or belief, opinion
and expression, peaceful assembly and association, the right to privacy and equal access to information, by
such means as the persecution, torture and imprisonment of individuals exercising their freedom of opinion
and expression, religion or belief, and their families, and the right of everyone to take part in the conduct of
public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives, of his or her country;
(vi) Violations of economic, social and cultural rights, which have led to severe hunger, malnutrition,
widespread health problems and other hardship for the population in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, in particular for women, children, persons with disabilities and the elderly;
(vii) Violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women, in particular the creation of
internal conditions that force women to leave the country and make them extremely vulnerable to trafficking
in persons for the purpose of prostitution, domestic servitude or forced marriage and the subjection of women
to gender-based discrimination, including in the political and social spheres, forced abortions and other forms
of sexual and gender-based violence;
(viii) Violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of children, in particular the continued lack of
access to basic economic, social and cultural rights for many children, and in this regard notes the particularly
vulnerable situation faced by, inter alia, returned or repatriated children, street children, children with
disabilities, children whose parents are detained, children living in detention or in institutions and children in
conflict with the law;
(ix) Violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of persons with disabilities, especially
violations involving the use of collective camps and coercive measures that target the rights of persons with
disabilities to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children and allegations of the

_______________
580
581

788

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

possible use of persons with disabilities in medical testing, forced relocation to rural areas and separation of
children with disabilities from their parents;
(x) Violations of workers’ rights, including the right to freedom of association and effective recognition of
the right to collective bargaining, the right to strike as defined by the obligations of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,573 and the
prohibition of the economic exploitation of children and of any harmful or hazardous work of children as
defined by the obligations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea under the Convention on the Rights
of the Child;574
(xi) Discrimination based on the songbun system, which classifies people on the basis of State-assigned
social class and birth, and also includes consideration of political opinions and religion;
(b) The continued refusal of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to extend an
invitation to the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or to extend cooperation to the Special Rapporteur and other United
Nations special procedures in accordance with their terms of reference, as well as to other United Nations human
rights mechanisms;
(c) The continued lack of acknowledgement by the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of the grave human rights situation in the country and its consequential lack of action to implement the
recommendations contained in the outcome of its first universal periodic review582 and to give consideration to the
concluding observations of the treaty bodies;
3. Underscores its very serious concern at the systematic abduction, denial of repatriation and subsequent
enforced disappearance of persons, including those from other countries, on a large scale and as a matter of State
policy, and in this regard strongly calls upon the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
urgently to resolve these issues of international concern, in a transparent manner, including by ensuring the
immediate return of abductees;
4. Expresses its very deep concern at the precarious humanitarian situation in the country, which could
rapidly deteriorate owing to limited resilience to natural disasters and to government policies causing limitations in
the availability of and access to adequate food, compounded by structural weaknesses in agricultural production
resulting in significant shortages of diversified food and the State restrictions on the cultivation of and trade in
foodstuffs, as well as the prevalence of chronic malnutrition, particularly among the most vulnerable groups,
pregnant and lactating women, children, persons with disabilities, the elderly and political prisoners, and urges the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in this regard, to take preventive and remedial action,
cooperating where necessary with international donor agencies and in accordance with international standards for
monitoring humanitarian assistance;
5. Commends the Special Rapporteur for the activities undertaken so far and for his continued efforts in the
conduct of his mandate despite the denial of access;
6. Welcomes the findings contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur,571 and takes note of his
recommendations, in particular those aimed at exploring possible options to ensure justice and accountability;
7. Recalls its appreciation for the work of the commission of inquiry, recognizes the continuing importance
of its report, and regrets that the commission received no cooperation from the authorities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, including with regard to access to the country;
8. Acknowledges the commission’s finding that the body of testimony gathered and the information
received provide reasonable grounds to believe that crimes against humanity have been committed in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, pursuant to policies established at the highest level of the State for decades;
9. Expresses its concern at the failure of the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
prosecute those responsible for human rights violations, including violations which the commission of inquiry has
_______________
582

A/HRC/13/13.

789

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

said may amount to crimes against humanity, and encourages the international community to cooperate with
accountability efforts and to ensure that such crimes do not remain unpunished;
10. Encourages the Security Council to continue its consideration of the relevant conclusions and
recommendations of the commission of inquiry and take appropriate action to ensure accountability, including
through consideration of referral of the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the International
Criminal Court and consideration of the scope for effective targeted sanctions against those who appear to be most
responsible for acts that the commission has said may constitute crimes against humanity;
11. Also encourages the Security Council to continue to discuss the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, including the country’s human rights record, and looks forward to its continued and active
engagement on this matter;
12. Welcomes the establishment by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
of a field-based structure in Seoul to strengthen the monitoring and documentation of the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, to ensure accountability, to provide the Special Rapporteur with
increased support, to enhance the engagement and capacity-building of the Governments of all States concerned,
civil society and other stakeholders and to maintain the visibility of the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, including through sustained communications, advocacy and outreach initiatives;
13. Calls upon Member States to undertake to ensure that the field-based structure of the Office of the High
Commissioner can function with independence, that it has sufficient resources and support to fulfil its mandate and
that it is not subjected to any reprisals or threats;
14. Strongly urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect fully all human
rights and fundamental freedoms and, in this regard:
(a) To immediately put an end to the systematic, widespread and grave violations of human rights
emphasized above, inter alia, by implementing fully the measures set out in the above-mentioned resolutions of the
General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, and the recommendations
addressed to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the Council in the context of the universal periodic
review and by the commission of inquiry, the United Nations special procedures and treaty bodies;
(b) To immediately close the political prison camps and to release all political prisoners unconditionally and
without any delay;
(c) To protect its inhabitants, address the issue of impunity and ensure that those responsible for violations
of human rights are brought to justice before an independent judiciary;
(d) To tackle the root causes leading to refugee outflows and prosecute those who exploit refugees through
human smuggling, trafficking and extortion, while not criminalizing the victims;
(e) To ensure that citizens of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who are expelled or returned to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are able to return in safety and dignity, are treated humanely and are not
subjected to any kind of punishment, and to provide information on their status and treatment;
(f) To extend its full cooperation to the Special Rapporteur, including by granting him full, free and
unimpeded access to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and to other United Nations human rights
mechanisms so that a full needs assessment of the human rights situation may be made;
(g) To engage in technical cooperation activities in the field of human rights with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and his Office, as pursued by the High Commissioner in recent years, with a view
to improving the situation of human rights in the country;
(h) To implement the accepted recommendations stemming from the universal periodic review and to
consider positively those recommendations which are still under consideration, as well as the preparation of a
midterm implementation report;
(i) To become a member of the International Labour Organization and consider ratifying all the relevant
conventions;
(j)
790

To continue and reinforce its cooperation with United Nations humanitarian agencies;

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(k) To ensure full, safe and unhindered access to humanitarian aid and take measures to allow humanitarian
agencies to secure its impartial delivery to all parts of the country on the basis of need in accordance with
humanitarian principles, as it pledged to do, to ensure access to adequate food and implement more effective food
security and nutrition policies, including through sustainable agriculture, sound food production and distribution
measures and the allocation of more funds to the food sector, and to ensure adequate monitoring of humanitarian
assistance;
(l) To further improve cooperation with the United Nations country team and development agencies so that
they can directly contribute to improving the living conditions of the civilian population, including progress towards
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals;
(m) To consider ratifying and acceding to the remaining international human rights treaties, which would
enable a dialogue with the human rights treaty bodies, to resume reporting to monitoring bodies on treaties to which
it is a party, and to give consideration to the concluding observations of such bodies in order to improve the human
rights situation in the country;
15. Urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to implement the recommendations
of the commission of inquiry without delay;
16. Encourages all Member States, the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the Office of the
High Commissioner, the United Nations Secretariat, relevant specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental
organizations and forums, civil society organizations, foundations and engaged business enterprises and other
stakeholders towards which the commission of inquiry has directed recommendations to implement or take forward
those recommendations;
17. Encourages the United Nations system as a whole to continue to address the grave human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in a coordinated and unified manner;
18. Notes the willingness expressed by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in 2014 to consider
human rights dialogues with States and groups of States, technical cooperation with the Office of the High
Commissioner and a country visit of the Special Rapporteur, and strongly encourages the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to continue to undertake such dialogues and cooperation initiatives as a matter of priority;
19. Calls upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to continue to engage constructively with
international interlocutors with a view to promoting concrete improvements in the human rights situation on the
ground, including through dialogues, official visits to the country and more people-to-people contact;
20. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea at its seventy-first session, and to this end requests the Secretary-General to submit a
comprehensive report on the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and requests the Special
Rapporteur to continue to report his findings and recommendations, as well as to report on the follow-up to the
implementation of the recommendations of the commission of inquiry.
RESOLUTION 70/173
A/RE S/70 /173

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.3,
para. 30),583 by a recorded vote of 81 to 37, with 67 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,

_______________
583

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Vanuatu.

791

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu
Against: Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cambodia, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Côte
d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia

70/173. Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,584 the
International Covenants on Human Rights585 and other international human rights instruments,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, the most
recent of which is resolution 69/190 of 18 December 2014,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General of 31 August 2015 submitted pursuant to resolution
69/190586 and the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights
in the Islamic Republic of Iran of 6 October 2015,587 submitted pursuant to Council resolution 28/21 of
27 March 2015;588
2. Continues to welcome the pledges made by the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran with regard to
some important human rights issues, particularly on eliminating discrimination against women and members of
ethnic minorities and on greater space for freedom of expression and opinion;
3. Acknowledges proposals for legislative and administrative changes in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
which, if properly implemented, would address some human rights concerns, including portions of the new Code of
Criminal Procedure;
4. Welcomes recent announcements by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran of increased
services for victims of domestic violence, as well as draft legislation that may increase penalties for perpetrators of
violence against women;
5. Also welcomes steps taken to improve access to education for persons belonging to some ethnic
minorities in their native languages;
6. Acknowledges the participation of the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran in its second
universal periodic review by the Human Rights Council, and welcomes its acceptance of 130 recommendations, as
well as its recent engagement with human rights treaty bodies through the submission of periodic national reports,
while remaining concerned about the Government’s implementation record in respect of the recommendations that
it accepted during its first universal periodic review;
7. Expresses serious concern at the alarming high frequency of and increase in the carrying-out of the
death penalty, in disregard of internationally recognized safeguards, including executions undertaken without
_______________
584

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
586
A/70/352.
587
A/70/411.
588
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
585

792

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

notification to the prisoner’s family members or legal counsel, and at the continuing imposition and carrying-out of
the death penalty against minors and persons who at the time of their offence were under the age of 18, in violation
of the obligations of the Islamic Republic of Iran under both the Convention on the Rights of the Child589 and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,585 and for crimes that do not qualify as the most serious crimes,
and calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to abolish, in law and in practice, public executions,
which are contrary to the 2008 prohibition of this practice by the former head of the judiciary, and executions carried
out in violation of its international obligations or in the absence of respect for internationally recognized safeguards;
8. Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to ensure, in law and in practice, that no one
is subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, which may include sexual
violence, in conformity with the constitutional guarantees of the Islamic Republic of Iran and international
obligations;
9. Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to uphold, in law and in practice, procedural
guarantees to ensure fair trial standards of law, including timely access to legal representation of one’s choice, the
right not to be subjected to torture, cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and consideration of
bail and other reasonable terms for release from custody pending trial, and urges the Government to cease enforced
disappearances and the widespread and systematic use of arbitrary detention;
10. Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to address the poor conditions of prisons, to
eliminate the denial of access to adequate medical treatment and the consequent risk of death faced by prisoners and
to put an end to the continued and sustained house arrest of leading opposition figures from the 2009 presidential
elections despite serious concerns about their health, as well as the pressure exerted upon their relatives and
dependants, including through arrest;
11. Also calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, including the judicial and security
branches, to end widespread and serious restrictions, in law and in practice, on the right to freedom of expression,
opinion, association and peaceful assembly, including through the ongoing harassment, intimidation, arbitrary
detention and prosecution of, as well as the denial of access to higher education for, political opponents, human
rights defenders, women’s and minority rights activists, labour leaders, students’ rights activists, academics, filmmakers, journalists, bloggers, social media users, religious leaders, artists, lawyers, recognized and unrecognized
religious minorities and their families, and urges the Government to release persons arbitrarily detained for the
legitimate exercise of these rights, to consider rescinding unduly harsh sentences, including the death penalty and
long-term exile, for exercising such fundamental freedoms and to end reprisals against individuals cooperating with
the United Nations human rights mechanisms;
12. Strongly urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to eliminate, in law and in practice, all
forms of discrimination and other human rights violations against women and girls, to take measures to ensure
protection for women and girls against violence, to address the alarming incidence of child, early and forced
marriage, to promote women’s participation in decision-making processes and, while recognizing the high
enrolment of women in all levels of education in the Islamic Republic of Iran, to lift restrictions on women’s equal
access to all aspects of education and women’s equal participation in the labour market and in all aspects of
economic, cultural, social and political life;
13. Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to eliminate, in law and in practice, all forms
of discrimination and other human rights violations against persons belonging to ethnic, linguistic or other
minorities, including but not limited to Arabs, Azeris, Balochis and Kurds and their defenders;
14. Expresses serious concern about ongoing severe limitations and restrictions on the right to freedom of
thought, conscience, religion or belief and restrictions on the establishment of places of worship, as well as attacks
against places of worship and burial, as well as other human rights violations, including but not limited to
harassment, persecution and incitement to hatred that lead to violence against persons belonging to recognized and
unrecognized religious minorities, including Christians, Jews, Sufi Muslims, Sunni Muslims, Zoroastrians and
members of the Baha’i faith and their defenders, and calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
release the seven Baha’i leaders declared by the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention of the Human Rights
_______________
589

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.

793

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Council to have been arbitrarily detained since 2008 and to eliminate, in law and in practice, all forms of
discrimination, including the closure of businesses, and other human rights violations against persons belonging to
recognized and unrecognized religious minorities;
15. Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to launch a comprehensive accountability process
in response to cases of serious human rights violations, including those involving the Iranian judiciary and security
agencies and those following the 2009 presidential elections, and calls upon the Government to end impunity for
such violations;
16. Strongly urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to ensure credible, transparent and
inclusive parliamentary elections in 2016 and to allow all candidates to stand in a manner consistent with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights584 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in order to
guarantee the free expression of the will of the Iranian people, and to that end calls upon the Government to allow
independent national and international observation;
17. Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to implement its obligations under those
human rights treaties to which it is already a party, to withdraw any reservations that it has made where such
reservations are overly general, imprecise or could be considered incompatible with the object and purpose of the
treaty, to consider acting upon the concluding observations concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran adopted by the
bodies of the international human rights treaties to which it is a party and to consider ratifying or acceding to the
international human rights treaties to which it is not already a party;
18. Also calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to engage with international human
rights mechanisms by:
(a) Cooperating fully with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic
of Iran, including by accepting the repeated requests made by the Special Rapporteur to visit the country in order to
carry out his mandate;
(b) Cooperating with other special mechanisms, including by facilitating long-standing requests for access
to the country from thematic special procedures mandate holders, whose access to its territory has been restricted or
denied, despite the standing invitation issued by the Islamic Republic of Iran, without imposing undue conditions
upon those visits;
(c) Implementing all accepted universal periodic review recommendations from its first cycle, in 2010, and
its second cycle, in 2014, with the full and genuine participation of independent civil society and other stakeholders
in the implementation process;
(d) Building upon the engagement of the Islamic Republic of Iran with the universal periodic review
process by continuing to explore cooperation on human rights and justice reform with the United Nations, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
(e) Following through on its commitment to establish an independent national human rights institution,
made in the context of its first universal periodic review by the Human Rights Council, with due regard for the
recommendation of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
19. Further calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to translate the pledges made by the
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran with respect to human rights concerns into concrete action that results in
demonstrable improvements as soon as possible and to ensure that its national laws are consistent with its
obligations under international human rights law and that they are implemented in accordance with its international
obligations;
20. Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to address the substantive concerns
highlighted in the reports of the Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Islamic Republic of Iran, as well as the specific calls to action found in previous resolutions of the General
Assembly, and to respect fully its human rights obligations in law and in practice;
21. Strongly encourages the relevant thematic special procedures mandate holders to pay particular attention
to, with a view to investigating and reporting on, the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran;
794

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

22. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution, including options and recommendations to improve
its implementation, and to submit an interim report to the Human Rights Council at its thirty-first session;
23. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran at its
seventy-first session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 70/174
A/RE S/70 /174

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/490, para. 35)590

70/174. Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
The General Assembly,
Emphasizing the responsibility assumed by the United Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal
justice in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 155 C (VII) of 13 August 1948 and General
Assembly resolution 415 (V) of 1 December 1950,
Acknowledging that the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice, as major
intergovernmental forums, have influenced national policies and practices and promoted international cooperation
in that field by facilitating the exchange of views and experience, mobilizing public opinion and recommending
policy options at the national, regional and international levels,
Recalling its resolution 46/152 of 18 December 1991, in the annex to which Member States affirmed that the
United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice should be held every five years and should
provide a forum for, inter alia, the exchange of views between States, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and individual experts representing various professions and disciplines, the exchange of experiences
in research, law and policy development, and the identification of emerging trends and issues in crime prevention
and criminal justice,
Recalling also its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
in which it stressed that all countries should promote policies consistent and coherent with the commitments of the
major United Nations conferences and summits, emphasized that the United Nations system had an important
responsibility to assist Governments to stay fully engaged in the follow-up to and implementation of agreements
and commitments reached at the major United Nations conferences and summits and invited the intergovernmental
bodies of the United Nations system to further promote the implementation of the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits,
Recalling further its resolution 69/191 of 18 December 2014, in which it requested the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice to give high priority at its twenty-fourth session to considering the declaration of the
Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, with a view to recommending,
through the Economic and Social Council, appropriate follow-up by the General Assembly at its seventieth session,
Bearing in mind its resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012 on the declaration of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels and its resolution 69/195 of
18 December 2014 on the rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice in the United Nations development
agenda beyond 2015,
Bearing in mind also its resolution 69/244 of 29 December 2014 on the organization of the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda,
Taking into account Economic and Social Council resolution 2014/22 of 16 July 2014 on the Thirteenth
Congress and the post-2015 development agenda and the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations
_______________
590

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.

795

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Office on Drugs and Crime on the contribution of the Thirteenth Congress to the discussions on the post-2015
development agenda, submitted to the Congress pursuant to that resolution,591
Aware of the presidential summary of the high-level thematic debate of the General Assembly on
integrating crime prevention and criminal justice in the post-2015 development agenda, held in New York on
25 February 2015,592
Aware also of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Follow-up to the Salvador Declaration on
Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their
Development in a Changing World”,593
Encouraged by the success of the Thirteenth Congress as one of the largest and most diverse forums for the
exchange of views on and experiences in research, law and policy and programme development between States,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and individual experts representing various professions and
disciplines,
Having considered the report of the Thirteenth Congress594 and the related recommendations made by the
Commission at its twenty-fourth session,595
1. Expresses its satisfaction with the results achieved by the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015, including the Doha Declaration on
Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and
Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public
Participation, adopted at the high-level segment of the Thirteenth Congress;
2.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Thirteenth Congress;594

3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for the work done in the
preparations for and follow-up to the Thirteenth Congress, and extends its thanks to the institutes of the United
Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network for their contribution to the Congress, in
particular with regard to the workshops held within the framework of the Congress;
4. Endorses the Doha Declaration adopted by the Thirteenth Congress, as approved by the Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-fourth session and annexed to the present resolution;
5. Welcomes with appreciation the initiative of the Government of Qatar, in cooperation with the Qatar
Foundation, to organize for the first time a youth forum prior to the Thirteenth Congress, appreciates the results of
the Doha Youth Forum on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, as contained in the Doha Youth Forum
Statement,596 which were submitted to the Congress, encourages Member States to give due consideration to the
recommendations set out therein, and invites the host countries of future congresses to consider the holding of
similar events;
6. Invites Governments to take into consideration the Doha Declaration adopted by the Thirteenth
Congress when formulating legislation and policy directives and to make every effort, where appropriate, to
implement the principles contained therein in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations;
7. Invites Member States to identify areas covered in the Doha Declaration where further tools and training
manuals based on international standards and best practices are needed and to submit that information to the
Commission so that it may take that information into account when considering potential areas of future activity of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
_______________
591

A/CONF.222/5.
A/CONF.222/15.
593
A/CONF.222/3.
594
A/CONF.222/17.
595
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 10 (E/2015/30).
596
A/CONF.222/16, annex.
592

796

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

8. Welcomes the intention of the Government of Qatar to work with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in ensuring appropriate follow-up to the outcome of the Thirteenth Congress, particularly the
implementation of the Doha Declaration;
9. Also welcomes the initiative of the Government of Qatar to establish a regional fund for the education
and training of displaced and refugee children and youth in the Middle East, with the aim of integrating social and
cultural dimensions in crime prevention strategies and policies;
10. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in the development and implementation of its
technical cooperation programmes, to aim for sustainable and long-lasting results when assisting Member States in
rebuilding, modernizing and strengthening criminal justice systems, as well as promoting the rule of law, and to
design such programmes to achieve those aims for all components of the criminal justice system, in an integrated
way and with a long-term perspective;
11. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance
to facilitate the ratification and implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,597 the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto598 and the international
counter-terrorism instruments;
12. Calls for greater coherence and coordination between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and relevant United Nations agencies, with a view to achieving a fully coordinated approach to integrating crime
prevention and criminal justice into the broader United Nations agenda, and invites other international
organizations, the private sector and non-governmental organizations to cooperate with the Office in the
implementation of its mandate;
13. Requests the Commission to review the implementation of the Doha Declaration under the standing item
on its agenda entitled “Follow-up to the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice and preparations for the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice”;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the report of the Thirteenth Congress, including the Doha
Declaration, to Member States, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations, so as to
ensure that they are disseminated as widely as possible, and to seek proposals by Member States on ways and means
of ensuring appropriate follow-up to the Doha Declaration, for consideration and action by the Commission at its
twenty-fifth session;
15. Welcomes with appreciation the offer of the Government of Japan to act as host to the Fourteenth
Congress, to be held in 2020;
16. Expresses its profound gratitude to the people and Government of Qatar for the warm and generous
hospitality extended to the participants in the Thirteenth Congress and for the excellent facilities provided for the
Congress;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
Annex
Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations
Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels, and Public Participation
We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and Representatives of Member States,
Having assembled at the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in
Doha, from 12 to 19 April 2015, to reaffirm our shared commitment to uphold the rule of law and to prevent and
counter crime in all its forms and manifestations, at the domestic and international levels, to ensure that our criminal
justice systems are effective, fair, humane and accountable, to provide access to justice for all, to build effective,
_______________
597
598

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.
Ibid., vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.

797

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

accountable, impartial and inclusive institutions at all levels and to uphold the principle of human dignity and the
universal observance and respect of all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
To that end, declare the following:
1. We acknowledge the 60-year legacy and continuing significant role of the United Nations congresses on
crime prevention and criminal justice as one of the largest and most diverse international forums for the exchange of
views and experiences in research, law and policy and programme development between States, intergovernmental
organizations and individual experts representing various professions and disciplines in order to identify emerging
trends and issues in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice. We recognize the unique and important
contributions of the congresses to law and policy development, as well as to the identification of emerging trends
and issues in crime prevention and criminal justice.
2. We reaffirm the cross-cutting nature of crime prevention and criminal justice issues and the consequent
need to integrate those issues into the wider agenda of the United Nations in order to enhance system-wide
coordination. We look forward to the future contributions of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice with regard to designing and implementing national and international crime prevention and criminal justice
policies and programmes, taking into account and building upon the recommendations of the congresses.
3. We recognize the importance of effective, fair, humane and accountable crime prevention and criminal
justice systems and the institutions comprising them as a central component of the rule of law. We commit ourselves
to holistic and comprehensive approaches to countering crime, violence, corruption and terrorism in all their forms
and manifestations, and to ensuring that those responses are implemented in a coordinated and coherent way, along
with broader programmes or measures for social and economic development, poverty eradication, respect for
cultural diversity, social peace and social inclusion.
4. We acknowledge that sustainable development and the rule of law are strongly interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. We therefore welcome the inclusive and transparent intergovernmental process for the post-2015
development agenda, which is aimed at developing global sustainable development goals to be agreed by the General
Assembly, and acknowledge the proposals of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals of the
Assembly as the main basis for integrating sustainable development goals into the post-2015 development agenda,
while recognizing that other inputs will also be considered. In this context, we reiterate the importance of promoting
peaceful, corruption-free and inclusive societies for sustainable development, with a focus on a people-centred
approach that provides access to justice for all and builds effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.
5. We reaffirm our commitment and strong political will in support of effective, fair, humane and
accountable criminal justice systems and the institutions comprising them, and encourage the effective participation
and inclusion of all sectors of society, thus creating the conditions needed to advance the wider United Nations
agenda, while respecting fully the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and recognizing the
responsibility of Member States to uphold human dignity, all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, in
particular for those affected by crime and those who may be in contact with the criminal justice system, including
vulnerable members of society, regardless of their status, who may be subject to multiple and aggravated forms of
discrimination, and to prevent and counter crime motivated by intolerance or discrimination of any kind. To that
end, we endeavour:
(a) To adopt comprehensive and inclusive national crime prevention and criminal justice policies and
programmes that fully take into account evidence and other relevant factors, including the root causes of crime, as
well as the conditions conducive to its occurrence, and, in accordance with our obligations under international law
and taking into consideration relevant United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice,
to ensure appropriate training of officials entrusted with upholding the rule of law and the protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms;
(b) To ensure the right of everyone to a fair trial without undue delay by a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal established by law, to equal access to justice with due process safeguards and, if needed, to access
to an attorney and to an interpreter, and to ensure relevant rights under the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations;599 to exercise due diligence to prevent and counter acts of violence; and to take effective legislative,
_______________
599

798

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

administrative and judicial measures to prevent, prosecute and punish all forms of torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment and eliminate impunity;
(c) To review and reform legal aid policies for expansion of access to effective legal aid in criminal
proceedings for those without sufficient means or when the interests of justice so require, including, when necessary,
through the development of national plans in this field, and to build capacities to provide and ensure access to
effective legal aid in all matters and in all its forms, taking into account the United Nations Principles and
Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems;600
(d) To make every effort to prevent and counter corruption, and to implement measures aimed at enhancing
transparency in public administration and promoting the integrity and accountability of our criminal justice systems,
in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Corruption;601
(e) To integrate child- and youth-related issues into our criminal justice reform efforts, recognizing the
importance of protecting children from all forms of violence, exploitation and abuse, consistent with the obligations
of parties under relevant international instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child602 and the
Optional Protocols thereto,603 and taking into consideration the relevant provisions of the United Nations Model
Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice,604 as well as to develop and apply comprehensive child-sensitive justice policies focused on
the best interests of the child, consistent with the principle that the deprivation of liberty of children should be used
only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time, so as to protect children who are in
contact with the criminal justice system, as well as children who are in any other situation requiring legal
proceedings, particularly in relation to their treatment and social reintegration. We look forward to the results of the
global study on children deprived of their liberty in this regard;
(f) To mainstream a gender perspective into our criminal justice systems by developing and implementing
national strategies and plans to promote the full protection of women and girls from all acts of violence, including
gender-related killing of women and girls, in accordance with the obligations of parties under the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women605 and the Optional Protocol thereto,606 and taking into
account the updated Model Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Women in the
Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice607 and General Assembly resolutions on the gender-related killing of
women and girls;
(g) To promote gender-specific measures as an integral part of our policies on crime prevention, criminal
justice and the treatment of offenders, including the rehabilitation and reintegration of women offenders into society,
taking into consideration the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial
Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules);608
(h) To develop and implement appropriate and effective national strategies and plans for the advancement of
women in criminal justice systems and institutions at the leadership, managerial and other levels;
(i) To enhance equality for all persons before the law, including gender equality, for individuals belonging
to minority groups and for indigenous people, through, inter alia, a comprehensive approach with other sectors of
government, relevant members of civil society and the media and the promotion of the recruitment by criminal
justice institutions of individuals belonging to these groups;

_______________
600

Resolution 67/187, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.
602
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
603
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
604
Resolution 69/194, annex.
605
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
606
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
607
Resolution 65/228, annex.
608
Resolution 65/229, annex.
601

799

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(j) To implement and enhance policies for prison inmates that focus on education, work, medical care,
rehabilitation, social reintegration and the prevention of recidivism, and to consider the development and
strengthening of policies to support the families of inmates, as well as to promote and encourage the use of
alternatives to imprisonment, where appropriate, and to review or reform our restorative justice and other processes
in support of successful reintegration;
(k) To intensify our efforts to address the challenge of prison overcrowding through appropriate criminal
justice reforms, which should include, where appropriate, a review of penal policies and practical measures to
reduce pretrial detention, to enhance the use of non-custodial sanctions and to improve access to legal aid to the
extent possible;
(l) To adopt effective measures for the recognition, protection and provision of support for and assistance to
victims and witnesses in the framework of criminal justice responses to all crimes, including corruption and
terrorism, in accordance with relevant international instruments and taking into consideration the United Nations
standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice;
(m) To implement a victim-oriented approach to prevent and counter all forms of trafficking in persons for
the purpose of exploitation, including the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual
exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs,
where appropriate, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime,609 and taking into account the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons,610 and to work, as necessary, with regional, international and civil society organizations to
overcome the obstacles that may impede the delivery of social and legal assistance to victims of trafficking;
(n) To implement effective measures to protect the human rights of smuggled migrants, particularly women
and children, and unaccompanied migrant children, in accordance with the obligations of parties under the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime611 and the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants
by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,612
which include the obligation that migrants shall not become liable to criminal prosecution under the Protocol only
for the fact of having been the object of smuggling, and other relevant international instruments, and to make every
possible effort to prevent the further loss of lives and bring the perpetrators to justice;
(o) To implement effective measures to eliminate violence against all migrants, migrant workers and their
families, and to take all necessary legal and administrative steps to prevent and counter crimes involving violence
against those groups;
(p) To conduct further research and gather data on crime victimization motivated by discrimination of any
kind and to exchange experiences in and information on effective laws and policies that can prevent such crimes,
bring perpetrators to justice and provide support to victims;
(q) To consider providing specialized training to criminal justice professionals to enhance capacities for
recognizing, understanding, suppressing and investigating hate crimes motivated by discrimination of any kind, to
help engage effectively with victim communities and to build public confidence and cooperation with criminal
justice agencies;
(r) To intensify our national and international efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination, including
racism, religious intolerance, xenophobia and gender-related discrimination by, inter alia, raising awareness,
developing educational materials and programmes and considering, where appropriate, drafting and enforcing
legislation against discrimination;
(s) To prevent and counter, through appropriate domestic procedures for the timely identification and
processing of cases, acts of violence falling within our jurisdiction against journalists and media professionals,
_______________
609

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
Resolution 64/293.
611
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
612
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
610

800

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

whose professional duties often put them at specific risk of intimidation, harassment and violence, in particular from
organized criminal groups and terrorists, and in conflict and post-conflict situations, and to ensure accountability
through the conduct of impartial, speedy and effective investigations, in accordance with national legislation and
applicable international law;
(t) To strengthen the development and use of tools and methods aimed at increasing the availability and
quality of statistical information and analytical studies on crime and criminal justice at the international level, in
order to better measure and evaluate the impact of responses to crime and to enhance the effectiveness of crime
prevention and criminal justice programmes at the national, regional and international levels.
6. We welcome the work of the Expert Group on the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners and take note of the draft updated Standard Minimum Rules, as finalized by the Expert Group at its
meeting held in Cape Town, South Africa, from 2 to 5 March 2015, and look forward to the consideration of this
revised draft, and action thereon, by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice.
7. We emphasize that education for all children and youth, including the eradication of illiteracy, is
fundamental to the prevention of crime and corruption and to the promotion of a culture of lawfulness that supports
the rule of law and human rights while respecting cultural identities. In this regard, we also stress the fundamental
role of youth participation in crime prevention efforts. Therefore, we will endeavour:
(a) To create a safe, positive and secure learning environment in schools, supported by the community,
including by protecting children from all forms of violence, harassment, bullying, sexual abuse and drug abuse, in
accordance with domestic laws;
(b) To integrate crime prevention, criminal justice and other rule of law aspects into our domestic
educational systems;
(c) To integrate crime prevention and criminal justice strategies into all relevant social and economic
policies and programmes, in particular those affecting youth, with a special emphasis on programmes focused on
increasing educational and employment opportunities for youth and young adults;
(d) To provide access to education for all, including technical and professional skills, as well as to promote
lifelong learning skills for all.
8. We endeavour to strengthen international cooperation as a cornerstone of our efforts to enhance crime
prevention and ensure that our criminal justice systems are effective, fair, humane and accountable, and ultimately to
prevent and counter all crimes. We encourage States parties to implement and make more effective use of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, the three international drug control conventions and the international conventions
and protocols related to countering terrorism, and urge all Member States that have not yet done so to consider
ratifying or acceding to those instruments. We underscore that any measures taken to counter terrorism must comply
with all our obligations under international law. We endeavour to enhance further international cooperation to stop
the systematic exploitation of large numbers of individuals who are forced and coerced into a life of abuse and
degradation. We therefore strive:
(a) To promote and strengthen international and regional cooperation to further develop the capacity of
national criminal justice systems, including through efforts to modernize and strengthen national legislation, as
appropriate, as well as joint training and upgrading of the skills of our criminal justice officials, in particular to foster
the development of strong and effective central authorities for international cooperation in criminal matters, inter
alia, in the areas of extradition, mutual legal assistance, transfer of criminal proceedings and transfer of sentenced
persons, and to conclude, where appropriate, bilateral and regional cooperation agreements, and to continue the
development of specialized networks of law enforcement authorities, central authorities, prosecutors, judges,
defence lawyers and legal aid providers to exchange information and share good practices and expertise, including,
where appropriate, by promoting a global virtual network to advance, where possible, direct contact among
competent authorities to enhance information-sharing and mutual legal assistance, making the best possible use of
information and communication platforms;
(b) To continue to support the implementation of capacity-building programmes and training for criminal
justice officials aimed at preventing and countering terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in line with human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including with regard to international cooperation in criminal matters, the
801

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

financing of terrorism, the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, the destruction of cultural heritage by terrorists
and kidnapping for ransom or for the purpose of extortion, and at addressing the conditions conducive to the spread
of terrorism, and to cooperate, as well as address, further analyse and identify appropriate areas for joint action,
through, inter alia, effective exchange of information and sharing of experiences and best practices, to counter any
existing, growing or potential links, in some cases, between transnational organized crime, illicit drug-related
activities, money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, in order to enhance criminal justice responses to those
crimes;
(c) To adopt effective measures at the national and international levels aimed at preventing terrorist groups
from benefiting from ransom payments;
(d) To strengthen cooperation at the international, regional, subregional and bilateral levels to counter the
threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, including through enhanced operational and timely information-sharing,
logistical support, as appropriate, and capacity-building activities, such as those provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to share and adopt best practices to identify foreign terrorist fighters, to prevent the
travel of foreign terrorist fighters from, into or through Member States, to prevent the financing, mobilization,
recruitment and organization of foreign terrorist fighters, to counter violent extremism and radicalization to violence,
which can be conducive to terrorism, to enhance our efforts to implement deradicalization programmes, and to
ensure that any person who participates in the financing, planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts or in
the supporting of terrorist acts is brought to justice, in compliance with obligations under international law, as well
as applicable domestic law;
(e) To implement effective measures to detect, prevent and counter corruption, as well as the transfer abroad
and laundering of assets derived from corruption, and to strengthen international cooperation and assistance to
Member States to assist in the identification, freezing or seizure of such assets, as well as in their recovery and
return, in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Corruption, in particular chapter V thereof, and in
this regard to continue discussing innovative modalities to improve mutual legal assistance in order to speed up asset
recovery proceedings and render them more successful, while also drawing on the experience and knowledge built
through the implementation of the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the World Bank;
(f) To develop strategies to prevent and combat all illicit financial flows and emphasize the urgent need to
adopt more effective measures to fight against economic and financial crimes, including fraud, as well as tax and
corporate crimes, especially in their relevant transnational dimensions;
(g) To strengthen or, as appropriate, adopt procedures to more effectively prevent and counter moneylaundering and enhance measures for the identification, tracing, freezing, seizure and recovery of the proceeds of
crime, including money and other assets that have not been accounted for and that are found in safe havens, for the
purpose of their eventual confiscation, including, where appropriate and in accordance with domestic law, nonconviction-based confiscation, and for the transparent disposition of confiscated proceeds;
(h) To develop and implement adequate mechanisms to manage and preserve the value and condition of
frozen, seized or confiscated assets that are the proceeds of crime, as well as to strengthen international cooperation
in criminal matters and to explore ways of affording one another similar cooperation in civil and administrative
proceedings for confiscation purposes;
(i) To take appropriate measures to prevent and counter trafficking in persons and the smuggling of
migrants, while protecting the victims and those who have been the object of such crimes, through all necessary
legal and administrative steps, in accordance with the respective protocols, as appropriate, and strengthening interagency cooperation and coordination at the national level, as well as closer bilateral, regional and multilateral
cooperation;
(j) To consider, when investigating and prosecuting offences related to trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants, the concurrent undertaking of financial investigations, with a view to tracing, freezing and
confiscating proceeds acquired through those crimes, and the establishment of such crimes as predicate offences for
money-laundering, as well as to enhance coordination and information-sharing among relevant agencies;
(k) To develop and adopt, as appropriate, effective measures to prevent and combat the illicit manufacturing
of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, as well as explosives, including through
awareness-raising campaigns designed to eliminate the illicit use of firearms and the illicit manufacture of
802

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

explosives, to encourage States parties to the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime,613 to strengthen implementation of the Protocol by, inter alia, considering the use of
available tools, including marking and record-keeping technologies, to facilitate the tracing of firearms and, where
possible, their parts and components and ammunition, in order to enhance criminal investigations of illicit
trafficking in firearms, to support the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,614 and to note the contributions of existing
instruments on this issue and on related matters at the regional and international levels;
(l) To intensify our efforts to address the world drug problem, based upon the principle of common and
shared responsibility and through a comprehensive and balanced approach, including through more effective
bilateral, regional and international cooperation among judicial and law enforcement authorities, to counter the
involvement of organized criminal groups in illicit drug production and trafficking and related criminal activities,
and to take steps to reduce the violence that accompanies drug trafficking;
(m) To continue to explore all options regarding an appropriate and effective mechanism or mechanisms to
assist the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime in the
review of the implementation of the Convention and the Protocols thereto in an effective and efficient manner;
(n) To invite Member States to draw on the United Nations model treaties on international cooperation in
criminal matters when considering developing agreements with other States, bearing in mind their value as
important tools for the development of international cooperation, and to invite the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice to continue its initiative to identify United Nations model treaties that may need to be updated,
based on inputs received from Member States.
9. We endeavour to ensure that the benefits of economic, social and technological advancements become a
positive force to enhance our efforts in preventing and countering new and emerging forms of crime. We recognize
our responsibility to adequately respond to emerging and evolving threats posed by such crimes. Therefore,
we strive:
(a) To develop and implement comprehensive crime prevention and criminal justice responses, including
strengthening of the capacities of our judiciary and law enforcement institutions, and to adopt, when necessary,
legislative and administrative measures to effectively prevent and counter new, emerging and evolving forms of
crime at the national, regional and international levels, taking into account the scope of application of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime with regard to “serious crimes”, in accordance with
national legislation;
(b) To explore specific measures designed to create a secure and resilient cyberenvironment, to prevent and
counter criminal activities carried out over the Internet, paying particular attention to identity theft, recruitment for
the purpose of trafficking in persons and protecting children from online exploitation and abuse, to strengthen law
enforcement cooperation at the national and international levels, including with the aim of identifying and protecting
victims by, inter alia, removing child pornography, in particular child sexual abuse imagery, from the Internet, to
enhance the security of computer networks and protect the integrity of relevant infrastructure, and to endeavour to
provide long-term technical assistance and capacity-building to strengthen the ability of national authorities to deal
with cybercrime, including the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of such crime in all its forms. In
addition, we note the activities of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to conduct a comprehensive study
of the problem of cybercrime and responses to it by Member States, the international community and the private
sector, and invite the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to consider recommending that the
expert group continue, based on its work, to exchange information on national legislation, best practices, technical
assistance and international cooperation, with a view to examining options to strengthen existing responses and to
propose new national and international legal or other responses to cybercrime;

_______________
613

Ibid., vol. 2326, No. 39574.
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
614

803

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(c) To strengthen and implement comprehensive crime prevention and criminal justice responses to illicit
trafficking in cultural property, for the purpose of providing the widest possible international cooperation to address
such crime, to review and strengthen domestic legislation to counter trafficking in cultural property, where
appropriate, in accordance with our commitments under international instruments, including, as appropriate, the
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of
Cultural Property of 1970,615 and taking into consideration the International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences,616 to
continue to gather and share information and statistical data on trafficking in cultural property, in particular on
trafficking that involves organized criminal groups and terrorist organizations, and to further consider the potential
utility of and improvements to the model treaty for the prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of
peoples in the form of movable property,617 and international standards and norms in this field, in close cooperation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL) and other competent international organizations, with a view to ensuring coordination
of efforts in fulfilment of their respective mandates;
(d) To conduct further research on the links between urban crime and other manifestations of organized
crime in some countries and regions, including crimes committed by gangs, as well as to exchange experiences in
and information on effective crime prevention and criminal justice programmes and policies among Member States
and with relevant international and regional organizations, in order to address through innovative approaches the
impact of urban crime and gang-related violence on specific populations and places, fostering social inclusion and
employment opportunities and aiming at facilitating social reintegration of adolescents and young adults;
(e) To adopt effective measures to prevent and counter the serious problem of crimes that have an impact on
the environment, such as trafficking in wildlife, including flora and fauna as protected by the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora,618 timber and timber products and hazardous
waste, as well as poaching, by strengthening legislation, international cooperation, capacity-building, criminal
justice responses and law enforcement efforts aimed at, inter alia, dealing with transnational organized crime,
corruption and money-laundering linked to such crimes;
(f) To ensure that our law enforcement and criminal justice institutions have the expertise and technical
capacities to adequately address these new and emerging forms of crime, in close cooperation and coordination with
one another, and to provide those institutions with the necessary financial and structural support;
(g) To continue the analysis and exchange of information and practices relating to other evolving forms of
transnational organized crime with varying impacts at the regional and global levels, with a view to more effectively
preventing and countering crime and strengthening the rule of law. These may include, as appropriate, smuggling of
petroleum and its derivatives, trafficking in precious metals and stones, illegal mining, counterfeiting of
trademarked goods, trafficking in human organs, blood and tissue, and piracy and transnational organized crime
committed at sea.619
10. We support the development and implementation of consultative and participatory processes in crime
prevention and criminal justice in order to engage all members of society, including those at risk of crime and
victimization, to make our prevention efforts more effective and to galvanize public trust and confidence in criminal
justice systems. We recognize our leading role and responsibility at all levels in developing and implementing crime
prevention strategies and criminal justice policies at the national and subnational levels. We also recognize that, to
enhance the effectiveness and fairness of such strategies, we should take measures to ensure the contribution of civil
society, the private sector and academia, including the network of institutes of the United Nations crime prevention

_______________
615

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 823, No. 11806.
Resolution 69/196, annex.
617
Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990:
report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.1, annex.
618
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
619
As defined by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in its resolution 22/6 (see Official Records of the Economic
and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (E/2013/30 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. D).
616

804

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and criminal justice programme, as well as the media and all other relevant stakeholders, in the development and
implementation of crime prevention policies. Therefore, we endeavour:
(a) To plan and implement comprehensive policies and programmes that foster socioeconomic
development, with a focus on the prevention of crime, including urban crime, and violence, and to support other
Member States in such endeavours, in particular through the exchange of experience and relevant information on
policies and programmes that have been successful in reducing crime and violence through social policies;
(b) To develop awareness-raising programmes to convey key values based on the rule of law and supported
by educational programmes, to be accompanied by economic and social policies promoting equality, solidarity and
justice, and to reach out to young people, drawing on them as agents of positive change;
(c) To promote a culture of lawfulness based on the protection of human rights and the rule of law while
respecting cultural identity, with particular emphasis on children and youth, seeking the support of civil society and
intensifying our prevention efforts and measures targeting and using the full potential of families, schools, religious
and cultural institutions, community organizations and the private sector in order to address the social and economic
root causes of crime;
(d) To promote the management and resolution of social conflict through dialogue and mechanisms of
community participation, including by raising public awareness, preventing victimization, increasing cooperation
between the public, competent authorities and civil society, and promoting restorative justice;
(e) To raise public confidence in criminal justice by preventing corruption and promoting respect for human
rights, as well as enhancing professional competence and oversight in all sectors of the criminal justice system, thus
ensuring that it is accessible and responsive to the needs and rights of all individuals;
(f) To explore the potential for the use of traditional and new information and communications technologies
in the development of policies and programmes to strengthen crime prevention and criminal justice, including for
identifying public safety issues and fostering public participation;
(g) To promote the improvement of e-government systems in the area of crime prevention and criminal
justice, with a view to enhancing public participation, and to promote the use of new technologies to facilitate
cooperation and partnerships between the police and the communities they serve, as well as to share good practices
and exchange information on community policing;
(h) To strengthen public-private partnerships in preventing and countering crime in all its forms and
manifestations;
(i) To ensure that the content of the law is accessible to the public, and to promote, as appropriate, the
transparency of criminal trials;
(j) To establish or build upon existing practices and measures to encourage the public, especially victims, to
report and follow up on incidents of crime and corruption, and to develop and implement measures for the
protection of whistle-blowers and witnesses;
(k) To consider partnering and supporting community initiatives and fostering the active participation of
citizens in ensuring access to justice for all, including awareness of their rights, as well as their involvement in the
prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, including by creating opportunities for community service and
supporting the social reintegration and rehabilitation of offenders, and in that regard to encourage the sharing of best
practices and the exchange of information on relevant social reintegration policies and programmes and on relevant
public-private partnerships;
(l) To encourage the active participation of the private sector in crime prevention, as well as in social
inclusion programmes and employability schemes for vulnerable members of society, including victims and those
released from prison;
(m) To build and maintain capacities for the study of criminology, as well as forensic and correctional
sciences, and to draw on contemporary scientific expertise in the design and implementation of relevant policies,
programmes and projects.
805

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

11. As we continue our efforts to achieve the objectives set forth in the present Declaration, to enhance
international cooperation, to uphold the rule of law and to ensure that our crime prevention and criminal justice
systems are effective, fair, humane and accountable, we reaffirm the importance of adequate, long-term, sustainable
and effective technical assistance and capacity-building policies and programmes. We therefore strive:
(a) To continue to provide sufficient, stable and predictable funding in support of the design and
implementation of effective programmes to prevent and counter crime in all its forms and manifestations, upon the
request of Member States and based on an assessment of their specific needs and priorities, in close collaboration
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
(b) To invite the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the network of institutes of the United Nations
crime prevention and criminal justice programme, and all relevant United Nations entities and international and
regional organizations, in fulfilment of their mandates, to continue to coordinate and cooperate with Member States
to provide effective responses to the challenges faced at the national, regional and global levels, as well as to
strengthen the effectiveness of public participation in crime prevention and criminal justice, including through the
preparation of studies and the development and implementation of programmes.
12. We reaffirm that the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime remains an essential partner for the
achievement of our aspirations in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice and for the implementation of
the provisions of the present Declaration.
13. We welcome with appreciation the offer of the Government of Japan to act as host to the Fourteenth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in 2020.
14. We express our profound gratitude to the people and Government of Qatar for their warm and generous
hospitality and for the excellent facilities provided for the Thirteenth Congress.
RESOLUTION 70/175
A/RE S/70 /175

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/490, para. 35)620

70/175. United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules)
The General Assembly,
Guided by the principal purposes of the United Nations, as set out in the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,621 and inspired by the determination to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, without distinction of any kind, and in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small, to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained and to
promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Recalling all standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice developed at the request of the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and adopted or recommended by the General Assembly, or
adopted by a United Nations congress on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, and recognizing
that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a source of inspiration for the United Nations standards and
norms in crime prevention and criminal justice,
Bearing in mind the long-standing concern of the United Nations for the humanization of criminal justice and
the protection of human rights, and emphasizing the fundamental importance of human rights in the daily
administration of criminal justice and crime prevention,

_______________
620
621

806

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
Resolution 217 A (III).

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Aware that the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners622 have been the universally
acknowledged minimum standards for the detention of prisoners and that they have been of significant value and
influence, as a guide, in the development of correctional laws, policies and practices since their adoption by the First
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in 1955,
Mindful that, in the Salvador Declaration on Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their Development in a Changing World,623 Member States
recognized that an effective, fair, accountable and humane criminal justice system was based on the commitment to
uphold the protection of human rights in the administration of justice and the prevention and control of crime, and
acknowledged the value and impact of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal
justice in designing and implementing national crime prevention and criminal justice policies, procedures and
programmes,
Taking into account the progressive development of international law pertaining to the treatment of prisoners
since 1955, including in international instruments such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,624 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights624 and the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment625 and the Optional Protocol thereto,626
Recalling the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice related to the
treatment of prisoners and to alternatives to imprisonment adopted since 1955, in particular the procedures for the
effective implementation of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners,627 the Body of Principles
for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment,628 the Basic Principles for the
Treatment of Prisoners,629 the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo
Rules)630 and the basic principles on the use of restorative justice programmes in criminal matters,631
Bearing in mind the need for vigilance with regard to the specific situation of children, juveniles and women
in the administration of justice, in particular while they are deprived of their liberty, as called for in the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules),632 the United
Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (the Riyadh Guidelines),633 the United Nations
Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty634 and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of
Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),635
Recalling the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice adopted since
1955 that provide additional guidance on the treatment of prisoners, including the Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials,636 the Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel, particularly
physicians, in the protection of prisoners and detainees against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,637 the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement
_______________
622

Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal Instruments (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
623
Resolution 65/230, annex.
624
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
625
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
626
Ibid., vol. 2375, No. 24841.
627
Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/47, annex.
628
Resolution 43/173, annex.
629
Resolution 45/111, annex.
630
Resolution 45/110, annex.
631
Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/12, annex.
632
Resolution 40/33, annex.
633
Resolution 45/112, annex.
634
Resolution 45/113, annex.
635
Resolution 65/229, annex.
636
Resolution 34/169, annex.
637
Resolution 37/194, annex.

807

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Officials,638 the Principles on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment639 and the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid
in Criminal Justice Systems,640
Aware of regional principles and standards related to the treatment of prisoners, including the Principles and
Best Practices on the Protection of Persons Deprived of Liberty in the Americas, the revised European Prison Rules,
the Kampala Declaration on Prison Conditions in Africa,641 the Arusha Declaration on Good Prison Practice642 and
the Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Fair Trial and Legal Assistance in Africa,
Recalling its resolution 65/230 of 21 December 2010, entitled “Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice”, in which it requested the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
to establish an open-ended intergovernmental expert group to exchange information on best practices, as well as
national legislation and existing international law, and on the revision of existing United Nations standard minimum
rules for the treatment of prisoners so that they reflect recent advances in correctional science and best practices,
Recalling also its resolutions 67/188 of 20 December 2012, 68/190 of 18 December 2013 and 69/192 of
18 December 2014, entitled “Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners”, in particular resolution
68/190, in which it took note with appreciation of the work done by the Expert Group on the Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, and resolution 69/192, in which it emphasized that efforts should be made to
finalize the revision process, building on the recommendations made at the three meetings of the Expert Group and
the submissions of Member States,
Mindful that, in its resolution 68/190, it took into consideration the recommendations of the Expert Group with
regard to the issues and the rules of the Standard Minimum Rules that had been identified for revision in the
following areas:
(a)
para. 1),
(b)

Respect for prisoners’ inherent dignity and value as human beings (rules 6, para. 1; 57–59; and 60,
Medical and health services (rules 22–26; 52; 62; and 71, para. 2),

(c) Disciplinary action and punishment, including the role of medical staff, solitary confinement and
reduction of diet (rules 27, 29, 31 and 32),
(d) Investigation of all deaths in custody, as well as of any signs or allegations of torture or inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment of prisoners (rule 7 and proposed rules 44 bis and 54 bis),
(e) Protection and special needs of vulnerable groups deprived of their liberty, taking into consideration
countries in difficult circumstances (rules 6 and 7),
(f)

The right of access to legal representation (rules 30; 35, para. 1; 37; and 93),

(g)

Complaints and independent inspection (rules 36 and 55),

(h)

The replacement of outdated terminology (rules 22–26, 62, 82 and 83 and various others),

(i)

Training of relevant staff to implement the Standard Minimum Rules (rule 47),

Mindful also that, in its resolution 69/192, it reiterated that any changes to the Standard Minimum Rules
should not lower any of the existing standards, but should reflect recent advances in correctional science and good
practices so as to promote safety, security and humane conditions for prisoners,
Mindful further of the extensive consultative process culminating in the recommendations of the Expert
Group, a process spanning a period of five years, consisting of technical and expert pre-consultations, meetings in
_______________
638

Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990:
report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.2, annex.
639
Resolution 55/89, annex.
640
Resolution 67/187, annex.
641
Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/36, annex.
642
Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/27, annex.

808

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Vienna, Buenos Aires and Cape Town, South Africa, and the active participation and input of Member States from
all regions, assisted by representatives of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme
network and other United Nations entities, including the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, intergovernmental organizations, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross, specialized agencies in the United Nations system, including the World
Health Organization, and non-governmental organizations and individual experts in the field of correctional science
and human rights,
Recalling its resolution 69/172 of 18 December 2014, entitled “Human rights in the administration of justice”,
in which it recognized the importance of the principle that, except for those lawful limitations that are demonstrably
necessitated by the fact of incarceration, persons deprived of their liberty shall retain their non-derogable human
rights and all other human rights and fundamental freedoms, recalled that the social rehabilitation and reintegration
of persons deprived of their liberty shall be among the essential aims of the criminal justice system, ensuring, as far
as possible, that offenders are able to lead a law-abiding and self-supporting life upon their return to society, and
took note of, inter alia, general comment No. 21 on the humane treatment of persons deprived of their liberty,
adopted by the Human Rights Committee,643
1. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Government of South Africa for hosting the meeting of
the Expert Group on the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners held in Cape Town, South Africa,
from 2 to 5 March 2015 and for providing financial support and leadership throughout the review process, and notes
with appreciation the consensus achieved on the nine thematic areas and the rules identified for revision by the
Expert Group at its previous meetings;644
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of Argentina for hosting and financing the meeting of the
Expert Group held in Buenos Aires from 11 to 13 December 2012 and to the Government of Brazil for its financial
contribution to the meeting of the Expert Group held in Vienna from 25 to 28 March 2014;
3. Acknowledges the valuable work accomplished by the bureau of the meeting of the Expert Group held in
Vienna in 2014 in preparing, with the assistance of the Secretariat, the documentation for the meeting of the Expert
Group held in Cape Town in 2015, in particular the revised consolidated working paper;645
4. Notes that in the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider
United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels, and Public Participation, adopted by the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015,646 the Thirteenth Congress
welcomed the work of the Expert Group, and took note of the draft updated Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners, as finalized by the Expert Group at its meeting held in Cape Town in March 2015;
5. Adopts the proposed revision of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, annexed to
the present resolution, as the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;
6. Approves the recommendation of the Expert Group that the Rules should be known as “the Nelson
Mandela Rules”, to honour the legacy of the late President of South Africa, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, who spent
27 years in prison in the course of his struggle for global human rights, equality, democracy and the promotion of a
culture of peace;
7. Decides to extend the scope of Nelson Mandela International Day, observed each year on 18 July,647 to
be also utilized in order to promote humane conditions of imprisonment, to raise awareness about prisoners being a
continuous part of society and to value the work of prison staff as a social service of particular importance, and to
_______________
643

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/47/40), annex VI.B.
See E/CN.15/2015/17.
645
UNODC/CCPCJ/EG.6/2015/2.
646
Resolution 70/174, annex.
647
See resolution 64/13.
644

809

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

this end invites Member States, regional organizations and organizations of the United Nations system to celebrate
this occasion in an appropriate manner;
8. Reaffirms, in the context of paragraph 5 above, the preliminary observations to the Nelson Mandela
Rules, underscores the non-binding nature of the Rules, acknowledges the variety of Member States’ legal
frameworks, and in that regard recognizes that Member States may adapt the application of the Rules in accordance
with their domestic legal frameworks, as appropriate, bearing in mind the spirit and purposes of the Rules;
9. Encourages Member States to endeavour to improve conditions in detention, consistent with the Nelson
Mandela Rules and all other relevant and applicable United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and
criminal justice, to continue exchanging good practices in order to identify challenges faced in implementing the
Rules and to share their experiences in dealing with those challenges;
10. Invites the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to consider, at its upcoming sessions,
reconvening the open-ended intergovernmental Expert Group on the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners for the purpose of identifying the lessons learned, the means to continue to exchange good practices and
the challenges faced in the implementation of the Nelson Mandela Rules;
11. Encourages Member States to promote the implementation of the United Nations Rules for the
Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty634 and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women
Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules);635
12. Recommends that Member States continue to endeavour to reduce prison overcrowding and, where
appropriate, resort to non-custodial measures as alternatives to pretrial detention, to promote increased access to
justice and legal defence mechanisms, to reinforce alternatives to imprisonment and to support rehabilitation and
social reintegration programmes, in accordance with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Noncustodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules);630
13. Notes the importance of a voluntary exchange of experiences and good practices among Member States
and with relevant international entities, where appropriate, and the provision of technical assistance to Member
States, for the improved implementation of the Nelson Mandela Rules, upon their request;
14. Encourages Member States to consider allocating adequate human and financial resources to assist in
the improvement of prison conditions and the application of the Nelson Mandela Rules;
15. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to ensure broad dissemination of the Nelson
Mandela Rules, to design guidance material and to provide technical assistance and advisory services to Member
States in the field of penal reform, in order to develop or strengthen penitentiary legislation, procedures, policies and
practices in line with the Rules;
16. Commends the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice for its continuing contributions
to the improvement of the administration of justice through the development and refinement of international
standards and norms in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, and calls upon Member States to continue
their efforts in this regard;
17. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to promote the use and application
of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice by, inter alia, providing advisory
services and technical assistance to Member States, on request, including assistance in crime prevention, criminal
justice and law reform, and in the organization of training for law enforcement, crime prevention and criminal
justice personnel and support in the administration and management of penal and penitentiary systems, thus
contributing to the upgrading of their efficiency and capabilities;
18. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the purposes described
above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations;
19. Affirms the important role of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme
network, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council in the revision process and in contributing to the dissemination, promotion and
practical application of the Nelson Mandela Rules in accordance with the procedures for their effective
implementation.
810

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Annex
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules)
Preliminary observation 1
The following rules are not intended to describe in detail a model system of penal institutions. They seek only,
on the basis of the general consensus of contemporary thought and the essential elements of the most adequate
systems of today, to set out what is generally accepted as being good principles and practice in the treatment of
prisoners and prison management.
Preliminary observation 2
1. In view of the great variety of legal, social, economic and geographical conditions in the world, it is evident
that not all of the rules are capable of application in all places and at all times. They should, however, serve to
stimulate a constant endeavour to overcome practical difficulties in the way of their application, in the knowledge
that they represent, as a whole, the minimum conditions which are accepted as suitable by the United Nations.
2. On the other hand, the rules cover a field in which thought is constantly developing. They are not intended to
preclude experiment and practices, provided these are in harmony with the principles and seek to further the
purposes which derive from the text of the rules as a whole. It will always be justifiable for the central prison
administration to authorize departures from the rules in this spirit.
Preliminary observation 3
1. Part I of the rules covers the general management of prisons, and is applicable to all categories of prisoners,
criminal or civil, untried or convicted, including prisoners subject to “security measures” or corrective measures
ordered by the judge.
2. Part II contains rules applicable only to the special categories dealt with in each section. Nevertheless, the rules
under section A, applicable to prisoners under sentence, shall be equally applicable to categories of prisoners dealt
with in sections B, C and D, provided they do not conflict with the rules governing those categories and are for their
benefit.
Preliminary observation 4
1. The rules do not seek to regulate the management of institutions set aside for young persons such as juvenile
detention facilities or correctional schools, but in general part I would be equally applicable in such institutions.
2. The category of young prisoners should include at least all young persons who come within the jurisdiction of
juvenile courts. As a rule, such young persons should not be sentenced to imprisonment.
I.

Rules of general application

Basic principles
Rule 1
All prisoners shall be treated with the respect due to their inherent dignity and value as human beings. No
prisoner shall be subjected to, and all prisoners shall be protected from, torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, for which no circumstances whatsoever may be invoked as a justification. The
safety and security of prisoners, staff, service providers and visitors shall be ensured at all times.
Rule 2
1. The present rules shall be applied impartially. There shall be no discrimination on the grounds of race, colour,
sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or any other status. The
religious beliefs and moral precepts of prisoners shall be respected.
811

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. In order for the principle of non-discrimination to be put into practice, prison administrations shall take
account of the individual needs of prisoners, in particular the most vulnerable categories in prison settings. Measures
to protect and promote the rights of prisoners with special needs are required and shall not be regarded as
discriminatory.
Rule 3
Imprisonment and other measures that result in cutting off persons from the outside world are afflictive by the
very fact of taking from these persons the right of self-determination by depriving them of their liberty. Therefore
the prison system shall not, except as incidental to justifiable separation or the maintenance of discipline, aggravate
the suffering inherent in such a situation.
Rule 4
1. The purposes of a sentence of imprisonment or similar measures deprivative of a person’s liberty are primarily
to protect society against crime and to reduce recidivism. Those purposes can be achieved only if the period of
imprisonment is used to ensure, so far as possible, the reintegration of such persons into society upon release so that
they can lead a law-abiding and self-supporting life.
2. To this end, prison administrations and other competent authorities should offer education, vocational training
and work, as well as other forms of assistance that are appropriate and available, including those of a remedial,
moral, spiritual, social and health- and sports-based nature. All such programmes, activities and services should be
delivered in line with the individual treatment needs of prisoners.
Rule 5
1. The prison regime should seek to minimize any differences between prison life and life at liberty that tend to
lessen the responsibility of the prisoners or the respect due to their dignity as human beings.
2. Prison administrations shall make all reasonable accommodation and adjustments to ensure that prisoners with
physical, mental or other disabilities have full and effective access to prison life on an equitable basis.
Prisoner file management
Rule 6
There shall be a standardized prisoner file management system in every place where persons are imprisoned.
Such a system may be an electronic database of records or a registration book with numbered and signed pages.
Procedures shall be in place to ensure a secure audit trail and to prevent unauthorized access to or modification of
any information contained in the system.
Rule 7
No person shall be received in a prison without a valid commitment order. The following information shall be
entered in the prisoner file management system upon admission of every prisoner:
(a) Precise information enabling determination of his or her unique identity, respecting his or her selfperceived gender;
(b) The reasons for his or her commitment and the responsible authority, in addition to the date, time and
place of arrest;
(c)

The day and hour of his or her admission and release as well as of any transfer;

(d)

Any visible injuries and complaints about prior ill-treatment;

(e)

An inventory of his or her personal property;

(f) The names of his or her family members, including, where applicable, his or her children, the children’s
ages, location and custody or guardianship status;
(g)
812

Emergency contact details and information on the prisoner’s next of kin.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rule 8
The following information shall be entered in the prisoner file management system in the course of
imprisonment, where applicable:
(a)

Information related to the judicial process, including dates of court hearings and legal representation;

(b)

Initial assessment and classification reports;

(c)

Information related to behaviour and discipline;

(d) Requests and complaints, including allegations of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, unless they are of a confidential nature;
(e)

Information on the imposition of disciplinary sanctions;

(f) Information on the circumstances and causes of any injuries or death and, in the case of the latter, the
destination of the remains.
Rule 9
All records referred to in rules 7 and 8 shall be kept confidential and made available only to those whose
professional responsibilities require access to such records. Every prisoner shall be granted access to the records
pertaining to him or her, subject to redactions authorized under domestic legislation, and shall be entitled to receive
an official copy of such records upon his or her release.
Rule 10
Prisoner file management systems shall also be used to generate reliable data about trends relating to and
characteristics of the prison population, including occupancy rates, in order to create a basis for evidence-based
decision-making.
Separation of categories
Rule 11
The different categories of prisoners shall be kept in separate institutions or parts of institutions, taking account
of their sex, age, criminal record, the legal reason for their detention and the necessities of their treatment; thus:
(a) Men and women shall so far as possible be detained in separate institutions; in an institution which
receives both men and women, the whole of the premises allocated to women shall be entirely separate;
(b)

Untried prisoners shall be kept separate from convicted prisoners;

(c) Persons imprisoned for debt and other civil prisoners shall be kept separate from persons imprisoned by
reason of a criminal offence;
(d)

Young prisoners shall be kept separate from adults.

Accommodation
Rule 12
1. Where sleeping accommodation is in individual cells or rooms, each prisoner shall occupy by night a cell or
room by himself or herself. If for special reasons, such as temporary overcrowding, it becomes necessary for the
central prison administration to make an exception to this rule, it is not desirable to have two prisoners in a cell or
room.
2. Where dormitories are used, they shall be occupied by prisoners carefully selected as being suitable to
associate with one another in those conditions. There shall be regular supervision by night, in keeping with the
nature of the prison.
813

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rule 13
All accommodation provided for the use of prisoners and in particular all sleeping accommodation shall meet
all requirements of health, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and particularly to cubic content of air,
minimum floor space, lighting, heating and ventilation.
Rule 14
In all places where prisoners are required to live or work:
(a) The windows shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light and shall be
so constructed that they can allow the entrance of fresh air whether or not there is artificial ventilation;
(b)

Artificial light shall be provided sufficient for the prisoners to read or work without injury to eyesight.

Rule 15
The sanitary installations shall be adequate to enable every prisoner to comply with the needs of nature when
necessary and in a clean and decent manner.
Rule 16
Adequate bathing and shower installations shall be provided so that every prisoner can, and may be required
to, have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to the climate, as frequently as necessary for general hygiene
according to season and geographical region, but at least once a week in a temperate climate.
Rule 17
All parts of a prison regularly used by prisoners shall be properly maintained and kept scrupulously clean at
all times.
Personal hygiene
Rule 18
1. Prisoners shall be required to keep their persons clean, and to this end they shall be provided with water and
with such toilet articles as are necessary for health and cleanliness.
2. In order that prisoners may maintain a good appearance compatible with their self-respect, facilities shall be
provided for the proper care of the hair and beard, and men shall be able to shave regularly.
Clothing and bedding
Rule 19
1. Every prisoner who is not allowed to wear his or her own clothing shall be provided with an outfit of clothing
suitable for the climate and adequate to keep him or her in good health. Such clothing shall in no manner be
degrading or humiliating.
2. All clothing shall be clean and kept in proper condition. Underclothing shall be changed and washed as often
as necessary for the maintenance of hygiene.
3. In exceptional circumstances, whenever a prisoner is removed outside the prison for an authorized purpose, he
or she shall be allowed to wear his or her own clothing or other inconspicuous clothing.
Rule 20
If prisoners are allowed to wear their own clothing, arrangements shall be made on their admission to the
prison to ensure that it shall be clean and fit for use.
814

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rule 21
Every prisoner shall, in accordance with local or national standards, be provided with a separate bed and with
separate and sufficient bedding which shall be clean when issued, kept in good order and changed often enough to
ensure its cleanliness.
Food
Rule 22
1. Every prisoner shall be provided by the prison administration at the usual hours with food of nutritional value
adequate for health and strength, of wholesome quality and well prepared and served.
2.

Drinking water shall be available to every prisoner whenever he or she needs it.

Exercise and sport
Rule 23
1. Every prisoner who is not employed in outdoor work shall have at least one hour of suitable exercise in the
open air daily if the weather permits.
2. Young prisoners, and others of suitable age and physique, shall receive physical and recreational training
during the period of exercise. To this end, space, installations and equipment should be provided.
Health-care services
Rule 24
1. The provision of health care for prisoners is a State responsibility. Prisoners should enjoy the same standards
of health care that are available in the community, and should have access to necessary health-care services free of
charge without discrimination on the grounds of their legal status.
2. Health-care services should be organized in close relationship to the general public health administration and
in a way that ensures continuity of treatment and care, including for HIV, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases,
as well as for drug dependence.
Rule 25
1. Every prison shall have in place a health-care service tasked with evaluating, promoting, protecting and
improving the physical and mental health of prisoners, paying particular attention to prisoners with special healthcare needs or with health issues that hamper their rehabilitation.
2. The health-care service shall consist of an interdisciplinary team with sufficient qualified personnel acting in
full clinical independence and shall encompass sufficient expertise in psychology and psychiatry. The services of a
qualified dentist shall be available to every prisoner.
Rule 26
1. The health-care service shall prepare and maintain accurate, up-to-date and confidential individual medical
files on all prisoners, and all prisoners should be granted access to their files upon request. A prisoner may appoint a
third party to access his or her medical file.
2. Medical files shall be transferred to the health-care service of the receiving institution upon transfer of a
prisoner and shall be subject to medical confidentiality.
Rule 27
1. All prisons shall ensure prompt access to medical attention in urgent cases. Prisoners who require specialized
treatment or surgery shall be transferred to specialized institutions or to civil hospitals. Where a prison service has its
own hospital facilities, they shall be adequately staffed and equipped to provide prisoners referred to them with
appropriate treatment and care.
815

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Clinical decisions may only be taken by the responsible health-care professionals and may not be overruled or
ignored by non-medical prison staff.
Rule 28
In women’s prisons, there shall be special accommodation for all necessary prenatal and postnatal care and
treatment. Arrangements shall be made wherever practicable for children to be born in a hospital outside the prison.
If a child is born in prison, this fact shall not be mentioned in the birth certificate.
Rule 29
1. A decision to allow a child to stay with his or her parent in prison shall be based on the best interests of the
child concerned. Where children are allowed to remain in prison with a parent, provision shall be made for:
(a) Internal or external childcare facilities staffed by qualified persons, where the children shall be placed
when they are not in the care of their parent;
(b) Child-specific health-care services, including health screenings upon admission and ongoing monitoring
of their development by specialists.
2.

Children in prison with a parent shall never be treated as prisoners.

Rule 30
A physician or other qualified health-care professionals, whether or not they are required to report to the
physician, shall see, talk with and examine every prisoner as soon as possible following his or her admission and
thereafter as necessary. Particular attention shall be paid to:
(a)

Identifying health-care needs and taking all necessary measures for treatment;

(b)

Identifying any ill-treatment that arriving prisoners may have been subjected to prior to admission;

(c) Identifying any signs of psychological or other stress brought on by the fact of imprisonment, including,
but not limited to, the risk of suicide or self-harm and withdrawal symptoms resulting from the use of drugs,
medication or alcohol; and undertaking all appropriate individualized measures or treatment;
(d) In cases where prisoners are suspected of having contagious diseases, providing for the clinical isolation
and adequate treatment of those prisoners during the infectious period;
(e) Determining the fitness of prisoners to work, to exercise and to participate in other activities, as
appropriate.
Rule 31
The physician or, where applicable, other qualified health-care professionals shall have daily access to all sick
prisoners, all prisoners who complain of physical or mental health issues or injury and any prisoner to whom their
attention is specially directed. All medical examinations shall be undertaken in full confidentiality.
Rule 32
1. The relationship between the physician or other health-care professionals and the prisoners shall be governed
by the same ethical and professional standards as those applicable to patients in the community, in particular:
(a) The duty of protecting prisoners’ physical and mental health and the prevention and treatment of disease
on the basis of clinical grounds only;
(b) Adherence to prisoners’ autonomy with regard to their own health and informed consent in the doctorpatient relationship;
(c) The confidentiality of medical information, unless maintaining such confidentiality would result in a real
and imminent threat to the patient or to others;
816

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(d) An absolute prohibition on engaging, actively or passively, in acts that may constitute torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including medical or scientific experimentation that may be
detrimental to a prisoner’s health, such as the removal of a prisoner’s cells, body tissues or organs.
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1 (d) of this rule, prisoners may be allowed, upon their free and informed
consent and in accordance with applicable law, to participate in clinical trials and other health research accessible in
the community if these are expected to produce a direct and significant benefit to their health, and to donate cells,
body tissues or organs to a relative.
Rule 33
The physician shall report to the prison director whenever he or she considers that a prisoner’s physical or
mental health has been or will be injuriously affected by continued imprisonment or by any condition of
imprisonment.
Rule 34
If, in the course of examining a prisoner upon admission or providing medical care to the prisoner thereafter,
health-care professionals become aware of any signs of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, they shall document and report such cases to the competent medical, administrative or judicial
authority. Proper procedural safeguards shall be followed in order not to expose the prisoner or associated persons to
foreseeable risk of harm.
Rule 35
1.

The physician or competent public health body shall regularly inspect and advise the prison director on:
(a)

The quantity, quality, preparation and service of food;

(b)

The hygiene and cleanliness of the institution and the prisoners;

(c)

The sanitation, temperature, lighting and ventilation of the prison;

(d)

The suitability and cleanliness of the prisoners’ clothing and bedding;

(e) The observance of the rules concerning physical education and sports, in cases where there is no
technical personnel in charge of these activities.
2. The prison director shall take into consideration the advice and reports provided in accordance with
paragraph 1 of this rule and rule 33 and shall take immediate steps to give effect to the advice and the
recommendations in the reports. If the advice or recommendations do not fall within the prison director’s
competence or if he or she does not concur with them, the director shall immediately submit to a higher authority his
or her own report and the advice or recommendations of the physician or competent public health body.
Restrictions, discipline and sanctions
Rule 36
Discipline and order shall be maintained with no more restriction than is necessary to ensure safe custody, the
secure operation of the prison and a well ordered community life.
Rule 37
The following shall always be subject to authorization by law or by the regulation of the competent
administrative authority:
(a)

Conduct constituting a disciplinary offence;

(b)

The types and duration of sanctions that may be imposed;

(c)

The authority competent to impose such sanctions;
817

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(d) Any form of involuntary separation from the general prison population, such as solitary confinement,
isolation, segregation, special care units or restricted housing, whether as a disciplinary sanction or for the
maintenance of order and security, including promulgating policies and procedures governing the use and review of,
admission to and release from any form of involuntary separation.
Rule 38
1. Prison administrations are encouraged to use, to the extent possible, conflict prevention, mediation or any
other alternative dispute resolution mechanism to prevent disciplinary offences or to resolve conflicts.
2. For prisoners who are, or have been, separated, the prison administration shall take the necessary measures to
alleviate the potential detrimental effects of their confinement on them and on their community following their
release from prison.
Rule 39
1. No prisoner shall be sanctioned except in accordance with the terms of the law or regulation referred to in
rule 37 and the principles of fairness and due process. A prisoner shall never be sanctioned twice for the same act or
offence.
2. Prison administrations shall ensure proportionality between a disciplinary sanction and the offence for which it
is established, and shall keep a proper record of all disciplinary sanctions imposed.
3. Before imposing disciplinary sanctions, prison administrations shall consider whether and how a prisoner’s
mental illness or developmental disability may have contributed to his or her conduct and the commission of the
offence or act underlying the disciplinary charge. Prison administrations shall not sanction any conduct of a prisoner
that is considered to be the direct result of his or her mental illness or intellectual disability.
Rule 40
1.

No prisoner shall be employed, in the service of the prison, in any disciplinary capacity.

2. This rule shall not, however, impede the proper functioning of systems based on self-government, under
which specified social, educational or sports activities or responsibilities are entrusted, under supervision, to
prisoners who are formed into groups for the purposes of treatment.
Rule 41
1. Any allegation of a disciplinary offence by a prisoner shall be reported promptly to the competent authority,
which shall investigate it without undue delay.
2. Prisoners shall be informed, without delay and in a language that they understand, of the nature of the
accusations against them and shall be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of their defence.
3. Prisoners shall be allowed to defend themselves in person, or through legal assistance when the interests of
justice so require, particularly in cases involving serious disciplinary charges. If the prisoners do not understand or
speak the language used at a disciplinary hearing, they shall be assisted by a competent interpreter free of charge.
4.

Prisoners shall have an opportunity to seek judicial review of disciplinary sanctions imposed against them.

5. In the event that a breach of discipline is prosecuted as a crime, prisoners shall be entitled to all due process
guarantees applicable to criminal proceedings, including unimpeded access to a legal adviser.
Rule 42
General living conditions addressed in these rules, including those related to light, ventilation, temperature,
sanitation, nutrition, drinking water, access to open air and physical exercise, personal hygiene, health care and
adequate personal space, shall apply to all prisoners without exception.
818

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rule 43
1. In no circumstances may restrictions or disciplinary sanctions amount to torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment. The following practices, in particular, shall be prohibited:

2.

(a)

Indefinite solitary confinement;

(b)

Prolonged solitary confinement;

(c)

Placement of a prisoner in a dark or constantly lit cell;

(d)

Corporal punishment or the reduction of a prisoner’s diet or drinking water;

(e)

Collective punishment.

Instruments of restraint shall never be applied as a sanction for disciplinary offences.

3. Disciplinary sanctions or restrictive measures shall not include the prohibition of family contact. The means of
family contact may only be restricted for a limited time period and as strictly required for the maintenance of
security and order.
Rule 44
For the purpose of these rules, solitary confinement shall refer to the confinement of prisoners for 22 hours or
more a day without meaningful human contact. Prolonged solitary confinement shall refer to solitary confinement
for a time period in excess of 15 consecutive days.
Rule 45
1. Solitary confinement shall be used only in exceptional cases as a last resort, for as short a time as possible and
subject to independent review, and only pursuant to the authorization by a competent authority. It shall not be
imposed by virtue of a prisoner’s sentence.
2. The imposition of solitary confinement should be prohibited in the case of prisoners with mental or physical
disabilities when their conditions would be exacerbated by such measures. The prohibition of the use of solitary
confinement and similar measures in cases involving women and children, as referred to in other United Nations
standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice,648 continues to apply.
Rule 46
1. Health-care personnel shall not have any role in the imposition of disciplinary sanctions or other restrictive
measures. They shall, however, pay particular attention to the health of prisoners held under any form of involuntary
separation, including by visiting such prisoners on a daily basis and providing prompt medical assistance and
treatment at the request of such prisoners or prison staff.
2. Health-care personnel shall report to the prison director, without delay, any adverse effect of disciplinary
sanctions or other restrictive measures on the physical or mental health of a prisoner subjected to such sanctions or
measures and shall advise the director if they consider it necessary to terminate or alter them for physical or mental
health reasons.
3. Health-care personnel shall have the authority to review and recommend changes to the involuntary separation
of a prisoner in order to ensure that such separation does not exacerbate the medical condition or mental or physical
disability of the prisoner.

_______________
648

See rule 67 of the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (resolution 45/113, annex); and rule 22
of the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok
Rules) (resolution 65/229, annex).

819

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Instruments of restraint
Rule 47
1. The use of chains, irons or other instruments of restraint which are inherently degrading or painful shall be
prohibited.
2.

Other instruments of restraint shall only be used when authorized by law and in the following circumstances:

(a) As a precaution against escape during a transfer, provided that they are removed when the prisoner
appears before a judicial or administrative authority;
(b) By order of the prison director, if other methods of control fail, in order to prevent a prisoner from
injuring himself or herself or others or from damaging property; in such instances, the director shall immediately
alert the physician or other qualified health-care professionals and report to the higher administrative authority.
Rule 48
1. When the imposition of instruments of restraint is authorized in accordance with paragraph 2 of rule 47, the
following principles shall apply:
(a) Instruments of restraint are to be imposed only when no lesser form of control would be effective to
address the risks posed by unrestricted movement;
(b) The method of restraint shall be the least intrusive method that is necessary and reasonably available to
control the prisoner’s movement, based on the level and nature of the risks posed;
(c) Instruments of restraint shall be imposed only for the time period required, and they are to be removed
as soon as possible after the risks posed by unrestricted movement are no longer present.
2. Instruments of restraint shall never be used on women during labour, during childbirth and immediately after
childbirth.
Rule 49
The prison administration should seek access to, and provide training in the use of, control techniques that
would obviate the need for the imposition of instruments of restraint or reduce their intrusiveness.
Searches of prisoners and cells
Rule 50
The laws and regulations governing searches of prisoners and cells shall be in accordance with obligations under
international law and shall take into account international standards and norms, keeping in mind the need to ensure
security in the prison. Searches shall be conducted in a manner that is respectful of the inherent human dignity and
privacy of the individual being searched, as well as the principles of proportionality, legality and necessity.
Rule 51
Searches shall not be used to harass, intimidate or unnecessarily intrude upon a prisoner’s privacy. For the
purpose of accountability, the prison administration shall keep appropriate records of searches, in particular strip and
body cavity searches and searches of cells, as well as the reasons for the searches, the identities of those who
conducted them and any results of the searches.
Rule 52
1. Intrusive searches, including strip and body cavity searches, should be undertaken only if absolutely necessary.
Prison administrations shall be encouraged to develop and use appropriate alternatives to intrusive searches.
Intrusive searches shall be conducted in private and by trained staff of the same sex as the prisoner.
2. Body cavity searches shall be conducted only by qualified health-care professionals other than those primarily
responsible for the care of the prisoner or, at a minimum, by staff appropriately trained by a medical professional in
standards of hygiene, health and safety.
820

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rule 53
Prisoners shall have access to, or be allowed to keep in their possession without access by the prison
administration, documents relating to their legal proceedings.
Information to and complaints by prisoners
Rule 54
Upon admission, every prisoner shall be promptly provided with written information about:
(a)

The prison law and applicable prison regulations;

(b) His or her rights, including authorized methods of seeking information, access to legal advice, including
through legal aid schemes, and procedures for making requests or complaints;
(c)

His or her obligations, including applicable disciplinary sanctions; and

(d)

All other matters necessary to enable the prisoner to adapt himself or herself to the life of the prison.

Rule 55
1. The information referred to in rule 54 shall be available in the most commonly used languages in accordance
with the needs of the prison population. If a prisoner does not understand any of those languages, interpretation
assistance should be provided.
2. If a prisoner is illiterate, the information shall be conveyed to him or her orally. Prisoners with sensory
disabilities should be provided with information in a manner appropriate to their needs.
3. The prison administration shall prominently display summaries of the information in common areas of the
prison.
Rule 56
1. Every prisoner shall have the opportunity each day to make requests or complaints to the prison director or the
prison staff member authorized to represent him or her.
2. It shall be possible to make requests or complaints to the inspector of prisons during his or her inspections.
The prisoner shall have the opportunity to talk to the inspector or any other inspecting officer freely and in full
confidentiality, without the director or other members of the staff being present.
3. Every prisoner shall be allowed to make a request or complaint regarding his or her treatment, without
censorship as to substance, to the central prison administration and to the judicial or other competent authorities,
including those vested with reviewing or remedial power.
4. The rights under paragraphs 1 to 3 of this rule shall extend to the legal adviser of the prisoner. In those cases
where neither the prisoner nor his or her legal adviser has the possibility of exercising such rights, a member of the
prisoner’s family or any other person who has knowledge of the case may do so.
Rule 57
1. Every request or complaint shall be promptly dealt with and replied to without delay. If the request or
complaint is rejected, or in the event of undue delay, the complainant shall be entitled to bring it before a judicial or
other authority.
2. Safeguards shall be in place to ensure that prisoners can make requests or complaints safely and, if so
requested by the complainant, in a confidential manner. A prisoner or other person mentioned in paragraph 4 of
rule 56 must not be exposed to any risk of retaliation, intimidation or other negative consequences as a result of
having submitted a request or complaint.
3. Allegations of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of prisoners shall be dealt
with immediately and shall result in a prompt and impartial investigation conducted by an independent national
authority in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of rule 71.
821

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Contact with the outside world
Rule 58
1. Prisoners shall be allowed, under necessary supervision, to communicate with their family and friends at
regular intervals:
(a) By corresponding in writing and using, where available, telecommunication, electronic, digital and other
means; and
(b)

By receiving visits.

2. Where conjugal visits are allowed, this right shall be applied without discrimination, and women prisoners
shall be able to exercise this right on an equal basis with men. Procedures shall be in place and premises shall be
made available to ensure fair and equal access with due regard to safety and dignity.
Rule 59
Prisoners shall be allocated, to the extent possible, to prisons close to their homes or their places of social
rehabilitation.
Rule 60
1. Admission of visitors to the prison facility is contingent upon the visitor’s consent to being searched. The
visitor may withdraw his or her consent at any time, in which case the prison administration may refuse access.
2. Search and entry procedures for visitors shall not be degrading and shall be governed by principles at least as
protective as those outlined in rules 50 to 52. Body cavity searches should be avoided and should not be applied to
children.
Rule 61
1. Prisoners shall be provided with adequate opportunity, time and facilities to be visited by and to communicate
and consult with a legal adviser of their own choice or a legal aid provider, without delay, interception or censorship
and in full confidentiality, on any legal matter, in conformity with applicable domestic law. Consultations may be
within sight, but not within hearing, of prison staff.
2. In cases in which prisoners do not speak the local language, the prison administration shall facilitate access to
the services of an independent competent interpreter.
3.

Prisoners should have access to effective legal aid.

Rule 62
1. Prisoners who are foreign nationals shall be allowed reasonable facilities to communicate with the diplomatic
and consular representatives of the State to which they belong.
2. Prisoners who are nationals of States without diplomatic or consular representation in the country and refugees or
stateless persons shall be allowed similar facilities to communicate with the diplomatic representative of the State
which takes charge of their interests or any national or international authority whose task it is to protect such persons.
Rule 63
Prisoners shall be kept informed regularly of the more important items of news by the reading of newspapers,
periodicals or special institutional publications, by hearing wireless transmissions, by lectures or by any similar
means as authorized or controlled by the prison administration.
Books
Rule 64
Every prison shall have a library for the use of all categories of prisoners, adequately stocked with both
recreational and instructional books, and prisoners shall be encouraged to make full use of it.
822

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Religion
Rule 65
1. If the prison contains a sufficient number of prisoners of the same religion, a qualified representative of that
religion shall be appointed or approved. If the number of prisoners justifies it and conditions permit, the
arrangement should be on a full-time basis.
2. A qualified representative appointed or approved under paragraph 1 of this rule shall be allowed to hold
regular services and to pay pastoral visits in private to prisoners of his or her religion at proper times.
3. Access to a qualified representative of any religion shall not be refused to any prisoner. On the other hand, if
any prisoner should object to a visit of any religious representative, his or her attitude shall be fully respected.
Rule 66
So far as practicable, every prisoner shall be allowed to satisfy the needs of his or her religious life by
attending the services provided in the prison and having in his or her possession the books of religious observance
and instruction of his or her denomination.
Retention of prisoners’ property
Rule 67
1. All money, valuables, clothing and other effects belonging to a prisoner which he or she is not allowed to
retain under the prison regulations shall on his or her admission to the prison be placed in safe custody. An inventory
thereof shall be signed by the prisoner. Steps shall be taken to keep them in good condition.
2. On the release of the prisoner, all such articles and money shall be returned to him or her except in so far as he
or she has been authorized to spend money or send any such property out of the prison, or it has been found
necessary on hygienic grounds to destroy any article of clothing. The prisoner shall sign a receipt for the articles and
money returned to him or her.
3.

Any money or effects received for a prisoner from outside shall be treated in the same way.

4. If a prisoner brings in any drugs or medicine, the physician or other qualified health-care professionals shall
decide what use shall be made of them.
Notifications
Rule 68
Every prisoner shall have the right, and shall be given the ability and means, to inform immediately his or her
family, or any other person designated as a contact person, about his or her imprisonment, about his or her transfer
to another institution and about any serious illness or injury. The sharing of prisoners’ personal information shall be
subject to domestic legislation.
Rule 69
In the event of a prisoner’s death, the prison director shall at once inform the prisoner’s next of kin or
emergency contact. Individuals designated by a prisoner to receive his or her health information shall be notified by
the director of the prisoner’s serious illness, injury or transfer to a health institution. The explicit request of a prisoner
not to have his or her spouse or nearest relative notified in the event of illness or injury shall be respected.
Rule 70
The prison administration shall inform a prisoner at once of the serious illness or death of a near relative or any
significant other. Whenever circumstances allow, the prisoner should be authorized to go, either under escort or
alone, to the bedside of a near relative or significant other who is critically ill, or to attend the funeral of a near
relative or significant other.
823

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Investigations
Rule 71
1. Notwithstanding the initiation of an internal investigation, the prison director shall report, without delay, any
custodial death, disappearance or serious injury to a judicial or other competent authority that is independent of the
prison administration and mandated to conduct prompt, impartial and effective investigations into the circumstances
and causes of such cases. The prison administration shall fully cooperate with that authority and ensure that all
evidence is preserved.
2. The obligation in paragraph 1 of this rule shall equally apply whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe
that an act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment has been committed in prison,
irrespective of whether a formal complaint has been received.
3. Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that an act referred to in paragraph 2 of this rule has been
committed, steps shall be taken immediately to ensure that all potentially implicated persons have no involvement in
the investigation and no contact with the witnesses, the victim or the victim’s family.
Rule 72
The prison administration shall treat the body of a deceased prisoner with respect and dignity. The body of a
deceased prisoner should be returned to his or her next of kin as soon as reasonably possible, at the latest upon
completion of the investigation. The prison administration shall facilitate a culturally appropriate funeral if there is
no other responsible party willing or able to do so and shall keep a full record of the matter.
Removal of prisoners
Rule 73
1. When prisoners are being removed to or from an institution, they shall be exposed to public view as little as
possible, and proper safeguards shall be adopted to protect them from insult, curiosity and publicity in any form.
2. The transport of prisoners in conveyances with inadequate ventilation or light, or in any way which would
subject them to unnecessary physical hardship, shall be prohibited.
3. The transport of prisoners shall be carried out at the expense of the prison administration and equal conditions
shall apply to all of them.
Institutional personnel
Rule 74
1. The prison administration shall provide for the careful selection of every grade of the personnel, since it is on
their integrity, humanity, professional capacity and personal suitability for the work that the proper administration of
prisons depends.
2. The prison administration shall constantly seek to awaken and maintain in the minds both of the personnel and
of the public the conviction that this work is a social service of great importance, and to this end all appropriate
means of informing the public should be used.
3. To secure the foregoing ends, personnel shall be appointed on a full-time basis as professional prison staff and
have civil service status with security of tenure subject only to good conduct, efficiency and physical fitness.
Salaries shall be adequate to attract and retain suitable men and women; employment benefits and conditions of
service shall be favourable in view of the exacting nature of the work.
Rule 75
1. All prison staff shall possess an adequate standard of education and shall be given the ability and means to
carry out their duties in a professional manner.
2. Before entering on duty, all prison staff shall be provided with training tailored to their general and specific
duties, which shall be reflective of contemporary evidence-based best practice in penal sciences. Only those
candidates who successfully pass the theoretical and practical tests at the end of such training shall be allowed to
enter the prison service.
824

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. The prison administration shall ensure the continuous provision of in service training courses with a view to
maintaining and improving the knowledge and professional capacity of its personnel, after entering on duty and
during their career.
Rule 76
1.

Training referred to in paragraph 2 of rule 75 shall include, at a minimum, training on:

(a) Relevant national legislation, regulations and policies, as well as applicable international and regional
instruments, the provisions of which must guide the work and interactions of prison staff with inmates;
(b) Rights and duties of prison staff in the exercise of their functions, including respecting the human dignity
of all prisoners and the prohibition of certain conduct, in particular torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment;
(c) Security and safety, including the concept of dynamic security, the use of force and instruments of
restraint, and the management of violent offenders, with due consideration of preventive and defusing techniques,
such as negotiation and mediation;
(d) First aid, the psychosocial needs of prisoners and the corresponding dynamics in prison settings, as well
as social care and assistance, including early detection of mental health issues.
2. Prison staff who are in charge of working with certain categories of prisoners, or who are assigned other
specialized functions, shall receive training that has a corresponding focus.
Rule 77
All prison staff shall at all times so conduct themselves and perform their duties as to influence the prisoners
for good by their example and to command their respect.
Rule 78
1. So far as possible, prison staff shall include a sufficient number of specialists such as psychiatrists,
psychologists, social workers, teachers and trade instructors.
2. The services of social workers, teachers and trade instructors shall be secured on a permanent basis, without
thereby excluding part-time or voluntary workers.
Rule 79
1. The prison director should be adequately qualified for his or her task by character, administrative ability,
suitable training and experience.
2. The prison director shall devote his or her entire working time to official duties and shall not be appointed on a
part-time basis. He or she shall reside on the premises of the prison or in its immediate vicinity.
3. When two or more prisons are under the authority of one director, he or she shall visit each of them at frequent
intervals. A responsible resident official shall be in charge of each of these prisons.
Rule 80
1. The prison director, his or her deputy, and the majority of other prison staff shall be able to speak the language
of the greatest number of prisoners, or a language understood by the greatest number of them.
2.

Whenever necessary, the services of a competent interpreter shall be used.

Rule 81
1. In a prison for both men and women, the part of the prison set aside for women shall be under the authority of
a responsible woman staff member who shall have the custody of the keys of all that part of the prison.
825

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. No male staff member shall enter the part of the prison set aside for women unless accompanied by a woman
staff member.
3. Women prisoners shall be attended and supervised only by women staff members. This does not, however,
preclude male staff members, particularly doctors and teachers, from carrying out their professional duties in prisons
or parts of prisons set aside for women.
Rule 82
1. Prison staff shall not, in their relations with the prisoners, use force except in self-defence or in cases of
attempted escape, or active or passive physical resistance to an order based on law or regulations. Prison staff who
have recourse to force must use no more than is strictly necessary and must report the incident immediately to the
prison director.
2.

Prison staff shall be given special physical training to enable them to restrain aggressive prisoners.

3. Except in special circumstances, prison staff performing duties which bring them into direct contact with
prisoners should not be armed. Furthermore, prison staff should in no circumstances be provided with arms unless
they have been trained in their use.
Internal and external inspections
Rule 83
1.

There shall be a twofold system for regular inspections of prisons and penal services:
(a)

Internal or administrative inspections conducted by the central prison administration;

(b) External inspections conducted by a body independent of the prison administration, which may include
competent international or regional bodies.
2. In both cases, the objective of the inspections shall be to ensure that prisons are managed in accordance with
existing laws, regulations, policies and procedures, with a view to bringing about the objectives of penal and
corrections services, and that the rights of prisoners are protected.
Rule 84
1.

Inspectors shall have the authority:

(a) To access all information on the numbers of prisoners and places and locations of detention, as well as
all information relevant to the treatment of prisoners, including their records and conditions of detention;
(b) To freely choose which prisons to visit, including by making unannounced visits at their own initiative,
and which prisoners to interview;
(c)
visits;
(d)

To conduct private and fully confidential interviews with prisoners and prison staff in the course of their
To make recommendations to the prison administration and other competent authorities.

2. External inspection teams shall be composed of qualified and experienced inspectors appointed by a
competent authority and shall encompass health-care professionals. Due regard shall be given to balanced gender
representation.
Rule 85
1. Every inspection shall be followed by a written report to be submitted to the competent authority. Due
consideration shall be given to making the reports of external inspections publicly available, excluding any personal
data on prisoners unless they have given their explicit consent.
2. The prison administration or other competent authorities, as appropriate, shall indicate, within a reasonable
time, whether they will implement the recommendations resulting from the external inspection.
826

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

II.

Rules applicable to special categories

A.

Prisoners under sentence

Guiding principles
Rule 86
The guiding principles hereafter are intended to show the spirit in which penal institutions should be
administered and the purposes at which they should aim, in accordance with the declaration made under preliminary
observation 1 of these rules.
Rule 87
Before the completion of the sentence, it is desirable that the necessary steps be taken to ensure for the
prisoner a gradual return to life in society. This aim may be achieved, depending on the case, by a pre-release regime
organized in the same prison or in another appropriate institution, or by release on trial under some kind of
supervision which must not be entrusted to the police but should be combined with effective social aid.
Rule 88
1. The treatment of prisoners should emphasize not their exclusion from the community but their continuing part
in it. Community agencies should therefore be enlisted wherever possible to assist the prison staff in the task of
social rehabilitation of the prisoners.
2. There should be in connection with every prison social workers charged with the duty of maintaining and
improving all desirable relations of a prisoner with his or her family and with valuable social agencies. Steps should
be taken to safeguard, to the maximum extent compatible with the law and the sentence, the rights relating to civil
interests, social security rights and other social benefits of prisoners.
Rule 89
1. The fulfilment of these principles requires individualization of treatment and for this purpose a flexible system
of classifying prisoners in groups. It is therefore desirable that such groups should be distributed in separate prisons
suitable for the treatment of each group.
2. These prisons do not need to provide the same degree of security for every group. It is desirable to provide
varying degrees of security according to the needs of different groups. Open prisons, by the very fact that they
provide no physical security against escape but rely on the self-discipline of the inmates, provide the conditions
most favourable to the rehabilitation of carefully selected prisoners.
3. It is desirable that the number of prisoners in closed prisons should not be so large that the individualization of
treatment is hindered. In some countries it is considered that the population of such prisons should not exceed 500.
In open prisons the population should be as small as possible.
4. On the other hand, it is undesirable to maintain prisons which are so small that proper facilities cannot be
provided.
Rule 90
The duty of society does not end with a prisoner’s release. There should, therefore, be governmental or private
agencies capable of lending the released prisoner efficient aftercare directed towards the lessening of prejudice
against him or her and towards his or her social rehabilitation.
Treatment
Rule 91
The treatment of persons sentenced to imprisonment or a similar measure shall have as its purpose, so far as
the length of the sentence permits, to establish in them the will to lead law-abiding and self-supporting lives after
their release and to fit them to do so. The treatment shall be such as will encourage their self-respect and develop
their sense of responsibility.
827

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rule 92
1. To these ends, all appropriate means shall be used, including religious care in the countries where this is
possible, education, vocational guidance and training, social casework, employment counselling, physical
development and strengthening of moral character, in accordance with the individual needs of each prisoner, taking
account of his or her social and criminal history, physical and mental capacities and aptitudes, personal
temperament, the length of his or her sentence and prospects after release.
2. For every prisoner with a sentence of suitable length, the prison director shall receive, as soon as possible after
his or her admission, full reports on all the matters referred to in paragraph 1 of this rule. Such reports shall always
include a report by the physician or other qualified health-care professionals on the physical and mental condition of
the prisoner.
3. The reports and other relevant documents shall be placed in an individual file. This file shall be kept up to date
and classified in such a way that it can be consulted by the responsible personnel whenever the need arises.
Classification and individualization
Rule 93
1.

The purposes of classification shall be:

(a) To separate from others those prisoners who, by reason of their criminal records or characters, are likely
to exercise a bad influence;
(b) To divide the prisoners into classes in order to facilitate their treatment with a view to their social
rehabilitation.
2. So far as possible, separate prisons or separate sections of a prison shall be used for the treatment of different
classes of prisoners.
Rule 94
As soon as possible after admission and after a study of the personality of each prisoner with a sentence of
suitable length, a programme of treatment shall be prepared for him or her in the light of the knowledge obtained
about his or her individual needs, capacities and dispositions.
Privileges
Rule 95
Systems of privileges appropriate for the different classes of prisoners and the different methods of treatment
shall be established at every prison, in order to encourage good conduct, develop a sense of responsibility and secure
the interest and cooperation of prisoners in their treatment.
Work
Rule 96
1. Sentenced prisoners shall have the opportunity to work and/or to actively participate in their rehabilitation,
subject to a determination of physical and mental fitness by a physician or other qualified health-care professionals.
2. Sufficient work of a useful nature shall be provided to keep prisoners actively employed for a normal working
day.
Rule 97

828

1.

Prison labour must not be of an afflictive nature.

2.

Prisoners shall not be held in slavery or servitude.

3.

No prisoner shall be required to work for the personal or private benefit of any prison staff.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rule 98
1. So far as possible the work provided shall be such as will maintain or increase the prisoners’ ability to earn an
honest living after release.
2. Vocational training in useful trades shall be provided for prisoners able to profit thereby and especially for
young prisoners.
3. Within the limits compatible with proper vocational selection and with the requirements of institutional
administration and discipline, prisoners shall be able to choose the type of work they wish to perform.
Rule 99
1. The organization and methods of work in prisons shall resemble as closely as possible those of similar work
outside of prisons, so as to prepare prisoners for the conditions of normal occupational life.
2. The interests of the prisoners and of their vocational training, however, must not be subordinated to the
purpose of making a financial profit from an industry in the prison.
Rule 100
1. Preferably, institutional industries and farms should be operated directly by the prison administration and not
by private contractors.
2. Where prisoners are employed in work not controlled by the prison administration, they shall always be under
the supervision of prison staff. Unless the work is for other departments of the government, the full normal wages
for such work shall be paid to the prison administration by the persons to whom the labour is supplied, account
being taken of the output of the prisoners.
Rule 101
1.

The precautions laid down to protect the safety and health of free workers shall be equally observed in prisons.

2. Provision shall be made to indemnify prisoners against industrial injury, including occupational disease, on
terms not less favourable than those extended by law to free workers.
Rule 102
1. The maximum daily and weekly working hours of the prisoners shall be fixed by law or by administrative
regulation, taking into account local rules or custom in regard to the employment of free workers.
2. The hours so fixed shall leave one rest day a week and sufficient time for education and other activities
required as part of the treatment and rehabilitation of prisoners.
Rule 103
1.

There shall be a system of equitable remuneration of the work of prisoners.

2. Under the system, prisoners shall be allowed to spend at least a part of their earnings on approved articles for
their own use and to send a part of their earnings to their family.
3. The system should also provide that a part of the earnings should be set aside by the prison administration so
as to constitute a savings fund to be handed over to the prisoner on his or her release.
Education and recreation
Rule 104
1. Provision shall be made for the further education of all prisoners capable of profiting thereby, including
religious instruction in the countries where this is possible. The education of illiterate prisoners and of young
prisoners shall be compulsory and special attention shall be paid to it by the prison administration.
829

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. So far as practicable, the education of prisoners shall be integrated with the educational system of the country
so that after their release they may continue their education without difficulty.
Rule 105
Recreational and cultural activities shall be provided in all prisons for the benefit of the mental and physical
health of prisoners.
Social relations and aftercare
Rule 106
Special attention shall be paid to the maintenance and improvement of such relations between a prisoner and
his or her family as are desirable in the best interests of both.
Rule 107
From the beginning of a prisoner’s sentence, consideration shall be given to his or her future after release and
he or she shall be encouraged and provided assistance to maintain or establish such relations with persons or
agencies outside the prison as may promote the prisoner’s rehabilitation and the best interests of his or her family.
Rule 108
1. Services and agencies, governmental or otherwise, which assist released prisoners in re-establishing
themselves in society shall ensure, so far as is possible and necessary, that released prisoners are provided with
appropriate documents and identification papers, have suitable homes and work to go to, are suitably and adequately
clothed having regard to the climate and season and have sufficient means to reach their destination and maintain
themselves in the period immediately following their release.
2. The approved representatives of such agencies shall have all necessary access to the prison and to prisoners
and shall be taken into consultation as to the future of a prisoner from the beginning of his or her sentence.
3. It is desirable that the activities of such agencies shall be centralized or coordinated as far as possible in order
to secure the best use of their efforts.
B.

Prisoners with mental disabilities and/or health conditions

Rule 109
1. Persons who are found to be not criminally responsible, or who are later diagnosed with severe mental
disabilities and/or health conditions, for whom staying in prison would mean an exacerbation of their condition,
shall not be detained in prisons, and arrangements shall be made to transfer them to mental health facilities as soon
as possible.
2. If necessary, other prisoners with mental disabilities and/or health conditions can be observed and treated in
specialized facilities under the supervision of qualified health-care professionals.
3. The health-care service shall provide for the psychiatric treatment of all other prisoners who are in need of
such treatment.
Rule 110
It is desirable that steps should be taken, by arrangement with the appropriate agencies, to ensure if necessary
the continuation of psychiatric treatment after release and the provision of social-psychiatric aftercare.
C.

Prisoners under arrest or awaiting trial

Rule 111
1. Persons arrested or imprisoned by reason of a criminal charge against them, who are detained either in police
custody or in prison custody (jail) but have not yet been tried and sentenced, will be referred to as “untried
prisoners” hereinafter in these rules.
830

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2.

Unconvicted prisoners are presumed to be innocent and shall be treated as such.

3. Without prejudice to legal rules for the protection of individual liberty or prescribing the procedure to be
observed in respect of untried prisoners, these prisoners shall benefit from a special regime which is described in the
following rules in its essential requirements only.
Rule 112
1.

Untried prisoners shall be kept separate from convicted prisoners.

2. Young untried prisoners shall be kept separate from adults and shall in principle be detained in separate
institutions.
Rule 113
Untried prisoners shall sleep singly in separate rooms, with the reservation of different local custom in respect
of the climate.
Rule 114
Within the limits compatible with the good order of the institution, untried prisoners may, if they so desire,
have their food procured at their own expense from the outside, either through the administration or through their
family or friends. Otherwise, the administration shall provide their food.
Rule 115
An untried prisoner shall be allowed to wear his or her own clothing if it is clean and suitable. If he or she
wears prison dress, it shall be different from that supplied to convicted prisoners.
Rule 116
An untried prisoner shall always be offered the opportunity to work, but shall not be required to work. If he or
she chooses to work, he or she shall be paid for it.
Rule 117
An untried prisoner shall be allowed to procure at his or her own expense or at the expense of a third party
such books, newspapers, writing material and other means of occupation as are compatible with the interests of the
administration of justice and the security and good order of the institution.
Rule 118
An untried prisoner shall be allowed to be visited and treated by his or her own doctor or dentist if there are
reasonable grounds for the application and he or she is able to pay any expenses incurred.
Rule 119
1. Every untried prisoner has the right to be promptly informed about the reasons for his or her detention and
about any charges against him or her.
2. If an untried prisoner does not have a legal adviser of his or her own choice, he or she shall be entitled to have
a legal adviser assigned to him or her by a judicial or other authority in all cases where the interests of justice so
require and without payment by the untried prisoner if he or she does not have sufficient means to pay. Denial of
access to a legal adviser shall be subject to independent review without delay.
Rule 120
1. The entitlements and modalities governing the access of an untried prisoner to his or her legal adviser or legal
aid provider for the purpose of his or her defence shall be governed by the same principles as outlined in rule 61.
2. An untried prisoner shall, upon request, be provided with writing material for the preparation of documents
related to his or her defence, including confidential instructions for his or her legal adviser or legal aid provider.
831

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

D.

Civil prisoners

Rule 121
In countries where the law permits imprisonment for debt, or by order of a court under any other non-criminal
process, persons so imprisoned shall not be subjected to any greater restriction or severity than is necessary to ensure
safe custody and good order. Their treatment shall be not less favourable than that of untried prisoners, with the
reservation, however, that they may possibly be required to work.
E.

Persons arrested or detained without charge

Rule 122
Without prejudice to the provisions of article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,649
persons arrested or imprisoned without charge shall be accorded the same protection as that accorded under part I
and part II, section C, of these rules. Relevant provisions of part II, section A, of these rules shall likewise be
applicable where their application may be conducive to the benefit of this special group of persons in custody,
provided that no measures shall be taken implying that re-education or rehabilitation is in any way appropriate to
persons not convicted of any criminal offence.
RESOLUTION 70/176
A/RE S/70 /176

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/490, para. 35)650

70/176. Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/191 of 18 December 2013 on taking action against gender-related killing of women
and girls, in particular the obligation to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
including women and girls,
Deeply concerned that the global prevalence of different manifestations of the gender-related killing of women
and girls is reaching alarming proportions, and noting especially that one of every two women victims of homicide
is killed by her intimate partner or a family member,651
Deeply concerned also at the scourge of sexual violence in all situations, including those of conflict, and
targeted mass kidnapping, rape and killing of women and girls,
Recalling the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on violence against women, its
causes and consequences652 and Council resolution 20/12 of 5 July 2012 on accelerating efforts to eliminate all
forms of violence against women: remedies for women who have been subjected to violence,653
Recalling also the report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on
creating and/or strengthening synergies and linkages on violence against women and girls654 and Human Rights
Council resolution 23/25 of 14 June 2013 on accelerating efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women:
preventing and responding to rape and other forms of sexual violence,655

_______________
649

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
651
See the Global Study on Homicide 2013 prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
652
A/HRC/20/16.
653
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1),
chap. IV, sect. A.
654
A/HRC/23/25.
655
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
650

832

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling further its resolution 69/147 of 18 December 2014 on the intensification of efforts to eliminate all
forms of violence against women and girls,
Taking note with appreciation of the political declaration on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the
Fourth World Conference on Women adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-ninth
session,656 which focused on the 20-year review of the Beijing Platform for Action,657
Expressing its gratitude to the Government of Thailand for hosting and chairing the meeting of the openended intergovernmental expert group on gender-related killing of women and girls, held in Bangkok from 11 to
13 November 2014, as mandated by resolution 68/191,
Taking note with appreciation of the recommendations of the above-mentioned expert group meeting,658
Welcoming the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United
Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels, and Public Participation,659 in particular the endeavour of Member States to mainstream a
gender perspective into criminal justice systems by developing and implementing national strategies and plans, in
order to promote the full protection of women and girls from all acts of violence, including gender-related killing of
women and girls,
Stressing the importance of eliminating all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and
private spheres and significantly reducing all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere, in the context of
the post-2015 development agenda,660
Stressing also that States have the obligation to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, including women and girls, to take measures to prevent and investigate acts of violence against
women and girls and to prosecute and punish those responsible, no matter who the perpetrators of such crimes are,
and to eliminate impunity,
Expressing appreciation for the work undertaken by the United Nations system in preventing and responding
to all forms of violence against women and girls,
Viewing with appreciation the considerable input of many civil society organizations, as well as academia, in
addressing the different forms of violence against women and girls, through research and direct action in their
respective communities,
Taking note of national and international judicial decisions that condemn mass killing of women and girls,
Remaining alarmed by the high level of impunity with regard to gender-related killing of women and girls and
the fact that violence against women and girls is among the least prosecuted and punished crimes in the world,
1. Urges Member States to take measures to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish acts of violence
against women and girls, in particular gender-related killing, in accordance with national laws, and to act at all levels
to end impunity for those responsible for committing these heinous crimes against women and girls;
2. Also urges Member States to strengthen their criminal justice response to gender-related killing of
women and girls, in particular by taking measures to support their capacity to investigate, prosecute and punish all
forms of such crime, and to consider measures in their capacities to provide, as appropriate, reparation,
compensation and/or necessary legal, medical, psychological and social support to victims and their families or
dependents;
3. Encourages Member States to consider ways to enhance international cooperation and the exchange of
good practices in criminal matters related to gender-based violence, including by, as appropriate, ratifying or
_______________
656

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I, sect. C, resolution 59/1, annex.
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
658
See E/CN.15/2015/16.
659
Resolution 70/174, annex.
660
See A/68/970 and Corr.1.
657

833

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

acceding to and implementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocols thereto661 and other relevant international legal instruments;
4. Encourages States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women662 and the Optional Protocol thereto,663 the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional
Protocols thereto664 and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court665 to effectively implement those
instruments;
5. Invites Member States to take into consideration the existing practical tools, as recommended by the
open-ended intergovernmental expert group on gender-related killing of women and girls at its meeting held in
Bangkok from 11 to 13 November 2014, namely the Latin American model protocol for the investigation of genderrelated killing of women and the recommendations for the effective investigation of the crime of femicide;666
6. Encourages Member States to promote integrated and comprehensive strategies to prevent all forms of
violence against women and girls, including gender-related killing of women and girls, that include early and
continuous educational programmes, community mobilization and awareness-raising, in order to counter attitudes
and social factors that foster, justify or tolerate any violence against women and girls;
7. Urges Member States to adopt integrated and comprehensive responses to violence against women in
order to reduce risks of gender-related killing through early intervention and risk assessment, exercise due diligence
to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish gender-related killing of women and girls, ensure equal protection of
women under the law and equal access to justice, consider adopting an integrated, multidisciplinary and gendersensitive approach to the prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment of gender-related killing of women
and girls to minimize the risk of secondary victimization in the criminal justice system and develop appropriate
mechanisms and enhance capacities for forensic investigations to identify human remains and missing persons;
8. Encourages Member States to criminalize, prosecute and punish rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-related violence against women and girls committed in all situations, including situations of conflict, taking
into account international standards, and urges, where appropriate, relevant stakeholders to support the development
and strengthening of the capacities of national institutions, in particular law enforcement, judicial and health
systems, and of local civil society networks to provide sustainable assistance and access to justice to women and
girls affected by gender-related violence;
9. Also encourages Member States to ensure that appropriate punishment for perpetrators of gender-related
killing of women and girls are in place and are proportionate to the gravity of the offence;
10. Calls upon Member States to protect and support victims, drawing on the important role of civil society
and ensuring effective cooperation between all relevant State agencies, including, where appropriate, the judiciary,
prosecution services, law enforcement agencies, health and social services and local and regional authorities;
11. Urges Member States to ensure that victims and victims’ survivors are informed of their rights and can
participate, as appropriate, in the criminal proceedings, taking into account their dignity, well-being and safety, and
that victims are supported through appropriate services;
12. Encourages relevant United Nations entities and agencies, in particular the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to continue to support Member States
in developing and implementing strategies and policies, upon request, at the national, regional and international
levels to address and prevent gender-related killing of women and girls;
_______________
661

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
663
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
664
Ibid., vols. 1577, 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
665
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
666
See E/CN.15/2015/16, para. 8.
662

834

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

13. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations entities and agencies, including the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the High Commissioner, UN-Women and other specialized funds
and programmes of the United Nations, to raise awareness regarding gender-related killing of women and girls;
14. Encourages Member States to collect, disaggregate, analyse and report data on gender-related killing of
women and girls, according to the International Classification of Crime for Statistical Purposes endorsed by the
Statistical Commission and, where appropriate, to the extent possible, involve civil society, academia, victims’
representatives and relevant international organizations and provide appropriate training to relevant personnel on
technical and ethical aspects of such data collection and analysis;
15. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the institutes of the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme network to continue to conduct and coordinate relevant research on
gender-related killing of women and girls, particularly in connection with the standardization of the collection,
disaggregation, analysis and reporting of data;
16. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to prepare, in collaboration with Member
States, an analytical study on gender-related killing of women and girls at the global level, containing disaggregated
data, including from relevant stakeholders, on this phenomenon to illustrate its different forms and patterns;
17. Invites the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network to
include in their work programmes the issue of gender-related killing of women and girls with a view to promoting
ways and means of more effectively preventing, investigating, prosecuting and punishing such crime, and to
develop appropriate training material;
18. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary contributions for the purposes
described above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/177
A/RE S/70 /177

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/490, para. 35)667

70/177. Technical assistance for implementing the international conventions and protocols related to
counter-terrorism
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its resolutions related to technical assistance in countering terrorism, and especially the most
recent resolutions such as resolutions 68/178 of 18 December 2013 on the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, 68/187 of 18 December 2013 on technical assistance for
implementing the international conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism, 68/276 of 13 June 2014 on
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review, 69/127 of 10 December 2014 on measures to
eliminate international terrorism and 69/197 of 18 December 2014 on strengthening the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme, in particular its technical cooperation capacity,
Taking note of relevant Security Council resolutions related to technical assistance in countering terrorism,
especially the most recent resolutions,668
Stressing again the need to strengthen international, regional and subregional cooperation to effectively
prevent and combat terrorism, in particular by enhancing the national capacity of States through the provision of
technical assistance, based on the needs and priorities identified by requesting States,
_______________
667

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
Especially resolutions 2178 (2014) adopted on 24 September 2014, 2133 (2014) of 27 January 2014, 2195 (2014) of 19 December
2014 and 2199 (2015) of 12 February 2015.
668

835

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Emphasizing the need to address the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, while fully respecting the
fundamental principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
Recalling its resolution 68/187, in which, inter alia, it called upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime to continue to provide technical assistance, upon request, for building the capacity of Member States to
become a party to and implement international conventions and protocols related to terrorism, including through
targeted programmes and the training of relevant criminal justice officials, the development of and participation in
relevant initiatives and the elaboration of technical tools and publications, in consultation with Member States,
Reiterating all aspects of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy669 and the need for States to
continue to implement the Strategy, as reaffirmed in General Assembly resolution 68/276, in which the Assembly
noted with appreciation the activities undertaken in the area of capacity-building by United Nations entities,
including the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force entities, inter alia, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, in coordination with other relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, to assist
Member States, upon their request, in implementing the Strategy, and encouraged the Task Force to ensure focused
delivery of capacity-building assistance, including in the framework of the Integrated Assistance for Countering
Terrorism initiative,
Reiterating also that it is the primary responsibility of Member States to implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, recognizing the need to enhance the coordinating and main role that the United Nations
plays in facilitating coherence in the implementation of the Strategy at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels and in providing assistance, especially in the area of capacity-building, as affirmed in pillar III of
the Strategy, and encouraging other international, regional and subregional organizations to coordinate their
activities in this regard with the United Nations,
Recalling that in its resolution 68/276 it expressed concern at the increasing flow of international recruits to
terrorist organizations, including foreign terrorist fighters, and at the threat that that posed for all Member States,
including countries of origin, transit and destination, and recalling also that it expressed concern at the increase, in
some regions, in incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking committed by terrorist groups, for any purpose,
including with the aim of raising funds or gaining political concessions, and noted that ransoms paid to terrorists
were used as one of the sources of funding for their activities, including further kidnappings,
Recalling also the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider
United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels, and Public Participation, adopted by the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015,670
Noting, in this regard, the need to continue to counter terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including
any existing, growing or potential links, in some cases, between transnational organized crime, illicit drug-related
activities, money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, in order to enhance criminal justice responses to those
crimes,
Alarmed by the destruction of cultural heritage perpetrated recently by terrorist groups in some countries,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime within the entities of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force in countering the financing of terrorism and in legal and criminal
justice responses to terrorism, and recalling the importance of coordination among United Nations entities and of the
work of the Task Force to promote accountability and transparency and avoid duplication in their work,
Affirming that States must ensure that any measure taken to counter terrorism complies with all their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Noting the work undertaken and the progress achieved in providing technical assistance for countering
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism within the framework of relevant and specialized regional and
international bodies,
_______________
669
670

836

Resolution 60/288.
Resolution 70/174, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on technical assistance in implementing the international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism,671
Noting the ongoing work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to support Member States in their
efforts in preventing and countering terrorism in the crime prevention and criminal justice context, in particular with
regard to the compilation of good practices in the area of assistance to and support for victims of terrorism,
including the role of victims in the criminal justice framework, and reiterating that this work needs to be done in
close coordination with Member States,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group,
1. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the existing international
conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
within its mandate, in close coordination with the relevant entities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, to continue to provide technical assistance to Member States for the ratification and legislative incorporation
of those international legal instruments;
2. Urges Member States to continue to strengthen international coordination and cooperation in order to
prevent and counter terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, in accordance with international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, to effectively implement relevant international instruments and United Nations
resolutions that address the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, to counter the financing of terrorism, including
through hostage-taking and kidnapping for ransom, to enter, when appropriate, into bilateral, regional and
multilateral treaties on extradition and mutual legal assistance, and to ensure adequate training of all relevant
personnel in executing international cooperation activities, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, within its mandate, to provide technical assistance, upon request, to Member States to that end, including by
continuing and enhancing its assistance related to international legal cooperation pertaining to countering terrorism
and fostering the development of strong and effective central authorities for international cooperation in criminal
matters;
3. Stresses the importance of the development and maintenance of effective, fair, humane, transparent and
accountable criminal justice systems, in accordance with applicable international law, as a fundamental basis of any
strategy to counter terrorism, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, whenever appropriate, to
take into account in its technical assistance to counter terrorism the elements necessary for building national
capacity in order to strengthen criminal justice systems and the rule of law;
4. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to strengthen the provision of
technical assistance to Member States, upon request and within its mandate, on effective measures, based on the rule
of law, for criminal justice responses addressing the prevention of terrorism, in full conformity with human rights
and fundamental freedoms;
5. Also calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical
assistance, upon request, for building the capacity of Member States to become party to and implement international
conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism, including through targeted programmes and the training of
relevant criminal justice and law enforcement officials, the development of and participation in relevant initiatives
and the elaboration of technical tools and publications, in consultation with Member States;
6. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to continue to develop
specialized legal knowledge in the area of countering and preventing terrorism and pertinent thematic areas of
relevance to the mandate of the Office and to continue to provide assistance to requesting Member States with
regard to criminal justice responses to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations as set out in the international
legal instruments and as detailed in relevant United Nations resolutions;
7. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate and in collaboration
with, when appropriate, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism
_______________
671

E/CN.15/2015/4.

837

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Implementation Task Force, to provide assistance to requesting Member States in addressing the threat of foreign
terrorist fighters, through its capacity-building activities, with regard to enhancing their cooperation and developing
relevant measures, as well as appropriate criminal justice responses, to prevent the financing, mobilization, travel,
recruitment, organization and radicalization of foreign terrorist fighters, and to ensure that any person who
participates in the financing, planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts or in supporting terrorist acts is
brought to justice in compliance with obligations under international law and applicable domestic law;
8. Encourages Member States to strengthen cooperation in enhanced operational and timely sharing of
information related to foreign terrorist fighters, as well as to cooperate and to address, as appropriate, including
through the effective exchange of information and the sharing of experiences and good practices, and to counter any
existing, growing or potential links, in some cases, between transnational organized crime, illicit drug-related
activities, money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, in order to enhance criminal justice responses to those
crimes, and calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its relevant mandates, to support the
efforts of Member States in this regard, upon request;
9. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to support, as appropriate,
the development of improved cooperation between Member States in relation to kidnapping and hostage-taking
committed by terrorist groups by providing, upon request, technical assistance to develop their capability to prevent
future incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking by terrorists and prevent terrorists from benefiting directly or
indirectly from ransom payments and political concessions;
10. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to continue to develop
its specialized legal knowledge in close consultation with Member States to continue to provide assistance to
requesting Member States so as to counter the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, to support those Member
States in effectively criminalizing, investigating and prosecuting such acts in accordance with applicable
international law on due process and fully respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to encourage the
use of the Internet as a tool for countering the spread of terrorism;
11. Further requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to continue to
support requesting Member States in the implementation of capacity-building programmes to strengthen crime
prevention and criminal justice responses to the destruction of cultural heritage by terrorists;
12. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in coordination with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, to continue to
strengthen its cooperation with international organizations and relevant entities of the United Nations system, as
well as with international, regional and subregional organizations and arrangements, in the delivery of technical
assistance, whenever appropriate;
13. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to give high priority to the
implementation of an integrated approach through the promotion of its regional and thematic programmes,
including by assisting States, as requested;
14. Welcomes the ongoing joint initiatives developed by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate, as well as by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force;
15. Expresses its appreciation to Member States that have supported the technical assistance activities of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, including through financial contributions, and invites Member States to
consider making additional sustainable voluntary financial contributions, as well as providing in-kind support,
especially in view of the need for enhanced and effective delivery of technical assistance to assist Member States
with the implementation of the relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;669
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
with sufficient resources to carry out activities within its mandate, to assist Member States, upon request, in the
implementation of the relevant elements of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution.
838

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/178
A/RE S/70 /178

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/490, para. 35)672

70/178. Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in particular
its technical cooperation capacity
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 46/152 of 18 December 1991, 60/1 of 16 September 2005, 67/1 of 19 September
2012, 69/127 of 10 December 2014, 69/149, 69/192, 69/193, 69/196, 69/197 and 69/201 of 18 December 2014,
69/281 of 28 May 2015, 69/314 of 30 July 2015 and 70/1 of 25 September 2015,
Reaffirming also its resolutions relating to the urgent need to strengthen international cooperation and
technical assistance in promoting and facilitating the ratification and implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,673 the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,674 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,675 the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,676 the
United Nations Convention against Corruption677 and all the international conventions and protocols against
terrorism,
Welcoming the results achieved by the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, held in Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015,678 including the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to
Promote the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public Participation,679
Expressing its grave concern about the negative effects of transnational organized crime on development,
peace, stability and security and human rights, at the increasing vulnerability of States to such crime and about the
growing degree of penetration of criminal organizations and their financial and economic resources into the
economy,
Expressing concern at the involvement of organized criminal groups, as well as the substantial increase in the
volume, rate of transnational occurrence and range of criminal offences related to trafficking in precious metals and
stones in some parts of the world, and the potential use of trafficking in precious metals and stones as a source of
funding for organized crime, other relevant criminal activities and terrorism,

_______________
672

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay and Zimbabwe.
673
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
674
Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.
675
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
676
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
677
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
678
See A/CONF.222/17.
679
Resolution 70/174, annex.

839

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Deeply concerned about the growing links, in some cases, between some forms of transnational organized
crime and terrorism, and recognizing that countering transnational organized crime and terrorism is a common and
shared responsibility,
Convinced that the rule of law and development are strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing, and that the
advancement of the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through crime prevention and
criminal justice mechanisms, is essential for sustained and inclusive economic growth and sustainable development
and the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, and in
this respect welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,680 which, inter alia, includes
the commitment to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice
for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels,
Emphasizing that transnational organized crime must be addressed with full respect for the principle of the
sovereignty of States and in accordance with the rule of law as part of a comprehensive response to promote durable
solutions through the promotion of human rights and more equitable socioeconomic conditions,
Encouraging Member States to develop and implement, as appropriate, comprehensive crime prevention
policies, national and local strategies and action plans based on an understanding of the multiple factors that
contribute to crime and to address such factors in a holistic manner, in close cooperation with all stakeholders,
including civil society, and in this respect stressing that social development should be an integral element of
strategies to foster crime prevention and economic development in all States,
Reaffirming its commitment and strong political will in support of effective, fair, humane and accountable
criminal justice systems and the institutions comprising them, encouraging the effective participation and inclusion
of all sectors of society, thus creating the conditions needed to advance the wider United Nations agenda, and
recognizing the responsibility of Member States to uphold human dignity, all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, in particular for those affected by crime and those who may be in contact with the criminal justice
system, including vulnerable members of society, regardless of their status, who may be subject to multiple and
aggravated forms of discrimination, and to prevent and counter crime motivated by intolerance or discrimination of
any kind,
Deeply concerned about the negative impact of corruption on development and on the enjoyment of human
rights, and recognizing the universal importance of good governance, transparency, integrity and accountability, thus
calling for a zero-tolerance approach to corruption and more effective measures to prevent and counter corruption in
all its forms, including bribery, as well as the laundering of proceeds of corruption and other forms of crime,
Bearing in mind that the return of assets is one of the main objectives as well as a fundamental principle of the
United Nations Convention against Corruption and that the States parties to the Convention are obligated to afford
one another the widest measure of cooperation in that regard,
Recognizing that, thanks to their broad membership and wide scope of application, the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime681 and the United Nations Convention against Corruption offer
important bases for international cooperation, inter alia, for extradition, mutual legal assistance and confiscation and
asset recovery, and that they provide effective mechanisms that should be further utilized and implemented,
Stressing the importance of strengthened international cooperation, based on the principles of shared
responsibility and in accordance with international law, to effectively address the world drug problem, dismantle
illicit networks and counter transnational organized crime, including money-laundering, smuggling of migrants,
trafficking in persons, trafficking in arms and other forms of organized crime, all of which threaten national security
and undermine sustainable development and the rule of law,
Noting the important contribution that public-private sector cooperation can make in efforts to prevent and
combat criminal activities, such as transnational organized crime, corruption and terrorism, in particular in the
tourism sector,
_______________
680
681

840

Resolution 70/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the commitments undertaken by Member States in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted on 8 September 2006,682 and its successive biennial reviews,
Recalling the importance of the measures to eliminate international terrorism adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 69/127 and the adoption, on 18 December 2013, of resolution 68/178 on the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
Recalling also its resolution 66/177 of 19 December 2011 on strengthening international cooperation in
combating the harmful effects of illicit financial flows resulting from criminal activities, in which it urged States
parties to the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of
1988, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption to apply fully the provisions of those Conventions, in particular measures to prevent and combat
money-laundering, including by criminalizing the laundering of proceeds of transnational organized crime, as well
as measures to enhance national confiscation regimes and international cooperation, including in asset recovery,
Expressing concern that economic resources, such as oil, oil products, modular refineries and related material,
other natural resources and other assets are made available to organized criminal and terrorist groups,
Taking into consideration all resolutions of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the
relevant resolutions of the Economic and Social Council, in particular those relating to the strengthening of
international cooperation, as well as the technical assistance and advisory services of the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the fields of crime
prevention and criminal justice, promotion and reinforcement of the rule of law and reform of criminal justice
institutions, including with regard to the implementation of technical assistance,
Noting the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations system task force on transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking for the purpose of developing an effective and comprehensive approach to
those crimes within the United Nations system, and reaffirming the crucial role of Member States in this regard, as
reflected in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the general progress made by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the delivery of
advisory services and assistance to requesting Member States in the areas of crime prevention and criminal justice
reform, corruption, organized crime, money-laundering, terrorism, kidnapping, smuggling of migrants, trafficking in
persons, including the support and protection, as appropriate, of victims, their families and witnesses, as well as drug
trafficking and international cooperation, including progress in tackling the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
with special emphasis on extradition and mutual legal assistance and the international transfer of sentenced persons,
Welcoming the adoption by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime of a regional approach to
programming, based on continuing consultations and partnerships at the national and regional levels, particularly on
its implementation, and focused on ensuring that the Office responds in a sustainable and coherent manner to the
priorities of Member States,
Reiterating its concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and welcoming the extension of the mandate of the standing open-ended intergovernmental working group
on improving the governance and financial situation of the Office,
Recalling its resolution 69/147 of 18 December 2014 and the resolutions of the Commission on Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council addressing various aspects of violence against women and girls of all ages,
and recalling also the agreed conclusions of the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
which addressed the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence against women and girls,683
Reiterating its condemnation of all forms of violence against women and girls, expressing deep concern about
gender-related killing of women and girls, recalling all its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 68/191 of
18 December 2013 and 70/176 of 17 December 2015 on taking action against gender-related killing of women and
_______________
682
683

Resolution 60/288.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.

841

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

girls, and recognizing the key role of the criminal justice system in preventing and responding to gender-related
killing of women and girls, including by ending impunity for such crimes,
Noting the significance of the United Nations Model Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of
Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice684 as a way to assist countries in
strengthening their national crime prevention and criminal justice capacities to respond to all forms of violence
against women and girls,
Recalling its resolution 69/194 of 18 December 2014, by which it adopted the United Nations Model
Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice, convinced of the importance of preventing youth crime, supporting the rehabilitation of young
offenders and their reintegration into society, protecting child victims and witnesses, including efforts to prevent
their revictimization, and addressing the needs of children of prisoners, stressing that such responses should take
into account the human rights and best interests of children and young people, consistent with the obligations of the
States parties under relevant international instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child685 and
the Optional Protocols thereto,686 and noting other relevant United Nations standards and norms in juvenile justice,
Emphasizing the relevance of international instruments and United Nations standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice related to the treatment of prisoners, in particular women and juveniles,
Recalling its resolution 68/156 of 18 December 2013, in which it reaffirmed that no one shall be subjected to
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also its resolution 65/229 of 21 December 2010 on the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of
Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules), and in this regard
encouraging the efforts of Member States to implement the Bangkok Rules,
Welcoming the adoption, by its resolution 70/175 of 17 December 2015, of the revision to the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, as the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules),
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, which constitutes an offence to human dignity
and physical integrity, human rights and development and requires a robust criminal justice response,
Underlining that, although the crime of smuggling of migrants may share, in some cases, some common
features with the crime of trafficking in persons, Member States need to recognize that they are distinct crimes and
that they require separate and complementary legal, operational and policy responses, and recalling further its
resolutions 68/179 of 18 December 2013 and 69/167 and 69/187 of 18 December 2014, in which it called upon all
Member States to protect and assist migrants, including migrant children and adolescents, and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 2014/23 of 16 July 2014 and 2015/23 of 21 July 2015,
Welcoming the work of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, established in accordance with the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted by its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010,
Concerned at the growing involvement of terrorist and organized criminal groups in all forms and aspects of
trafficking in cultural property and related offences, and alarmed by the destruction of cultural heritage perpetrated
recently by terrorist groups, which is linked to trafficking in cultural property in some countries,
Recognizing the indispensable role of crime prevention and criminal justice responses in combating all forms
and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences in a comprehensive and effective manner, and
underlining the importance of developing a practical assistance tool to support the implementation of the
International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in
_______________
684

Resolution 69/194, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
686
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
685

842

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Cultural Property and Other Related Offences687 through the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, which will support the implementation of resolutions 67/80 of 12 December 2012, 68/186 of 18 December
2013 and 69/196 and facilitate operational cooperation against all forms of trafficking in cultural property, as well as
the request to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide practical assistance in the implementation
of the Guidelines and to facilitate cooperation in this area,
Affirming that the destruction of cultural heritage, which is representative of the diversity of human culture,
erases the collective memories of a nation, destabilizes communities and threatens their cultural identity, and
emphasizing the importance of cultural diversity and pluralism as well as freedom of religion and belief for
achieving peace, stability, reconciliation and social cohesion,
Reaffirming the intrinsic value of biological diversity and its various contributions to sustainable development
and human well-being, and recognizing that wild fauna and flora in their many beautiful and varied forms are an
irreplaceable part of the natural systems of the Earth which must be protected for this generation and the generations
to come,
Emphasizing that the protection of wildlife must be part of a comprehensive approach to achieving poverty
eradication, food security, sustainable development, including the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity, economic growth, social well-being and sustainable livelihoods,
Expressing deep concern about crimes that affect the environment, including illicit trafficking in endangered
and, where applicable, protected species of wild fauna and flora, and emphasizing the need to combat such crimes
by strengthening coordinated action to eliminate, prevent and combat corruption and disrupt illicit networks and also
by coordinating international cooperation, capacity-building, criminal justice responses and law enforcement efforts,
Recalling Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolutions 22/7 on strengthening
international cooperation to combat cybercrime and 22/8 on promoting technical assistance and capacity-building to
strengthen national measures and international cooperation against cybercrime, both of 26 April 2013,688
Concerned at the growing trend of cybercrime and the misuse of information and telecommunications
technologies in multiple forms of crime,
Concerned also by the serious challenges and threats posed by trafficking in firearms, their parts and
components and ammunition, and about its links with terrorism and other forms of transnational organized crime,
including drug trafficking,
Noting international efforts to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional arms, in particular
in small arms and light weapons, as demonstrated by the adoption in 2001 of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,689 the entry into force in
2005 of the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,690 and the
entry into force in 2014 of the Arms Trade Treaty,691
Reaffirming the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated
and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem692 adopted by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session, and the joint ministerial statement of the 2014 high-level review by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on
the implementation by Member States of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action,693
_______________
687

Resolution 69/196, annex.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (E/2013/30 and Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. D.
689
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
690
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2326, No. 39574.
691
See resolution 67/234 B.
692
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.
693
Ibid., 2014, Supplement No. 8 (E/2014/28), chap. I, sect. C.
688

843

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also its resolution 67/193 of 20 December 2012, in which it decided to convene, early in 2016, a
special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem, and its decision that the special session would
review the progress in the implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action, including an assessment
of the achievements and challenges in countering the world drug problem, within the framework of the three
international drug control conventions and other relevant United Nations instruments, and recalling its resolutions
69/200 and 69/201 of 18 December 2014 and 70/181 of 17 December 2015 on the modalities of the special session,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General prepared pursuant to resolutions
64/293 and 69/195, 69/197 and 69/199 of 18 December 2014;694
2. Reaffirms its resolution 70/1, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”, which, inter alia, includes the commitment to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
at all levels;
3. Calls upon all Member States, when appropriate, to take into consideration the Doha Declaration on
Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and
Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public
Participation, adopted at the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in
Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015,679 when formulating legislation and policy directives, and to make every effort,
where appropriate, to implement the principles contained therein in conformity with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,673 the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,674 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,675 the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,676 the
United Nations Convention against Corruption677 and the international conventions and protocols related to
terrorism, and urges States parties to those conventions and protocols to make efforts towards their effective
implementation;
5. Reaffirms that the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols
thereto represent the most important tools of the international community for fighting transnational organized crime,
and notes with appreciation that the number of States parties has reached 186, which is a significant indication of the
commitment shown by the international community to combating transnational organized crime;
6. Recalls article 32 of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime681 and
General Assembly resolution 69/197, in which, inter alia, the need for the establishment of a mechanism to review
the implementation of the Convention and the Protocols thereto by States parties was reiterated, and underlines that
the review of the implementation of the Convention is an ongoing and gradual process and that it is necessary to
explore all options regarding the establishment of a mechanism to assist the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime in the review of the implementation of the Convention
and the Protocols thereto, welcomes in this regard the convening of an open-ended intergovernmental meeting with
a view to analysing such options, and invites Member States to continue the dialogue in this regard;
7. Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption to continue to provide full
support to the review mechanism adopted by the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Corruption, and notes with appreciation that the number of States parties has reached 178, which is a
significant indication of the commitment shown by the international community to combating corruption and
related crimes;
8. Welcomes the progress achieved by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention
_______________
694

844

A/70/99.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

against Corruption in the implementation of their respective mandates, and calls upon States parties to give full
effect to the resolutions adopted by those bodies, including providing information regarding compliance with
the treaties;
9. Encourages Member States to strengthen the capacity of their respective criminal justice systems to
investigate, prosecute and punish all forms of crime, while supporting an effective, fair, humane and accountable
criminal justice system and protecting the human rights and fundamental freedoms of defendants, as well as the
legitimate interests of victims and witnesses, and to ensure access to effective legal aid in criminal justice
systems;
10. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to
Member States, upon request, to strengthen the rule of law, taking also into account the work undertaken by other
United Nations entities, within existing mandates, and to continue to ensure coordination and coherence, including
through the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group of the Secretariat;
11. Reiterates the importance of providing the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme with sufficient, stable and predictable funding for the full implementation of its mandates;
12. Encourages all States to have national and local action plans for crime prevention in order to take into
account, in a comprehensive, integrated and participatory manner, inter alia, factors that place certain populations
and places at higher risk of victimization and/or of offending, and to ensure that such plans are based on the best
available evidence and good practices, and stresses that crime prevention should be considered an integral element
of strategies to foster social and economic development in all States, in accordance with the commitments contained
in General Assembly resolution 70/1;
13. Urges Member States and relevant international organizations to develop national, subregional, regional
and international strategies, as appropriate, and other necessary measures, in cooperation with the United Nations
crime prevention and criminal justice programme, to effectively address transnational organized crime, and to
strengthen all forms of cooperation to enable the return of assets illicitly acquired from corruption, in accordance
with the provisions of the United Nations Convention against Corruption for asset recovery, in particular chapter V,
with the cooperation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its existing mandate;
14. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme in
promoting effective action to strengthen international cooperation in crime prevention and criminal justice, as well
as of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the fulfilment of its mandate in crime prevention
and criminal justice, including providing to Member States, upon request and as a matter of high priority, technical
cooperation, advisory services and other forms of assistance, and coordinating with and complementing the work of
all relevant and competent United Nations bodies and offices in respect of all forms of organized crime, including
piracy and transnational organized crime committed at sea, cybercrime, the use of new information technologies to
abuse and exploit children, as well as identity-related crime, trafficking in cultural property, illicit financial flows,
economic, financial and tax crime, trafficking in precious metals and stones, counterfeiting in trademark goods,
crimes that affect the environment and illicit trafficking in endangered species of wild fauna and flora, drug
trafficking, trafficking in persons, smuggling of migrants and illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms,
direct and indirect trade in oil and refined oil products with organized criminal and terrorist groups, as well as
corruption and terrorism;
15. Calls upon Member States to strengthen cooperation at the international, regional, subregional and
bilateral levels to counter the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, including through enhanced operational and
timely information-sharing, logistical support, as appropriate, and capacity-building activities, such as those
provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to share and adopt best practices to identify foreign
terrorist fighters, to prevent the travel of foreign terrorist fighters from, into or through Member States, to prevent the
financing, mobilization, recruitment and organization of foreign terrorist fighters, to counter violent extremism and
radicalization to violence, which can be conducive to terrorism, to enhance efforts to implement deradicalization
programmes and to ensure that any person who participates in the financing, planning, preparation or perpetration of
terrorist acts or in the supporting of terrorist acts is brought to justice, in compliance with obligations under
international law, as well as applicable domestic law;
16. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to increase collaboration with intergovernmental,
international and regional organizations that have transnational organized crime mandates, as appropriate, in order to
share best practices, foster cooperation and take advantage of their unique and comparative advantage;
845

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its country and regional
offices in building capacity at the local level in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, and urges the
Office to consider regional vulnerabilities, projects and impacts in the fight against transnational organized crime in
all its forms, in particular in developing countries, when deciding to close and allocate offices, with a view to
maintaining an effective level of support to national and regional efforts in those areas;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
with adequate resources to support, in an effective manner, efforts toward the implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, the United
Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 and the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, and to discharge its functions as the secretariat of the conferences of the
parties to the conventions, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, as well as the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice, in accordance
with its mandate;
19. Urges all Member States to provide the fullest possible financial and political support to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by widening its donor base and increasing voluntary contributions, in particular
general-purpose contributions, so as to enable it to continue, expand, improve and strengthen, within its mandates,
its operational and technical cooperation activities;
20. Expresses concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, emphasizes the need to provide the Office with adequate, predictable and stable resources and to ensure their
cost-effective utilization, and requests the Secretary-General, also considering the extension of the mandate of the
standing open-ended intergovernmental working group on improving the governance and financial situation of the
Office, to continue to report, within existing reporting obligations, on the financial situation of the Office and to
continue to ensure that the Office has sufficient resources to carry out its mandates fully and effectively;
21. Invites States and other interested parties to make further voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and to the United
Nations Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery;
22. Calls upon Member States to intensify national and international efforts to eliminate all forms of
discrimination, including racism, religious intolerance, xenophobia and gender-related discrimination by, inter alia,
raising awareness, developing educational materials and programmes and considering, where appropriate, drafting
and enforcing legislation against discrimination;
23. Emphasizes the importance of protecting vulnerable members of society, regardless of their status, who
may be subject to multiple and aggravated forms of discrimination, and in that regard expresses its concern about
the increase in the activities of transnational and national organized criminal groups and others who profit from
crimes against migrants, especially women and children, without regard for dangerous and inhumane conditions and
in flagrant violation of national laws and international law;
24. Calls upon Member States to implement, when appropriate, the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules),695 as finalized by the dedicated Expert Group at
its meeting held in Cape Town, South Africa, from 2 to 5 March 2015, bearing in mind their spirit and purpose, and
to intensify their efforts to address the challenge of prison overcrowding through appropriate criminal justice
reforms, which should include, where appropriate, a review of penal policies and practical measures to reduce
pretrial detention, to enhance the use of non-custodial sanctions and to improve access to legal aid to the extent
possible, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to
Member States, upon request, in this respect;
25. Invites Member States to mainstream a gender perspective into their criminal justice systems, including
by the use of non-custodial measures for women, when appropriate, and by improving the treatment of women
_______________
695

846

Resolution 70/175, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

prisoners, taking into consideration the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Noncustodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),696 and by developing and implementing national
strategies and plans to promote the full protection of women and girls from all acts of violence and to strengthen the
crime prevention and criminal justice response to the gender-related killing of women and girls, in particular by
taking measures to support the practical capacity of Member States to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish all
forms of such crime, and welcomes in this respect the practical tools recommended by the open-ended
intergovernmental expert group on gender-related killing of women and girls at its meeting held in Bangkok from
11 to 13 November 2014;697
26. Also invites Member States to integrate child- and youth-related issues into their criminal justice reform
efforts, recognizing the importance of protecting children from all forms of violence, exploitation and abuse,
consistent with the obligations of parties under relevant international instruments, and to develop comprehensive
child-sensitive justice policies focused on the best interests of the child, consistent with the principle that the
deprivation of liberty of children should be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate
period of time;
27. Recognizes the efforts made by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to assist Member States
in developing their abilities and strengthening their capacity to prevent and combat kidnapping, and requests the
Office to continue to provide technical assistance, with a view to fostering international cooperation, in particular
mutual legal assistance, aimed at countering effectively this growing serious crime;
28. Calls upon Member States to reinforce international cooperation for preventing and combating the
smuggling of migrants and for the prosecution of smugglers, in accordance, as appropriate, with article 6 of the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime,698 and with national laws and legislation, while effectively protecting the
rights and respecting the dignity of smuggled migrants, consistent with the principles of non-discrimination and
other applicable obligations under relevant international law, taking into account the special needs of women,
children, especially when unaccompanied, and persons with disabilities and older persons, and in collaboration with
international organizations, civil society and the private sector, and in this regard calls upon the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to continue its technical assistance to Member States in accordance with the abovementioned Protocol;
29. Encourages Member States to ensure that, in investigating and prosecuting the smuggling of migrants,
the concurrent undertaking of financial investigations is considered, with a view to tracing, freezing and confiscating
proceeds acquired through that crime, and to consider the smuggling of migrants to be a predicate offence of
money-laundering;
30. Emphasizes the importance of preventing and combating all forms of trafficking in persons, and in this
regard expresses its concern about the activities of transnational and national organized criminal groups and others
who profit from such crimes, including for the purpose of organ removal, and calls upon Member States to
strengthen national efforts to combat all forms of trafficking in persons and to protect and assist the victims of
trafficking in accordance with all relevant legal obligations and in collaboration with international organizations,
civil society and the private sector;
31. Reiterates its request to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to enhance its technical
assistance to Member States, upon request, to strengthen international cooperation in preventing and combating
terrorism, including the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and its financial sources, through the facilitation of
the ratification and implementation of the universal conventions and protocols related to terrorism, in close
consultation with the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism (the Counter-Terrorism Committee) and its Executive Directorate, as well as to continue to
contribute to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and invites Member States to provide
the Office with appropriate resources for its mandate;
_______________
696

Resolution 65/229, annex.
See E/CN.15/2015/16.
698
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2241, No. 39574.
697

847

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

32. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide, within its mandate,
technical assistance to Member States, upon their request, to combat money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism through the Global Programme against Money-Laundering, Proceeds of Crime and the Financing of
Terrorism, in accordance with United Nations-related instruments and international standards, including, where
applicable, standards and relevant initiatives of regional, interregional and multilateral organizations and
intergovernmental bodies against money-laundering, inter alia and as appropriate, the Financial Action Task Force,
in accordance with national legislation;
33. Encourages Member States to enhance the effectiveness of countering criminal threats to the tourism
sector, including terrorist threats, through, when appropriate, the activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other relevant international organizations, in cooperation with the World Tourism Organization and
the private sector;
34. Affirms that attacks intentionally directed against buildings dedicated to religion, education, art, science
or charitable purposes, or historic monuments, may amount to war crimes, stresses the importance of holding
accountable perpetrators of attacks intentionally directed against the above-mentioned buildings, provided they are
not military objectives, and calls upon all States to take appropriate action to this end within their jurisdiction in
accordance with applicable international law;
35. Urges States parties to make effective use of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime for broad cooperation in preventing and combating all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural
property and related offences, including money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, especially in returning
such confiscated proceeds of crime or property to their legitimate owners, in accordance with article 14,
paragraph 2, of the Convention, and invites States parties to exchange information and statistical data on all forms
and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences, also reaffirming in this regard the importance of
the International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in
Cultural Property and Other Related Offences, as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 69/196;
36. Urges Member States to introduce effective national and international measures to prevent and combat
illicit trafficking in cultural property, including publicizing legislation, international guidelines and related technical
background documents, and offering special training for police, customs and border services, and to consider such
trafficking a serious crime, as defined in the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
37. Also urges Member States to take decisive steps at the national level to prevent, combat and eradicate the
illegal trade in wildlife, on both the supply and demand sides, including by strengthening the legislation necessary
for the prevention, investigation and prosecution of such illegal trade, as well as by strengthening enforcement and
criminal justice responses, in accordance with national legislation and international law, acknowledging that the
International Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime can provide valuable technical assistance in this regard;
38. Calls upon Member States to make illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora
involving organized criminal groups a serious crime in accordance with their national legislation and with
article 2 (b) of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
39. Also calls upon Member States to take appropriate and effective measures to prevent and combat
trafficking in precious metals and stones by organized criminal groups, including, where appropriate, the adoption
and effective implementation of the necessary legislation for the prevention, investigation and prosecution of illicit
trafficking in precious metals and stones;
40. Encourages Member States to continue to support the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
providing targeted technical assistance, within its existing mandate, to enhance the capacity of affected States, upon
their request, to combat piracy and other forms of crime committed at sea, including by assisting Member States in
creating an effective law enforcement response and strengthening their judicial capacity;
41. Notes with appreciation the work of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to conduct a
comprehensive study of the problem of cybercrime and responses to it by Member States, the international
community and the private sector, and calls upon Member States to explore specific measures designed to create a
secure and resilient cyberenvironment, to prevent and counter effectively criminal activities carried out over the
Internet, paying particular attention to identity theft, recruitment for the purpose of trafficking in persons and
848

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

protecting children from online exploitation and abuse, to strengthen law enforcement cooperation at the national
and international levels, including with the aim of identifying and protecting victims by, inter alia, removing child
pornography, in particular child sexual abuse imagery, from the Internet, to enhance the security of computer
networks and protect the integrity of relevant infrastructure, and to endeavour to provide long-term technical
assistance and capacity-building to strengthen the ability of national authorities to deal with cybercrime, including
the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of such crime in all its forms;
42. Encourages Member States to strengthen their efforts in combating cybercrime and all forms of
criminal abuse of information and telecommunications technologies, and to enhance international cooperation in
this regard;
43. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to assist Member States, upon
request, in combating the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and
ammunition, and to support them in their efforts to address the links with other forms of transnational organized
crime, through, inter alia, legislative assistance, technical support and improved data collection and analysis;
44. Calls upon Member States to intensify all efforts to address the world drug problem, based upon the
principle of common and shared responsibility and through a comprehensive and balanced approach, including
through more effective bilateral, regional and international cooperation among judicial and law enforcement
authorities, to counter the involvement of organized criminal groups in illicit drug production and trafficking and
related criminal activities and to take steps to reduce the violence that accompanies drug trafficking;
45. Recommends that Member States, as appropriate to their national contexts, adopt a comprehensive and
integrated approach to crime prevention and criminal justice reform, based on baseline assessments and data
collection and focusing on all sectors of the justice system, and develop crime prevention policies, strategies and
programmes, including ones that focus on early prevention by using multidisciplinary and participatory approaches,
in close cooperation with all stakeholders, including civil society, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance, upon request, to Member States for this purpose;
46. Invites Member States to develop national plans for the gradual adoption of the International
Classification of Crime for Statistical Purposes and to strengthen national statistical systems of criminal justice,
requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its existing mandate, to continue to strengthen the
regular collection, analysis and dissemination of accurate, reliable and comparable data and information, including,
as appropriate, data disaggregated by sex, age and other relevant criteria, and strongly encourages Member States to
share such data and information with the Office;
47. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to develop, in close cooperation
with Member States, technical and methodological tools and trend analyses and studies to enhance knowledge of
crime trends and support Member States in designing appropriate responses in specific areas of crime, in particular
in their transnational dimension, taking into account the need to make the best possible use of existing resources;
48. Encourages Member States to take relevant measures, as appropriate to their national contexts, to ensure
the diffusion, use and application of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal
justice, including the consideration and, where they deem it necessary, dissemination of existing manuals and
handbooks developed and published by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
49. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in collaboration and close consultation with
Member States and within existing resources, to continue to support the enhancement of capacity and skills in the
field of forensic sciences, including the setting of standards, and the development of technical assistance material for
training, such as manuals, compilations of useful practices and guidelines and scientific and forensic reference
material, for law enforcement officials and prosecution authorities, and to promote and facilitate the establishment
and sustainability of regional networks of forensic science providers in order to enhance their expertise and capacity
to prevent and combat transnational organized crime;
50. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on
the implementation of the mandates of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme,
reflecting also emerging policy issues and possible responses.
849

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/179
A/RE S/70 /179

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/490, para. 35)699

70/179. Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, which
constitutes an offence and a serious threat to human dignity and physical integrity, human rights and development,
Reiterating its concern that, despite sustained measures taken at the international, regional and national levels,
trafficking in persons remains one of the grave challenges facing the international community, which also impairs
the enjoyment of human rights and needs a more concerted collective and comprehensive international response,
Bearing in mind that all States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish
perpetrators of trafficking in persons and to protect and assist victims, and that not doing so violates and impairs or
nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the victims,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,700 which reaffirms the
commitment by Member States to take immediate and effective measures to, inter alia, eradicate forced labour and
end modern slavery and human trafficking,
Reaffirming the commitment made by world leaders at the Millennium Summit,701 the 2005 World Summit702
and the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held in
2010,703 to devise, enforce and strengthen effective measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in
persons, to counter the demand for trafficked victims and to protect the victims,
Recalling the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,704 the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,705 which provided the definition of the crime of trafficking in
persons, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography706 and the Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and
Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery,707
Taking note of the adoption of the Protocol of 2014 to the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), of the
International Labour Organization, which recognizes that trafficking in persons for the purposes of forced or
compulsory labour is the subject of growing international concern,
Recalling the adoption of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons by the
General Assembly in its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010, and underlining the importance of its full
implementation,
_______________
699

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Gambia, Iceland, India, Israel, Italy,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malawi, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Serbia, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United States of America, Uzbekistan and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
700
Resolution 70/1.
701
See resolution 55/2.
702
See resolution 60/1.
703
See resolution 65/1.
704
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
705
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
706
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
707
Ibid., vol. 266, No. 3822.

850

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming that the Global Plan of Action was developed:
(a) To promote universal ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, as
well as other relevant international instruments that address trafficking in persons, and to reinforce the
implementation of existing instruments against trafficking in persons,
(b) To help Member States to reinforce their political commitments and legal obligations to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons,
(c) To promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent responses at the national, regional and
international levels to counter trafficking in persons,
(d) To promote a human rights-based, gender- and age-sensitive approach in addressing all factors that
make people vulnerable to trafficking in persons and strengthening the criminal justice response, which are
necessary to prevent trafficking in persons, protect its victims and prosecute its perpetrators,
(e) To raise awareness within the United Nations system and also among States and other stakeholders, such
as the private sector, civil society and the international and national mass media, and the public at large,
(f) To foster cooperation and coordination among all relevant stakeholders, including Member States,
international organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector, and within various entities of the
United Nations system, taking into account existing best practices and lessons learned,
Recalling its resolutions 61/180 of 20 December 2006, 64/178 of 18 December 2009, 67/190 of 20 December
2012 and 68/192 of 18 December 2013 on improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons and
other relevant General Assembly resolutions on trafficking in persons,708
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2015/23 of 21 July 2015 on the implementation of the
Global Plan of Action and previous Council resolutions on trafficking in persons,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolution 23/5 of 13 June 2013, entitled “Trafficking in persons,
especially women and children: efforts to combat human trafficking in supply chains of businesses”,709 and other
relevant resolutions of the Council on trafficking in persons,
Taking note of the reference to preventing and countering trafficking in persons and the victim-oriented
approach in the context of addressing trafficking in persons in the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges
and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public Participation, adopted by the
Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Doha from 12 to 19 April
2015,710
Recalling the adoption of the Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development,711 held on 3 and 4 October 2013, and the commitment by Member States, inter alia, to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons, to protect victims of trafficking, stressing the need to establish or upgrade, as
appropriate, national and regional anti-human trafficking policies, and to reinforce cooperation on prevention, the
prosecution of traffickers and the protection of victims of trafficking,
Recognizing the important role of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons in
fostering coordination and cooperation in the global fight against trafficking in persons, in particular the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the International Labour
Organization, the International Organization for Migration, the United Nations Development Programme, the
_______________
708

Resolutions 55/67, 58/137, 59/166, 61/144, 63/156 and 63/194.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
710
Resolution 70/174, annex.
711
Resolution 68/4.
709

851

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other
intergovernmental organizations, within their existing mandates,
Recognizing also that the Inter-Agency Coordination Group, within its mandate, contributes to the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action, and taking note with appreciation of the activities of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as coordinator of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group,
Emphasizing the central role of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the global fight
against trafficking in persons, particularly in providing technical assistance to Member States, upon their request, to
implement the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, by making use of existing capacitybuilding tools, lessons learned from Member States and expertise available in other international organizations,
Recognizing the need to continue to foster a global partnership against trafficking in persons and the need to
continue to work towards an enhanced comprehensive and coordinated approach to prevent and combat trafficking
and to protect and assist victims of trafficking in persons through the appropriate national, regional and international
mechanisms,
Recognizing also the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and international cooperation mechanisms
and initiatives, including information exchanges on good practices, of Governments and of intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to address the problem of trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
Stressing the need to protect victims of trafficking from being incarcerated and prosecuted even when States
have inadequate or no formal procedures for their identification,
Recognizing that broad international cooperation between Member States and relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations is essential for effectively countering the threat of trafficking in persons and other
contemporary forms of slavery,
Recognizing also that victims of trafficking are often subject to multiple forms of discrimination and violence,
including on the grounds of gender, age, disability, ethnicity, culture and religion, as well as national or social origin,
and that these forms of discrimination may themselves fuel trafficking in persons, and that women and children
without nationality or without birth registration are particularly vulnerable to trafficking in persons,
Stressing the need to promote and protect the rights of victims of trafficking in persons and to reintegrate
victims into the community, including by taking into account, where appropriate, the Recommended Principles and
Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking712 and the commentary thereon developed by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the Guidelines on the Protection of Child Victims
of Trafficking developed by the United Nations Children’s Fund,
Welcoming the efforts of Member States, United Nations agencies, international organizations, civil society
organizations and the private sector to address the problem of trafficking in persons, including women and girls as
the most vulnerable group, and encouraging them to further enhance their efforts and cooperation, including by
sharing their knowledge and best practices as widely as possible,
Affirming that capacity-building is a very important component in combating trafficking in persons, and in this
regard stressing the need to intensify international cooperation to combat trafficking in persons, as well as technical
assistance for countries aimed at strengthening their ability to prevent all forms of trafficking, including supporting
their development programmes,
Taking note of the Khartoum process and its Declaration adopted in Khartoum on 16 October 2014 during the
Regional Ministerial Conference on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn of Africa, coordinated by the
African Union, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, which aimed to strengthen national, regional and international cooperation and build
capacities in the African countries to combat trafficking in persons and migrant smuggling,
_______________
712

852

E/2002/68/Add.1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note also of the Second Work Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons in the Western Hemisphere
2015–2018, adopted by States members of the Organization of American States at the Fourth Meeting of National
Authorities on Trafficking in Persons, held on 4 and 5 December 2014 in Brasilia,
Recognizing that the Global Plan of Action and the establishment of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, established in compliance with the Global
Plan of Action, aim at raising awareness of the situation of victims of human trafficking and at providing them with
humanitarian, legal and financial aid through established channels of assistance, such as governmental,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Reaffirming the importance of humanitarian, legal and financial aid to victims of trafficking in persons,
including through governmental, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, including the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children and the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,713
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,714
Recognizing that, in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the Conference of the Parties to the Convention is established to improve the capacity of States parties to combat
transnational organized crime and to promote and review the implementation of the Convention, including the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
1. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to, as a matter of
priority, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime704 and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,705 taking into consideration the central role of those instruments
in the fight against trafficking in persons, and also urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully
and effectively;
2. Urges Member States and other stakeholders mentioned in the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons,715 and invites the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, within
their respective mandates, to continue to contribute to the full and effective implementation of the Global Plan of
Action, including by means of strengthening cooperation and improving coordination among themselves in
achieving that goal;
3. Recalls the holding of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly during its sixty-seventh session,
from 13 to 15 May 2013, to appraise the progress achieved in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action,
which, inter alia, evinced strong political will to step up efforts against trafficking in persons;
4. Also recalls its decision to appraise, from within existing resources, on a four-year basis starting at its
seventy-second session, the progress achieved in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action in order to assess
achievements, gaps and challenges, including in the implementation of the relevant legal instruments, and therefore
decides to convene, within existing resources, a high-level meeting of the General Assembly at its seventy-second
session, in October 2017, immediately after the general debate;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly, in close cooperation with
Member States, to take all appropriate measures to arrange the high-level meeting;
6. Recalls its decision to designate 30 July as the World Day against Trafficking in Persons, to be observed
annually, and, while welcoming events held by Member States, United Nations agencies, other international
_______________
713

A/70/94.
A/69/269 and A/70/260.
715
Resolution 64/293.
714

853

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

organizations and civil society at the international, regional and national levels to mark the World Day, invites all
stakeholders to continue to observe the World Day in order to raise awareness of trafficking in persons and the
situation of the victims of this crime and for the promotion and protection of their rights;
7. Expresses support for the activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, reaffirms its
request to the Secretary-General to provide adequate support to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, and invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to the Office for the purpose of providing
assistance to Member States upon request;
8. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to cooperate with relevant international
organizations outside the United Nations system and to invite such organizations and interested Member States to
participate, when appropriate, in the meetings of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in
Persons and to keep Member States informed of the schedule of and the progress made by the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group;
9. Takes note of the consultative briefing for Member States hosted by the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group in January 2015 at United Nations Headquarters on the work and priorities of the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group in 2015 and beyond;
10. Invites the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in its capacity as coordinator of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group, and other relevant agencies of the United Nations system to continue their activities related to
the implementation of relevant international instruments and the Global Plan of Action, and invites Member States
and other international and bilateral donors to provide voluntary contributions to the Office for these purposes, in
accordance with the policies, rules and procedures of the United Nations;
11. Invites Member States to address the social, economic, cultural, political and other factors that make
people vulnerable to trafficking in persons, such as poverty, unemployment, inequality, humanitarian emergencies,
including armed conflicts and natural disasters, sexual violence, gender discrimination and social exclusion and
marginalization, as well as a culture of tolerance towards violence against women, youth and children;
12. Calls upon Member States, international organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector
to increase and support prevention efforts in countries of origin, transit and destination by focusing on the demand
that fosters all forms of trafficking and the goods and services produced as a result of trafficking in persons;
13. Encourages Member States to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, as well as with other relevant special procedures, including
the Special Rapporteur of the Council on violence against women, its causes and consequences, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, the Special Rapporteur of the Council on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and the Special Rapporteur of the Council on
contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences;
14. Calls upon Member States to continue their efforts to criminalize trafficking in persons in all its forms,
including the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or
services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs, especially concerning children,
and to condemn these practices and to investigate, prosecute and penalize traffickers and intermediaries while
providing protection and assistance to the victims of trafficking with full respect for their human rights, and invites
Member States to continue to support those United Nations agencies and international organizations that are actively
involved in victim protection;
15. Notes the second consultative meeting on strengthening partnerships with national rapporteurs and
relevant mechanisms on trafficking in persons, held in Bangkok on 21 and 22 May 2014, co-hosted by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the establishment of an
informal network of such mechanisms located all over the world in order to address trafficking in persons in a
consistent manner and to exchange information and best practices built on different national experiences;
16. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in its capacity as fund manager of the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, to continue to
encourage contributions by States and all other relevant stakeholders to the Trust Fund;
854

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Welcomes the publication in 2012 and 2014 of the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, prepared by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, looks forward to the next such report to be produced by the Office
in 2016, pursuant to the Global Plan of Action, and encourages Member States to provide to the Office evidencebased data on patterns, forms and flows of trafficking in persons, including for the purpose of the removal of organs;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its seventy-first session.
RESOLUTION 70/180
A/RE S/70 /180

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/490, para. 35)716

70/180. United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/198 of 18 December 2014 and all other relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,717
Bearing in mind that weaknesses in crime prevention lead to subsequent difficulties at the level of crime
control mechanisms, and bearing in mind also the urgent need to establish effective crime prevention strategies for
Africa, as well as the importance of law enforcement agencies and the judiciary at the regional and subregional
levels,
Aware of the devastating impact of new and more dynamic crime trends on the national economies of African
States, such as the high levels of transnational organized crime being recorded in Africa, including the utilization of
digital technology to commit all types of cybercrime, and aware also of illicit trafficking in cultural property, drugs,
precious metals, rhinoceros horns and ivory, of piracy and money-laundering and of the fact that crime is a major
obstacle to harmonious and sustainable development in Africa,
Deeply concerned about the growing links, in some cases, between some forms of transnational organized
crime and terrorism, and recognizing that countering transnational organized crime and terrorism is a common and
shared responsibility and that criminal justice procedures will have to be more cost-conscious, timely and
expeditious and sensitive to public responses to minimize or eliminate any suspicion of compromise,
Emphasizing that combating crime is a collective endeavour to meet the global challenge of organized crime
and that investment of necessary resources in crime prevention is important to that aim and contributes to
sustainable development,
Noting with concern that in most African countries the existing criminal justice system does not have
sufficiently skilled personnel and adequate infrastructure and is therefore ill-equipped to manage the emergence of
new crime trends, and acknowledging the challenges that Africa faces in litigation processes and the management of
correctional institutions,
Recognizing that the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders is a focal point for all professional efforts aimed at promoting the active cooperation and collaboration of
Governments, academics, institutions and scientific and professional organizations and experts in crime prevention
and criminal justice,
Bearing in mind the revised African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control and Crime Prevention (2013–2017),
aimed at encouraging Member States to participate in and own the regional initiatives for effective crime prevention
and good governance and strengthened justice administration,
_______________
716

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Italy, and Sierra Leone (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States).
717
A/70/121.

855

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the importance of promoting sustainable development as a complement to crime prevention
strategies,
Emphasizing the need to create necessary coalitions with all partners in the process of achieving effective
crime prevention policies,
Welcoming the undertaking and conclusion of a preliminary diagnostic study by a consultant of the Economic
Commission for Africa prior to the commencement of a full system-wide review process, including the significance
of the Institute as a viable mechanism for promoting cooperation among the relevant entities to respond to the crime
problem afflicting Africa,
Expressing concern over the continued absence of a director of the Institute, and noting the important role of
such senior management positions in ensuring the normal functioning of the Institute,
Noting with concern that the financial situation of the Institute has greatly affected its capacity to deliver
services to African Member States in an effective and comprehensive manner, and noting that one of the findings of
the preliminary diagnostic study is that the Institute urgently needs to increase its income,
Recalling the detailed description provided in the report of the Secretary-General of funding deficiencies that
have severely undermined the Institute’s capacity to serve the needs of the region, and recognizing that crime results
in the expenditure of a significant amount of resources,
Bearing in mind that the Institute is an important component of the United Nations crime prevention and
criminal justice network, and that, without the necessary funds, the Institute will fail to accomplish its vital goals of
combating drug trafficking, cybercrime and environmental crimes, among other challenges, as well as its goals of
reforming the crucial deficiencies in the region’s prosecution system and building effective and strong alliances
among law enforcement personnel, professional bodies, academic institutions, individual communities, experts and
traditional and civil authorities in order to proactively prevent crime,
Acknowledging the Member States and organizations that have maintained their commitment to the fulfilment
of their financial obligations,
1. Commends the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders for its efforts to promote, coordinate and carry out more activities within its core mandate, including
regional technical cooperation related to crime prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa, despite the
resource constraints under which it is operating;
2. Also commends the initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in strengthening its
working relationship with the Institute by supporting and involving the Institute in the implementation of a number
of activities, including those contained in the revised African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control and Crime
Prevention (2013–2017), on strengthening the rule of law and criminal justice systems in Africa;
3. Reiterates the need to strengthen further the capacity of the Institute to support national mechanisms for
crime prevention and criminal justice in African countries;
4. Also reiterates the benefits, in some cases, of the utilization of alternative remedial measures, where
appropriate, applying standards of ethical conduct and using local traditions, counselling and other emerging
correctional rehabilitation measures, consistent with the obligations of States under international law;
5. Notes the efforts of the Institute to establish contacts with organizations in those countries which are
promoting crime prevention programmes and its maintenance of close links with regional and subregional political
entities, such as the African Union Commission, the East African Community, the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the Southern African
Development Community;
6. Encourages the Institute, in cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies, to take into account the
various planning authorities in the region that focus attention on the coordination of activities that promote
development based on sustainable agricultural production and preservation of the environment in developing its
crime prevention strategies;
856

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Urges States members of the Institute that have failed to meet their financial pledges to the Institute to
pay all or part of those outstanding arrears, taking into consideration that member States are to fund 73 per cent of
the approved budget;
8. Welcomes the report of the Governing Board of the Institute, convened in Lilongwe on 29 May 2015,
which outlines the positive conclusion of the review process aimed at reinvigorating the Institute and discusses
measures to address the decline in financial support for the programmes of the Institute;
9. Also welcomes the introduction by the Institute of a cost-sharing initiative in its execution of various
programmes with Member States, partners and United Nations entities;
10. Urges all Member States and non-governmental organizations and the international community to
continue to adopt concrete practical measures to support the Institute in the development of the requisite capacity
and in the implementation of its programmes and activities aimed at strengthening crime prevention and criminal
justice systems in Africa;
11. Urges all States that have not already done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,718 as well as the United Nations
Convention against Corruption;719
12. Encourages African States that are not yet members of the Institute to consider becoming member States
in order to strengthen the fight against crime and terrorism, which hamper individual and collective development
efforts on the continent;
13. Commends the continued support provided by the Government of Uganda as host country, including
resolving the issue of the ownership of the land on which the Institute is located and facilitating the Institute’s
collaboration with other stakeholders within Uganda and the region and with international partners;
14. Also commends the efforts of the Institute in implementing several programmes in the region, which
have contributed, inter alia, to a growing set of coordinated remedial responses to crime on the basis of technical
support in facilitating mutual assistance by law enforcement agencies and the emergence of regional jurisdictions;
15. Encourages the Institute to consider focusing on specific and general vulnerabilities of each programme
country and to maximize the use of available initiatives to address crime problems with existing funds, as well as
available capacity, by creating useful coalitions with regional and local institutions;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize the financial resources necessary to
maintain the Institute with the core Professional staff required to enable it to function effectively in the fulfilment of
its mandated obligations;
17. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to work closely with the Institute,
and requests the Institute to provide the annual report on its activities to the Office as well as to the Economic
Commission for Africa Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to enhance the promotion of regional cooperation, coordination and
collaboration in the fight against crime, especially in its transnational dimension, which cannot be dealt with
adequately by national action alone;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session with a specific focus on the current and future structural, financial, administrative and operational aspects of
the Institute, giving due consideration to intensifying efforts to mobilize all relevant entities of the United Nations
system to provide the necessary financial and technical support to the Institute to enable it to fulfil its mandate,
bearing in mind that the precarious financial situation of the Institute greatly undermines its capacity to deliver
services effectively.
_______________
718
719

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

857

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/181
A/RE S/70 /181

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/491, para. 15)720

70/181. Special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem to be held in 2016
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/193 of 20 December 2012, entitled “International cooperation against the world
drug problem”, in which it decided to convene, in early 2016, a special session on the world drug problem to review
the progress made in the implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,721 including an
assessment of the achievements and challenges in countering the world drug problem, within the framework of the
three international drug control conventions and other relevant United Nations instruments,
Recalling also its resolutions 68/197 of 18 December 2013 and 69/201 of 18 December 2014, entitled
“International cooperation against the world drug problem”,
Recalling further its resolution 69/200 of 18 December 2014, entitled “Special session of the General
Assembly on the world drug problem to be held in 2016”,
1.

Welcomes Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 58/8 of 17 March 2015;722

2. Decides that the special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem shall be convened
for three days, from 19 to 21 April 2016, at United Nations Headquarters in New York, following the fifty-ninth
session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, scheduled to be held in March 2016;
3.

Also decides that the organizational arrangements for the special session shall be as follows:

(a) The special session shall consist of a general debate and interactive, multi-stakeholder round tables
conducted in parallel with the plenary;
(b) The opening of the special session shall include statements by the Secretary-General, the President of the
General Assembly, the Chair of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the President of the International Narcotics Control Board and the Director-General of
the World Health Organization;
(c) The general debate shall include statements by the regional groups, Member States, observer States and
observers, relevant international organizations and representatives of non-governmental organizations;
(d) Representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council are invited to participate in the special session in accordance with the rules of procedure and established
practice of the General Assembly;
(e) In accordance with the rules of procedure and practice developed for other special sessions of the
General Assembly, the President of the Assembly, in consultation with the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, which
will take into consideration inputs from other relevant stakeholders, including civil society, shall draw up a list of
representatives of relevant non-governmental organizations, representatives of civil society and the scientific
community, academia, youth groups and other relevant stakeholders that may participate in the special session, with
due regard to geographical balance;
(f) The Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the entity leading the preparations for the special session, shall
address in an open-ended manner, supported and guided by the President of the General Assembly, the organizational
arrangements, including chairing arrangements, speakers and participation, for the following round tables, while
_______________
720

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Economic and Social Council.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.
722
Ibid., 2015, Supplement No. 8 (E/2015/28), chap. I, sect. C.
721

858

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

considering the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,721 in line with Assembly resolutions 67/193 and 69/201:
Round table 1: Demand reduction and related measures, including prevention and treatment, as well as healthrelated issues; and ensuring the availability of controlled substances for medical and scientific purposes, while
preventing their diversion (“drugs and health”):
(i) Demand reduction and related measures, including prevention and treatment, as well as health-related
issues, including HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and care;
(ii) Ensuring the availability of controlled substances for medical and scientific purposes, while preventing
their diversion;
Round table 2: Supply reduction and related measures; responses to drug-related crime; and countering
money-laundering and promoting judicial cooperation (“drugs and crime”):
(i) Domestic, regional and cross-regional responses to drug-related crime; and countering moneylaundering, including, where appropriate, in connection with the financing of terrorism, and promoting judicial
cooperation in criminal matters;
(ii) Addressing emerging issues, including new psychoactive substances, precursors and the misuse of the
Internet;
Round table 3: Cross-cutting issues: drugs and human rights, youth, women, children and communities:
(i) Addressing drug-related issues in full conformity with the purposes and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights723 and other relevant
international law, including the three drug control conventions;
(ii)

Drugs and youth, women, children and communities;

Round table 4: Cross-cutting issues: new challenges, threats and realities in preventing and addressing the
world drug problem in compliance with relevant international law, including the three drug control conventions;
strengthening the principle of common and shared responsibility and international cooperation:
(i) New challenges, threats and realities in preventing and addressing the world drug problem in
compliance with relevant international law, including the three drug control conventions;
(ii) Strengthening the principle of common and shared responsibility and enhancing international
cooperation, including technical assistance, leading up to 2019;
Round table 5: Alternative development; regional, interregional and international cooperation on
development-oriented balanced drug control policy; addressing socioeconomic issues:
(i) Drugs, addressing socioeconomic issues and fostering alternative development, including preventive
alternative development;
(ii) Enhancing regional, interregional and international cooperation on development-oriented, balanced drug
control policy;
(g) A summary of the salient points raised during the round tables will be prepared by the Chairs of those
round tables, to be presented at the plenary;
4. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the entity leading the preparations for the special
session by addressing all organizational and substantive matters in an open-ended manner, to report to the General
Assembly at its special session on the preparations that have been undertaken for the session, through the Chair of
the Board tasked by the Commission with the preparations for the special session, which was established by the
Commission by its decision 57/2 of 4 December 2014;724
_______________
723
724

Resolution 217 A (III).
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2014, Supplement No. 8A (E/2014/28/Add.1), chap. I, sect. B.

859

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Also requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to produce a short, substantive, concise and actionoriented document comprising a set of operational recommendations, based upon a review of the implementation of
the Political Declaration and Plan of Action, including an assessment of the achievements as well as ways to address
long-standing and emerging challenges in countering the world drug problem, within the framework of the three
international drug control conventions and other relevant United Nations instruments, and decides that the
document, to be recommended for adoption at the plenary of the special session, should, inter alia, address measures
to reach an effective balance between supply and demand reduction and address the key causes and consequences of
the world drug problem, including those in the health, social, human rights, economic, justice and security fields, in
line with the principle of common and shared responsibility;
6. Reiterates the importance of an inclusive preparatory process, including extensive substantive
consultations, and encourages organs, entities and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, relevant
international and regional organizations, civil society, academia, the scientific community and other relevant
stakeholders to continue to fully contribute to the process by actively participating in the preparations by the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, in accordance with the relevant rules of procedure and established practice;
7. Encourages all Member States, observer States and observers to consider being represented at the
special session at the highest possible level;
8. Also encourages all Member States, observer States and observers to consider the possible participation
of youth representatives at the special session;
9. Reaffirms its decision, taken in resolution 67/193, to conduct the special session and its preparatory
process from within existing regular budget resources;
10. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the purposes set out in
the present resolution, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations.
RESOLUTION 70/182
A/RE S/70 /182

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 17 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/491, para. 15)725

70/182. International cooperation against the world drug problem
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session,726 the
Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction,727 the Action Plan on International Cooperation
on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development,728 the Action Plan for the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction729 and the United Nations Guiding
Principles on Alternative Development,730

_______________
725

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Spain, Suriname, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay.
726
Resolution S-20/2, annex.
727
Resolution S-20/3, annex.
728
Resolution S-20/4 E.
729
Resolution 54/132, annex.
730
Resolution 68/196, annex.

860

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem731 and the joint ministerial statement of the
2014 high-level review by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the implementation by Member States of the
Political Declaration and Plan of Action,732
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,733 the provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
addressing the world drug problem,734 the 2011 Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to
Eliminate HIV and AIDS735 and other relevant United Nations resolutions, including General Assembly resolution
69/201 of 18 December 2014,
Recalling also the adoption by the Economic and Social Council of its resolution 2012/12 of 26 July 2012 on
the strategy for the period 2012–2015 for the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, welcoming the measures
taken by the Office to develop a thematic and regional programme approach to its activities, and noting the progress
in the implementation of such an approach,
Recalling further all resolutions adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-eighth session,736
Welcoming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,737 and noting that the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals can contribute to addressing the world drug problem,
Noting the efforts of the Secretary-General to develop, within the United Nations system, an effective and
comprehensive approach to transnational organized crime and the world drug problem, and reaffirming the crucial
role of Member States in this regard,
Welcoming the efforts made by Member States to achieve the aims and comply with the provisions of the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,738 the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971739 and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances of 1988,740
Emphasizing the importance both of the universality of the three above-mentioned international drug control
conventions and of their implementation, noting that they are concerned with the health and welfare of humankind,
and reaffirming the guiding principles enshrined therein and the system of control that they embody,
Expressing concern about the negative consequences of the world drug problem, including illicit drug
markets, on the social, economic, cultural and political foundations of society,
Gravely concerned that, despite continuing increased efforts by States, relevant organizations, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, the world drug problem continues to constitute a serious threat to public health and
safety and the well-being of humanity, in particular children and young people and their families, and to the national
security and sovereignty of States, and that it undermines socioeconomic and political stability and sustainable
development,
Reaffirming that the world drug problem remains a common and shared responsibility that requires effective
and increased international cooperation and demands an integrated, multidisciplinary, mutually reinforcing and
balanced approach to supply and demand reduction strategies, including by addressing the socioeconomic factors
that have a negative impact on the issue,
_______________
731

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.
Ibid., 2014, Supplement No. 8 (E/2014/28), chap. I, sect. C.
733
Resolution 55/2.
734
See resolution 60/1.
735
Resolution 65/277, annex.
736
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 8 (E/2015/28), chap. I, sect. C.
737
Resolution 70/1.
738
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
739
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
740
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
732

861

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Stressing the need to take all appropriate measures, including legislative, administrative, social and educational
measures, to protect children and young people against the use or abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, as defined in the relevant treaties, and to prevent the use of children and young people in the illicit
production of and trafficking in such substances, and urging Governments to implement the resolutions of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs relating to this matter, including its resolutions 58/2, 58/3 and 58/5 of
17 March 2015,736
Taking into account that Member States have developed various practical approaches to address the world
drug problem within the framework of the three international drug control conventions, and stressing the need to
scientifically assess their effectiveness in achieving their goals, in particular in ensuring access to narcotic drugs for
the relief of pain and suffering, while preventing their diversion or abuse, with due respect to established and
international standards for scientific reasons,
Recognizing the importance of preventing and addressing drug-related youth crime, and stressing the
importance of developing and implementing strategies, programmes and measures focusing on families, schools
and other relevant social settings aimed at protecting children and young people from potential risk associated with
the illicit sale and purchase of controlled substances and new psychoactive substances via the Internet and
elsewhere, and supporting the rehabilitation and treatment of young offenders and their reintegration into society,
Stressing the importance of the focus placed by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-seventh session
on the issues of the prevention of drug abuse, including through education and training on drug use disorders and
sport, supporting the treatment, rehabilitation, reintegration and recovery of drug-dependent persons and other
measures aimed at minimizing the public health and social consequences of drug abuse, in accordance with national
legislation and the three international drug control conventions,
Stressing also the importance of enhancing international cooperation in the identification and reporting of and
response to new psychoactive substances and incidents involving such substances,
Noting with grave concern the increased abuse of certain drugs and the proliferation of new substances
worldwide, which are a possible threat to public health and are not controlled under the three international drug
control conventions,
Noting with grave concern also the increasing sophistication of the transnational criminal groups engaged in
the illicit manufacture and distribution of amphetamine-type stimulants worldwide, as well as the proliferation and
diversion of chemical precursors used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
Recognizing the critical importance of forensic and scientific laboratory and treatment centre data and
qualitative information in understanding the problem of illicit synthetic drugs and the range of products available on
the illicit market,
Noting the need to promote adequate availability of internationally controlled narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances for medical and scientific purposes, in accordance with national legislation, while preventing their
diversion, abuse and trafficking, in order to realize the aims of the three international drug control conventions,
Expressing its appreciation for the results already achieved by the initiatives at the bilateral, regional and
international levels, and recognizing that further positive results can be achieved with sustained and collective
efforts through international cooperation in reducing the demand and supply of illicit drugs,
Recognizing the principal role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and its subsidiary bodies, together with
the International Narcotics Control Board, as the United Nations organs with prime responsibility for drug control
matters, as well as the role of the World Health Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme, as well as the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, among
other agencies, within their respective mandates, and recognizing also the need to promote and facilitate the
effective implementation of and follow-up to the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
Reaffirming that addressing the world drug problem in all its aspects requires a political commitment and
collective efforts through international cooperation to significantly and measurably reduce illicit supply and
demand, as an integral component of a balanced and comprehensive drug control strategy, in accordance with the
862

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

principles enshrined in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session
and the measures to enhance international cooperation to counter the world drug problem,741 including the Action
Plan on International Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development, also
adopted at that session, and the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development,
Reaffirming equally that reducing drug abuse requires efforts to reduce demand, which must be demonstrated
by sustained widespread demand reduction initiatives that are age- and gender-sensitive and integrate a
comprehensive public health approach spanning the spectrum of prevention, education, early detection and
intervention, treatment, care and related support services, recovery support, rehabilitation and social reintegration of
drug users, in full compliance with the three international drug control conventions and in accordance with the
Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction, adopted by the General Assembly at its
twentieth special session, and with the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation
towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem and other relevant Assembly
resolutions,
Acknowledging the important contributions made by women in curbing the world drug problem, and
reaffirming the commitment to ensure that drug control policies, measures and interventions take into account the
specific needs and circumstances that women face in this regard, as well as the commitment to take measures to
ensure that women and men benefit equally, and without any discrimination, from strategies to combat the world
drug problem through their active involvement in all stages of programme development and policymaking,
Encouraging Member States to continue to address, as appropriate, the reasons why women face social and
structural barriers in accessing treatment for drug abuse, as well as the causes of the higher prevalence of HIV
among women who inject drugs than among their male counterparts, where applicable,
Conscious of the need to continue to raise public awareness of the risks and threats posed to all societies by the
world drug problem in all its aspects,
Noting the importance of addressing the world drug problem in a coordinated manner while taking into
consideration balanced, comprehensive and integrated drug policies that may, where appropriate, include measures
based on scientific evidence and that contribute, as appropriate, in mutual complementarity with other measures, to
strengthening national, regional and global strategies in an effort to seek effective solutions and further
achievements in response to current challenges, in compliance with the three international drug control conventions
and in the full and effective implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
Expressing concern that aspects of the world drug problem associated with illicit drug production can cause
serious harm to the environment, including deforestation, soil erosion and degradation, loss of endemic species,
contamination of the soil, groundwater and waterways and the release of greenhouse gases,
Welcoming the efforts of countries that have worked for decades to counter the world drug problem and have
acquired knowledge, experience and institutional capacities that enable them to afford cooperation to other countries
in application of the principle of common and shared responsibility,
Inviting Member States to consider, when developing crime prevention programmes, such issues as social
inclusion, the strengthening of the social fabric, access to justice, drug-related violence, the social reintegration of
offenders and access to health and education services, as well as the needs of victims of crime, and to promote a
culture of lawfulness and concern for the well-being of individuals, families and communities, with a particular
emphasis on children and youth,
Reaffirming that alternative development policies are an important component in enhancing development in
States affected by, or in some cases at risk of, the illicit cultivation of crops used for illicit drug production and
manufacture, and that they play an important role in national, regional and international development policies and in
comprehensive policies of poverty reduction and cooperation,
_______________
741

Resolutions S-20/4 A–E.

863

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing that international cooperation, coordination and stakeholder ownership are essential for the
successful implementation and sustainability of alternative development programmes and that alternative
development should be considered by all parties involved as a long-term commitment, the results of which may
require time to attain,
Encouraging Member States to endeavour to ensure that measures taken at the national and local levels in
response to economic and financial constraints do not have a disproportionate impact on the implementation of
balanced drug demand and supply reduction policies,
Recalling the adoption, by its resolution 64/182 of 18 December 2009, of the Political Declaration and Plan of
Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug
Problem, the decision, contained in the Political Declaration, on the high-level review of the implementation by
Member States of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action held by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its
fifty-seventh session, the recommendation that the Economic and Social Council devote a high-level segment to a
theme related to the world drug problem and the recommendation that the General Assembly hold a special session
to address the world drug problem,
Recalling also its resolution 67/193 of 20 December 2012, in which it decided to convene, early in 2016, a
special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem, following the high-level review by the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-seventh session in March 2014 of the implementation by Member States
of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action,
Recalling further its decision in resolution 67/193 that the General Assembly, at its special session in 2016,
would review the progress in the implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action, including an
assessment of the achievements and challenges in countering the world drug problem, within the framework of the
three international drug control conventions and other relevant United Nations instruments,
Noting its decision to conduct the special session and its preparatory process from within existing resources,
1. Reiterates its call upon States to take, in a timely manner, the measures necessary to implement the
actions and attain the goals and targets set out in the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,731 adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, and to address the general challenges and priorities for action identified
in the joint ministerial statement of the 2014 high-level review by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the
implementation by Member States of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action;732
2. Reaffirms that countering the world drug problem is a common and shared responsibility that must be
addressed in a multilateral setting, that it requires an integrated and balanced approach and that it must be carried out
in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and other provisions of
international law, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights742 and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action743 on human rights and, in particular, with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
for the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and on the basis of the principles of equal rights and mutual respect;
3. Calls upon Member States to engage in effective cooperation and practical action aimed at addressing
the world drug problem on the basis of the principle of common and shared responsibility;
4. Underlines the need for Member States to cooperate closely with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the World Health Organization, the International Narcotics Control Board and other international and
regional organizations, as well as the scientific community, including academia, in contributing to the scientific
assessment of drug demand and supply reduction policies, drug markets and drug-related crime;
5. Encourages Member States to give adequate consideration to the negative effects of the world drug
problem and its consequences on development and on society in general;
_______________
742
743

864

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Urges Member States to address the relevant socioeconomic factors that relate to the world drug
problem through a comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach that incorporates drug policies in a broader
socioeconomic and development agenda, in compliance with the three international drug control conventions;
7. Calls upon Member States to actively promote the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into the
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programmes related to the world drug problem;
8. Invites Member States to implement comprehensive drug abuse prevention strategies and measures from
a perspective that considers the individual as well as the community and society as a whole, including through
public health education on the dangers of drug abuse, violence prevention, rehabilitation and aftercare to reintegrate
former drug users into society, as well as anticipate, detect and analyse various risks to communities associated with
drug-related violence and crime;
9. Encourages Member States to consider alternatives to incarceration, noting that, in appropriate cases of
a minor nature, States may provide, as alternatives to conviction or punishment, measures such as education,
rehabilitation or social reintegration, as well as, when the offender is a drug abuser, treatment and aftercare;
10. Invites Member States to consider reviewing their drug sentencing policies and practices in order to
facilitate collaboration between justice and public health authorities in the development and implementation of
initiatives that utilize alternative measures to conviction or punishment for appropriate drug-related offences of a
minor nature, subject to the legal frameworks of Member States;
11. Undertakes to promote bilateral, regional and international cooperation, including through intelligencesharing and cross-border cooperation, aimed at countering the world drug problem more effectively, in particular by
encouraging and supporting such cooperation by those States most directly affected by illicit crop cultivation and the
illicit production, manufacture, transit, trafficking, distribution and abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances;
12. Reiterates the commitment of Member States to promoting, developing, reviewing or strengthening
effective, comprehensive, integrated drug demand reduction programmes, based on scientific evidence and covering
a range of measures, including primary prevention, education, early detection and intervention, treatment, care and
related support services, recovery support, rehabilitation and social reintegration efforts, as well as measures aimed
at minimizing the public health and social consequences of drug abuse and at promoting health and social wellbeing among individuals, families and communities and reducing the adverse consequences of drug abuse for
individuals and society as a whole, taking into account the specific needs of women and the particular challenges
posed by high-risk drug users, in full compliance with the three international drug control conventions and in
accordance with national legislation, and commits Member States to investing increased resources in ensuring
access to those interventions on a non-discriminatory basis, including in detention facilities, bearing in mind that
those interventions should also consider vulnerabilities that undermine human development, such as poverty and
social marginalization;
13. Recalls target 3.5 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,737 which aims to strengthen the
prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol;
14. Encourages Member States to develop and implement, as appropriate, comprehensive policies and
programmes that, by fostering social development, are aimed at the prevention of crime and violence and that
address the multiple factors that contribute to marginalization, crime and victimization, in close cooperation with
relevant stakeholders, including civil society, and based on scientific evidence and taking into account good
practices;
15. Reaffirms the need for Member States to review and, if necessary, strengthen coordinated measures,
enhance capacity-building to combat money-laundering arising from drug trafficking and improve judicial
cooperation, where appropriate, at the national, regional and international levels, to dismantle organized criminal
groups involved in drug trafficking, in order to provide for the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution
of the perpetrators of such crimes;
16. Recalls Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development on promoting peaceful and inclusive
societies for sustainable development, providing access to justice for all and building effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions at all levels, and recalls all of its targets;
865

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Notes the importance of an integrated approach in drug policies, including by strengthening partnerships
between the public health, development, human rights, justice and law enforcement fields and by facilitating interagency cooperation and communication, where appropriate;
18. Encourages the promotion, where appropriate, in the framework of international cooperation, of the use
of law enforcement techniques, consistent with national legislation and international law, including applicable
human rights obligations, in order to ensure that drug traffickers are brought to justice and that major criminal
organizations are disrupted and dismantled, and the implementation of the resolutions of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs relating to this matter, including resolution 58/11 of 17 March 2015;736
19. Notes with great concern the adverse consequences of drug abuse for individuals and society as a whole,
and reaffirms the commitment of all Member States to tackling those problems in the context of comprehensive,
complementary and multisectoral drug demand reduction strategies, in particular such strategies targeting children,
young people and their families;
20. Also notes with great concern the alarming rise in the incidence of HIV/AIDS and other blood-borne
diseases among injecting drug users, reaffirms the commitment of all Member States to working towards the goal of
universal access to comprehensive prevention programmes and treatment, care and related support services, in full
compliance with the three international drug control conventions and in accordance with national legislation, taking
into account all relevant General Assembly resolutions and, when applicable, the revised technical guide for
countries to set targets for universal access to HIV prevention, treatment and care for injecting drug users, issued by
the World Health Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, and requests the Office to carry out its mandate in this area in close cooperation with
relevant organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, such as the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Development Programme and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS;
21. Urges Member States, where appropriate, to develop national responses to address the issue of drugaffected driving by, inter alia, exchanging information and best practices on effective responses, including through
engagement with the international scientific and legal communities;
22. Notes with concern that the availability and accessibility of internationally controlled drugs for medical
and scientific purposes, particularly for the relief of pain and for palliative care, remains low to non-existent in many
countries of the world, and highlights the need for Member States, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the
International Narcotics Control Board, in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
World Health Organization, as appropriate, to address that situation by promoting measures to ensure their
availability and accessibility for medical and scientific purposes, in accordance with national legislation, while
simultaneously preventing their diversion, abuse and trafficking, in order to realize the aims of the three
international drug control conventions and other relevant international instruments;
23. Urges all Member States to enact comprehensive measures aimed at stemming the abuse of prescription
drugs, in particular through the establishment of awareness-raising initiatives targeting the general public and healthcare providers;
24. Acknowledges the continuing efforts made and the progress achieved in countering the world drug
problem, notes with great concern the continuing illicit production of and trafficking in opiates, the continuing illicit
manufacture of and trafficking in cocaine, the increasing illicit production of and trafficking in cannabis, the
ongoing global spread of the illicit manufacture of amphetamine-type stimulants and the increasing diversion of
precursors, as well as the related distribution and use of illicit drugs, and stresses the need to strengthen and intensify
joint efforts at the national, regional and international levels to tackle those global challenges in a more
comprehensive manner, in accordance with the principle of common and shared responsibility, including by means
of enhanced and better-coordinated technical and financial assistance;
25. Expresses its concern that, despite all the efforts of Member States and the international community,
there has been little change in the overall global situation regarding the production, use and health consequences of
illicit drugs, as reflected in the World Drug Report 2015 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and that
further efforts are required from Member States and the international community;
26. Stresses that it is absolutely imperative for Member States to strengthen international efforts in order to
achieve more effective results in addressing the world drug problem, including in the health, social, human rights,
economic, justice and security fields;
866

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

27. Recognizes that it is necessary for Member States, under the three international drug control conventions
and the fundamental principles of their domestic legal systems and national legislation, to consider, where
appropriate:
(a) Regularly reviewing and assessing their drug control policies, ensuring that they are effective,
comprehensive, balanced and aimed at promoting the health and well-being of individuals, families, communities
and society as a whole;
(b) Providing, as appropriate, comprehensive, integrated drug demand reduction programmes, based on
scientific evidence and covering a range of measures, including primary prevention, early intervention, treatment,
care, rehabilitation, social reintegration and measures aimed at minimizing the negative public health and social
impacts of drug abuse, aimed at promoting health and social well-being among individuals, families and
communities and reducing the adverse consequences of drug abuse for individuals and society as a whole;
28. Invites Member States to take appropriate measures so as to strengthen international cooperation and the
exchange of information regarding the identification of new routes and modi operandi of organized criminal groups
dedicated to the diversion or smuggling of substances frequently used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, in particular with respect to their trafficking via the Internet, and to continue to notify the
International Narcotics Control Board of such information;
29. Continues to encourage Member States to promote, in accordance with Commission on Narcotic Drugs
resolution 58/11, the sharing of information on the potential abuse of and trafficking in new psychoactive
substances, as well as the sharing of information with regard to patterns of use, risks to public health, forensic data
and best practices with respect to interventions and new and existing control measures;
30. Recognizes the progress made in the development of a consolidated international response to the
increasing availability of new psychoactive substances that may pose risks to public health and safety, including the
development of a global reference point, the early warning advisory and cooperation with Member States and
relevant regional organizations in the identification and reporting of such substances, in order to increase data
collection, improve collective understanding and find effective policy responses, requests the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to continue its efforts to enhance the capacity of Member States in this regard, and calls upon
Member States to further improve the application of the international scheduling process and to provide to the
Secretary-General, through the Office, and to the World Health Organization timely information, identifying a
national government focal point to coordinate the provision of information on substances for effective review by the
World Health Organization Expert Committee on Drug Dependence;
31. Encourages Member States to take independent national measures and to cooperate in judicial and law
enforcement activities to tackle the manufacture and distribution of new psychoactive substances and the diversion
of their precursors, including the possibility of scheduling these substances under the three international drug control
conventions;
32. Also encourages Member States to adopt measures to strengthen public awareness of the risks and
threats to and negative impacts on society posed by the abuse and production of and trafficking in illicit drugs;
33. Recognizes:
(a) That sustainable crop control strategies targeting the illicit cultivation of crops used for the production of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances require international cooperation based on the principle of shared
responsibility and an integrated and balanced approach, taking into account the rule of law and, where appropriate,
security concerns, with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the principle of nonintervention in the internal affairs of States and all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(b) That such crop control strategies include alternative development and, where appropriate, preventive
alternative development programmes, eradication and law enforcement measures;
(c) That alternative development is an important, lawful, viable and sustainable alternative to the illicit
cultivation of drug crops and an effective measure for countering the world drug problem and other drug-related
crime challenges, as well as a choice in favour of societies free of drug abuse, that it is one of the key components of
867

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

policies and programmes for reducing illicit drug production and that it is an integral part of efforts by Governments
to achieve sustainable development within their societies;
(d) That such crop control strategies should be in full conformity with article 14 of the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988740 and appropriately
coordinated and phased in accordance with national policies in order to achieve the sustainable eradication of illicit
crops and the creation of alternative legal livelihood opportunities and facilitate long-term development, noting
furthermore the need for Member States to undertake to increase long-term investment in such strategies,
coordinated with other development measures, in order to contribute to the sustainability of social and economic
development and poverty eradication in affected rural areas, taking due account of the traditional licit uses of crops
where there is historical evidence of such use and giving due consideration to the protection of the environment;
(e) That developing countries with extensive expertise in alternative development, including preventive
alternative development, as appropriate, play a significant role in promoting best practices and lessons learned from
alternative development programmes, and invites them to continue to share those best practices with States affected
by illicit crop cultivation, with a view to using them in accordance with the national specificities of each State;
34. Encourages Member States, international organizations, entities and other relevant stakeholders to take
due account of the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development730 when designing and
implementing alternative development, including preventive alternative development programmes, as appropriate,
and welcomes the adoption by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of its resolution 58/4 of 17 March 2015;736
35. Requests the international community, in particular the countries of destination, to continue to provide,
bilaterally, multilaterally or through the competent international and regional organizations, in accordance with
article 10 of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of
1988, and on the basis of the principle of shared responsibility, urgent and sufficient technical assistance and support
to the most affected transit States, in full cooperation with national authorities, in order to promote the capacities of
such States to counter the flow of illicit drugs;
36. Reiterates the urgent need for Member States to strengthen international and regional cooperation in
order to respond to the serious challenges posed by the increasing links between drug trafficking, money-laundering,
corruption and other forms of organized crime, including trafficking in persons, smuggling of migrants, trafficking
in firearms, cybercrime and, in some cases, terrorism and the financing of terrorism, and to the significant
challenges faced by law enforcement and judicial authorities in responding to the ever-changing means used by
transnational criminal organizations, including the corruption of State officials, to avoid detection and prosecution;
37. Expresses deep concern at the growing violence resulting from activities of criminal organizations
involved in drug trafficking, recognizes the increasing links between drug trafficking, including gang-related
association, and the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms in some regions of the world and the need to
prevent the spread of that problem to other regions, and urges Member States to take adequate measures, consistent
with their international treaty obligations and other relevant international standards, to fully cooperate in preventing
the acquisition and use of firearms and ammunition by those criminal organizations involved in drug trafficking and
in combating the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in such firearms and ammunition;
38. Calls upon Member States to also consider, when developing comprehensive policies to tackle the world
drug problem, measures, programmes and actions that address the needs of those affected by drug-related violence
and crime;
39. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its field offices in
building capacity at the local level in the fight against transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, and
encourages the Office to maintain an effective level of support for national and regional efforts in countering the
world drug problem;
40. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to collaborate with relevant
intergovernmental, international and regional organizations involved in addressing the world drug problem, as
appropriate, in order to share best practices and scientific standards and to maximize the benefits from their unique
comparative advantage, and to continue to provide technical assistance to Member States so as to enhance capacity
in countering the world drug problem, including enhancing the analytical work of laboratories, by carrying out
868

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

training programmes to develop indicators and instruments for the collection and analysis of accurate, reliable and
comparable data on all relevant aspects of the world drug problem and, where appropriate, by supporting requesting
States to enhance or develop new national indicators and instruments;
41. Welcomes the further collaboration, within their mandates, between the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the World Health Organization, which provides leadership and guidance to further strengthen public
health as part of a comprehensive and balanced approach to drug demand reduction based on scientific evidence,
including by intensifying efforts to mainstream gender perspectives into all policies and programmes related to the
world drug problem;
42. Invites Member States to invest, where necessary and taking into account specific needs and available
resources, in capacity-building and quality-enhancing activities for the collection and reporting of information, to
participate in joint cooperation efforts organized by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and by other
national, regional or international organizations and bodies, aimed at the exchange of technical knowledge of
experts in the area of data collection, analysis and evaluation and of practical experience in the area of drug data, and
to regularly report data and information relating to all aspects of the world drug problem to the Office through the
annual report questionnaires, and invites the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the central policymaking body of
the United Nations system on drug-related matters, to strengthen the capacity of the Office to collect, analyse, use
and disseminate accurate, reliable, objective and comparable data and to reflect such information in the World
Drug Report;
43. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue its efforts in supporting States to
establish, upon request, operational frameworks essential for communication within and across national borders and
in facilitating the exchange of information on and analysis of drug trafficking trends, with a view to increasing
knowledge about the world drug problem at the national, regional and international levels, recognizes the
importance of integrating laboratories and providing scientific support to drug control frameworks and of treating
quality analytical data as a primary source of information worldwide, and urges coordination with other
international entities, including the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL);
44. Requests all Member States to provide the fullest possible financial and political support to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by widening its donor base, as appropriate, and increasing voluntary
contributions, in particular general purpose contributions, so as to enable it to continue, expand, improve and
strengthen, within its mandates, its operational and technical cooperation activities, including with a view to
assisting Member States with the full implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, as well
as with the full implementation of relevant resolutions adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs;
45. Expresses concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, emphasizes the need to provide the Office with adequate, predictable and stable resources and to ensure their
cost-effective utilization, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report, within existing reporting
obligations, on the financial situation of the Office and to continue to ensure that the Office has sufficient resources
to carry out its mandates fully and effectively;
46. Encourages Member States and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to address
the above-mentioned issues within the mandate of the standing open-ended intergovernmental working group on
improving the governance and financial situation of the Office in order for the Office to fulfil its mandate
effectively, efficiently and with the appropriate resources;
47. Encourages the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the principal policymaking organ of the United
Nations on matters of international drug control and as the governing body of the drug programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the International Narcotics Control Board to strengthen their useful work
on the control of precursors and other chemicals used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances;
48. Urges States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to, and States parties to implement,
as a matter of priority, all the provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the
1972 Protocol,738 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,739 the United Nations Convention against
869

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto744 and the United Nations Convention against
Corruption;745
49. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide, in close collaboration
with the International Narcotics Control Board, as may be appropriate, adequate support and technical assistance to
Governments in all regions so as to enable them to implement and fully meet their obligations under conventions
and give adequate follow-up to subsequent resolutions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly, including for the strengthening of regulatory authorities and controls,
provision of information and fulfilment of reporting requirements, and urges donors to contribute to the Office for
those purposes;
50. Takes note of the resolutions adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its fifty-eighth session,736
the 2014 report of the International Narcotics Control Board746 and the recommendations contained therein and the
World Drug Report 2015, and calls upon Member States to strengthen international and regional cooperation and
coordination to counter the threat to the international community caused by the illicit production of and trafficking
in drugs, especially those in the opium group, as well as other aspects of the world drug problem, and to continue to
take concerted measures within the framework of the Paris Pact747 and other relevant regional and international
initiatives and mechanisms, such as the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan,748 also known as the “Heart of Asia” initiative, in order to strengthen cross-border cooperation
and information exchange, with a view to countering drug trafficking, with the support of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and other international and regional organizations;
51. Urges Member States to continue to actively cooperate with the International Narcotics Control Board in
the exercise of its mandate, and reiterates the need to ensure that an appropriate level of resources is made available
to the Board to enable it to engage with Governments to effectively monitor compliance by States parties with the
three international drug control conventions;
52. Emphasizes the important role that civil society plays, in particular non-governmental organizations, in
addressing the world drug problem, notes with appreciation their important contributions, and notes that
representatives of affected populations and civil society entities, where appropriate, should be enabled to play a
participatory role in the formulation and implementation of drug demand and supply reduction policy;
53. Encourages Member States to ensure that civil society plays a participatory role, where appropriate,
through consultation in the development and implementation of drug control programmes and policies, in particular
with regard to aspects of demand reduction;
54. Encourages the continued contribution of the meetings of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement
Agencies and of the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs to the strengthening of regional and international cooperation, and in this regard
welcomes the discussions conducted in Brussels from 22 to 25 June 2015, Algiers from 14 to 18 September 2015,
San Pedro Sula, Honduras, from 5 to 9 October 2015, Bangkok from 19 to 22 October 2015 and Abu Dhabi from 8
to 12 November 2015;
55. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen cooperation in addressing the world drug problem and to
seek effectiveness and comprehensiveness in the strategies and policies undertaken by regional and subregional
organizations and transregional initiatives;
56. Invites Member States, with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, donors and
other relevant international organizations, to continue to assist African States in addressing health problems and
_______________
744

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
746
International Narcotics Control Board, document E/INCB/2014/1.
747
See S/2003/641, annex.
748
A/66/601-S/2011/767, annex.
745

870

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

raising awareness of the dangers associated with the abuse of all drugs, and in this regard encourages the Office and
the African Union Commission to continue to work together to enhance the complementarities of their activities;
57. Reiterates its call upon the relevant United Nations agencies and entities and other international
organizations, and invites international financial institutions, including regional development banks, to mainstream
efforts to counter the world drug problem into their programmes, and calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to maintain its leading role by providing relevant information and technical assistance;
58. Notes the ongoing discussions in some regions on how to address the world drug problem, in the light of
the current situation and policies, and emphasizes the importance of a broad, transparent, inclusive and scientific
evidence-based discussion among Member States, with input from other relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, in
multilateral settings, on the most effective ways to counter the world drug problem consistent with the three
international drug control conventions and other relevant international instruments, in order to further implement the
commitments and targets set out in the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation
towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem;
59. Reaffirms its decision, as recommended by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, that the special session
of the General Assembly on the world drug problem in 2016 shall have an inclusive preparatory process that
includes extensive substantive consultations, allowing organs, entities and the specialized agencies of the United
Nations system, relevant international and regional organizations, civil society and other relevant stakeholders to
fully contribute to the process in accordance with the relevant rules of procedure and established practice
60. Recognizes the constructive role that parliamentarians can play in addressing the world drug problem,
and encourages their participation, as appropriate, in the preparatory process and in the special session;
61. Welcomes Human Rights Council resolution 28/28 of 27 March 2015 on the contribution of the Council
to the special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem of 2016;749
62. Reaffirms its support for the preparations for the special session, which will review the progress in the
implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated
and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, including an assessment of the achievements and
challenges in countering the world drug problem, within the framework of the three international drug control
conventions and other relevant United Nations instruments, by, inter alia, addressing measures to reach an effective
balance between supply and demand reduction measures and addressing all the consequences of the world drug
problem, including in the health, social, human rights, economic, justice and security fields;
63. Invites Member States to share their drug policy experiences as a contribution to the special session;
64. Reaffirms its resolution 69/201, in which it is stated that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the
central policymaking body within the United Nations system dealing with drug-related matters, shall lead that
process by addressing all organizational and substantive matters in an open-ended manner, and in this regard
reiterates its invitation to the President of the General Assembly to support, guide and stay involved in the
process;
65. Also reaffirms its resolution 70/181 of 17 December 2015 on the modalities of the special session, to be
held from 19 to 21 April 2016, and calls upon all Member States, organs, entities and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations, other international and regional organizations, the International Narcotics Control Board,
multilateral development banks, civil society, academia and all other relevant stakeholders to participate in the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs preparations and in the special session at the highest and widest possible level;
66. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,750 and requests that he submit to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, properly taking into
account the outcome of the special session.
_______________
749
750

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. II.
A/70/98.

871

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 70/229
A/RE S/70 /229

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/481, para. 40)751

70/229. Persons with albinism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,752 and recalling relevant international human rights
treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,753 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,753 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,754 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,755 the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women756 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,757 and the World
Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons,758
Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 24/33 of 27 September 2013 on technical cooperation for the
prevention of attacks against persons with albinism,759
Recalling also General Assembly resolution 69/170 of 18 December 2014, by which the Assembly decided to
proclaim 13 June as International Albinism Awareness Day, with effect from 2015, and Human Rights Council
resolution 28/6 of 26 March 2015,760 by which the Council established the mandate of the Independent Expert on
the enjoyment of human rights by persons with albinism,
Taking note of the preliminary report on persons with albinism submitted by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fourth session,761
Taking note also of African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights resolution 263 of 5 November 2013
on the prevention of attacks and discrimination against persons with albinism,
Expressing concern at the attacks against persons with albinism, including women and children,
Welcoming the steps taken and the efforts made by the countries concerned, including the initiation of legal
action against perpetrators of attacks against persons with albinism, public condemnation of attacks against persons
with albinism and public campaigns to raise awareness,
Expressing concern that persons with albinism are disproportionately affected by poverty, owing to the
discrimination and marginalization they face, and in this regard recognizing that there is a need for resources to
develop and implement programmes to prevent and combat prejudice and create an environment conducive to
respect for their rights and dignity,
Reaffirming the need for the participation of persons with albinism in development efforts at the national,
regional and international levels, and in this regard stressing the need to strengthen the effectiveness of national,
regional and international policy and development programmes affecting persons with albinism,
_______________
751

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chad, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Honduras,
Indonesia, Italy, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Somalia,
South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
752
Resolution 217 A (III).
753
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
754
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
755
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
756
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
757
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
758
A/37/351/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex, sect. VIII, recommendation 1 (IV).
759
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
760
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
761
A/HRC/24/57.

872

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Encourages Member States to continue to meet their obligations to uphold the rights of persons of
albinism, including the rights to life, liberty, security of person, education, work, an adequate standard of living and
the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to present a comprehensive report, using existing resources and
mechanisms, including the Independent Expert of the Human Rights Council on the enjoyment of human rights by
persons with albinism, to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-second session, under the item
entitled “Social development”, on the various social development challenges faced by persons with albinism, taking
into consideration the specific needs of women and children, including those related to social inclusion, health,
education and employment, and measures taken, with recommendations for further action to be taken by Member
States and other relevant stakeholders to address identified challenges, and encourages the Secretary-General to
gather information from all relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system for the preparation of
the report;
3. Decides, taking into account the multifaceted nature of the challenges faced by persons with albinism, to
consider the issue of persons with albinism at its seventy-second session, under the item entitled “Social
development”.
RESOLUTION 70/232
A/RE S/70 /232

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/486, para. 13)762

70/232. Rights of indigenous peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the Economic and
Social Council relating to the rights of indigenous peoples, reaffirming its resolutions 65/198 of 21 December 2010,
66/142 of 19 December 2011, 67/153 of 20 December 2012, 68/149 of 18 December 2013, 69/2 of 22 September
2014 and 69/159 of 18 December 2014, and recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 27/13 of 25 September
2014763 and 30/4 of 1 October 2015,764
Recalling also Human Rights Council resolution 30/11 of 1 October 2015 on the review of the mandate of the
Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,764
Reaffirming the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held in New York on 22 and 23 September 2014,765 in which Heads of
State and Government, ministers and representatives of Member States reiterated the important and continuing role
of the United Nations in promoting and protecting the rights of indigenous peoples, recalling the inclusive
preparatory process for the high-level plenary meeting, including the comprehensive engagement of the
representatives of indigenous peoples, and welcoming and reaffirming the commitments, measures and efforts
undertaken by States, the United Nations system, indigenous peoples and other actors in its implementation,
Encouraging the active engagement of indigenous peoples in the implementation of the outcome document of
the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,
including at the regional and global levels,
_______________
762

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Chad, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liberia, Lithuania, Malaysia,
Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United States of
America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
763
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1
and 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
764
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), chap. III.
765
Resolution 69/2.

873

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,766 and stressing the need to ensure that no one is
left behind, including indigenous peoples, who will benefit from and participate in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda,
Reaffirming the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,767 which addresses their
individual and collective rights,
Stressing the importance of promoting and pursuing the objectives of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples also through international cooperation to support national and regional efforts to
achieve the ends of the Declaration, including the right to maintain and strengthen the distinct political, legal,
economic, social and cultural institutions of indigenous peoples and the right to participate fully, if they so choose, in
the political, economic, social and cultural life of the State,
Recalling its decision, in the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, to continue at its seventieth session the consideration of
ways to enable the participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions in meetings of relevant
United Nations bodies on issues affecting them, including any specific proposal made by the Secretary-General in
this regard,
Recognizing that violence against indigenous women and girls has a negative impact on the enjoyment of their
human rights and fundamental freedoms and constitutes a major impediment to women’s full, equal and effective
participation in society, the economy and political decision-making,
Expressing concern that, in some cases, indigenous peoples’ communities frequently experience suicide rates, in
particular among indigenous youth and children, which are significantly higher than among the general population,
Bearing in mind the importance of promoting respect for the rights of indigenous children, in particular
combating the worst forms of child labour, in accordance with international law, including relevant human rights
law and international labour law obligations,
Bearing in mind also the importance of the empowerment and capacity-building of indigenous youth,
including their full and effective participation in decision-making processes in matters that affect them, including
policies, programmes and resources, where relevant, that target the well-being of indigenous youth, in particular in
the areas of health, education, employment and the transmission of traditional knowledge, languages and practices,
and the importance of taking measures to promote awareness and understanding of their rights,
Recognizing the importance of access to justice in the promotion and protection of the rights of indigenous
peoples and individuals and the need to examine and take steps to remove obstacles to justice, especially for
indigenous women, indigenous youth and indigenous persons with disabilities,
Underlining the responsibility of transnational corporations and other business enterprises to respect all human
rights, applicable laws and international principles768 and operate transparently and in a socially and
environmentally responsible manner, and emphasizing the need to refrain from negatively affecting the well-being
of indigenous peoples and to take further action towards corporate responsibility and accountability, including the
prevention, mitigation and remediation of human rights abuses,
Recognizing the value and the diversity of the cultures and the form of social organization of indigenous
peoples and their holistic traditional scientific knowledge of their lands, natural resources and environment,
Recognizing also the importance of traditional sustainable agricultural practices, including traditional seed
supply systems, as well as access to credit and other financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health care,
social services, education, training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable technologies, including efficient
irrigation, the reuse of treated wastewater and water harvesting and storage for indigenous peoples and others living
in rural areas,
_______________
766

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 61/295, annex.
768
Including the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy”
Framework (A/HRC/17/31, annex).
767

874

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Concerned about the extreme disadvantages that indigenous peoples have typically faced across a range of
social and economic indicators and about the impediments to their full enjoyment of their rights,
Stressing the need to pay particular attention to the rights and special needs of indigenous women, children,
youth, older persons and persons with disabilities, as set out in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, including in the process of protecting and promoting their access to justice,
Recalling the thirtieth anniversary of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Peoples, in 2015,
1. Notes with appreciation the work of the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, of the
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of
indigenous peoples, takes note of her report,769 and encourages all Governments to respond favourably to her
requests for visits;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on progress made in the
implementation of the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,770 urges Governments and the United Nations system, in consultation
and cooperation with indigenous peoples through their representatives and institutions, to continue to implement,
when appropriate, measures at the national level, including legislative, policy and administrative measures, to
achieve the ends of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples767 and to promote
awareness of it among all sectors of society, including members of legislatures, the judiciary and the civil service, as
well as among indigenous peoples, and invites international and regional organizations, within their respective
mandates, national human rights institutions, where they exist, civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, and other relevant actors to contribute to those efforts;
3. Reiterates the commitment of Member States to cooperating with indigenous peoples, through their own
representative institutions, to develop and implement national action plans, strategies or other measures, where
relevant, to achieve the ends of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples;
4. Reaffirms the decision to convene a high-level event to mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, to be held during the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly, in 2017, and that the event will take stock of the achievements of the preceding 10 years and
assess the remaining challenges for the rights of indigenous peoples, and also consider the further follow-up to the
Declaration, including the consideration of a third International Decade;
5. Welcomes the progress in the follow-up action to the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,
including the leadership of the Secretary-General and of the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social
Affairs, as the responsible senior official of the United Nations system, in developing, within existing resources, in
consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples, the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Peoples’
Issues and Member States, a system-wide action plan to ensure a coherent approach to achieving the ends of the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, raising awareness of the rights of indigenous
peoples and increasing the coherence of the activities of the system in this regard;
6. Encourages those States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
Convention, 1989 (No. 169), of the International Labour Organization771 to consider doing so and to consider
supporting the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and welcomes the increased
support of States for the Declaration;
7. Urges Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to continue to
contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Peoples, the Trust Fund on Indigenous Issues and
the United Nations Indigenous Peoples’ Partnership, and invites indigenous organizations and private institutions
and individuals to do likewise;
_______________
769

A/70/301.
A/70/84-E/2015/76.
771
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1650, No. 28383.
770

875

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

8. Decides to expand the mandate of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Peoples so that it
can assist representatives of indigenous peoples’ organizations and institutions to participate in the consultation
process on the procedural and institutional steps to enable the participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives
and institutions in meetings of relevant United Nations bodies on issues affecting them during the seventieth and
seventy-first sessions of the General Assembly;
9. Also decides to continue observing in New York, Geneva and other United Nations offices every year on
9 August the International Day of Indigenous Peoples, to request the Secretary-General to support the observance of
the Day from within existing resources and to encourage Governments to observe the Day at the national level;
10. Encourages States to consider including in their reports related to indigenous peoples and women
information on the progress made and challenges in the implementation of Commission on the Status of Women
resolutions 49/7 of 11 March 2005, entitled “Indigenous women: beyond the ten-year review of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action”,772 and 56/4 of 9 March 2012, entitled “Indigenous women: key actors in
poverty and hunger eradication”;773
11. Also encourages States to consider including in their national and global reports information related to
indigenous peoples on the progress made and challenges in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,766 and recognizes in this regard that quality, accessible, timely and reliable disaggregated data will be
needed to measure progress and to ensure that no one is left behind;
12. Underlines the need to intensify efforts, in cooperation with indigenous peoples, to prevent and
eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against indigenous women, children, youth, older persons and
persons with disabilities and to support measures that will ensure their empowerment and full and effective
participation in decision-making processes at all levels and in all areas and eliminate barriers to their full, equal and
effective participation in political, economic, social and cultural life;
13. Reaffirms the importance of effective accountability with regard to violence against indigenous women
and girls, including sexual violence, abuse and exploitation, and of undertaking adequate measures to combat such
violence;
14. Stresses the need to strengthen the commitment of States and the entities of the United Nations system to
mainstream the promotion and protection of the rights of indigenous peoples into development policies and
programmes at the national, regional and international levels, and encourages them to give due consideration to the
rights of indigenous peoples in achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
15. Invites the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues and the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples to give due consideration, within their
mandates, to the rights of indigenous peoples as related to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
16. Encourages Governments to redouble efforts to combat the worst forms of child labour, both in
legislation and in practice, in the context of respect for the human rights of indigenous children, including through
international cooperation, as appropriate;
17. Encourages States and entities of the United Nations system to strengthen international cooperation,
including to address the disadvantages faced by indigenous peoples, and to increase technical cooperation and
financial assistance in this regard;
18. Encourages the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and other relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in accordance with their mandates, to carry out research and
evidence-gathering on the prevalence of suicide among indigenous youth and children and good practices on its
prevention and to consider developing, as appropriate, strategies or policies, consistent with national priorities, in
cooperation with Member States, to tackle it, including through consultation with indigenous peoples, in particular
indigenous youth organizations;
_______________
772

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I,
sect. D.
773
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2012/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. D.

876

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. Requests the President of the General Assembly to conduct, within existing resources, timely, inclusive,
representative and transparent consultations with Member States, indigenous peoples’ representatives and
institutions from all regions of the world, and existing relevant mechanisms of the United Nations, on the possible
measures necessary, including procedural and institutional steps and selection criteria, to enable the participation of
indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions in meetings of relevant United Nations bodies on issues
affecting them, and also requests the President to prepare a compilation of the views presented during the
consultations, including good practices within the United Nations regarding indigenous peoples’ participation,
which will form the basis for a draft text to be finalized and adopted by the Assembly during its seventy-first
session;
20. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-first session, under the item entitled
“Rights of indigenous peoples”, and to maintain in the provisional agenda the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples”.
RESOLUTION 70/233
A/RE S/70 /233

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/489/Add.3, para. 30)774

70/233. Situation of human rights in Myanmar
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,775 the
International Covenants on Human Rights776 and other relevant human rights instruments, and recalling its previous
resolutions on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, the most recent of which is resolution 69/248 of
29 December 2014, those of the Commission on Human Rights and those of the Human Rights Council, the most
recent of which are resolutions 28/23 of 27 March 2015777 and 29/21 of 3 July 2015,778
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in Myanmar779 and the
facilitation by the Government of Myanmar of the visits of his Special Adviser to the country from 15 to 20 January,
from 24 to 26 February, from 17 to 22 March, from 22 May to 6 June, on 6 and 7 August and from 12 to
16 October 2015,
Welcoming also the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human
rights in Myanmar780 and the access granted to her during her visits to Myanmar from 7 to 16 January and from 3 to
7 August 2015,
1. Welcomes the continued positive developments in Myanmar towards political and economic reform,
democratization and national reconciliation, good governance and the rule of law and the efforts to promote and
protect human rights, recognizes the scale of the reform effort undertaken to date, and encourages the Government
of Myanmar to take further steps to consolidate the progress made and address outstanding concerns;

_______________
774

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
775
Resolution 217 A (III).
776
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
777
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
778
Ibid, chap. V, sect. A.
779
A/70/332 and Corr.1.
780
A/70/412.

877

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Also welcomes the peaceful and competitive conduct of the elections on 8 November 2015, the
participation in voting of large numbers of the people of Myanmar and the efforts made towards ensuring a credible
electoral process, commends this significant step towards democracy, encourages the authorities to continue to
ensure a transparent approach in subsequent stages of the electoral process, further welcomes the invitation and
access given to domestic and international observer organizations to monitor the elections by the Government of
Myanmar and the Union Election Commission, and encourages the authorities to implement the recommendations
made by those organizations to further strengthen Myanmar’s electoral process;
3. Expresses serious concern over, and encourages action to address, political disenfranchisement and
discriminatory disqualification of candidates, including with respect to members of the Rohingya community and
persons belonging to religious and ethnic minorities;
4. Encourages continued efforts by parties to engage in early, constructive and inclusive dialogue towards
a smooth transition to the next government, and calls upon all stakeholders to cooperate in ensuring that, during the
period between the final election announcement and the formation of the next government, there is an atmosphere
of calm and restraint, with respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as the rule of law;
5. Stresses that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief applies equally to all persons,
regardless of their religion or belief and without any discrimination as to their equal protection under the law;
6. Calls upon all actors to sustain the democratic transition of Myanmar by bringing all national
institutions, including the military, under a democratically elected, fully representative civilian government;
7. Welcomes the steps taken to strengthen good governance and the rule of law, and calls upon the
Government of Myanmar to continue such efforts, especially through continued constitutional, legislative, judicial
and institutional reform, and recalls the importance of ensuring, including through the revision of laws, that existing
and new legislation is fully compatible with democratic principles and human rights obligations and commitments,
including, as part of those obligations, the right to freedom of religion or belief, the human rights of women and
children and the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
8. Recalls the handling of certain demonstrations, and encourages the Government of Myanmar to
continue its efforts to fulfil its human rights obligations and commitments to protect the right to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly, to create and maintain a safe and enabling environment for civil
society and independent media and to take appropriate steps to ensure the safety and security of journalists, civil
society activists and human rights defenders and their freedom to pursue their activities;
9. Welcomes the recent release of some prisoners of conscience, while urging the Government of Myanmar
to resume working with the political prisoner review committee and to fulfil its commitment to the unconditional
release of all political prisoners, including those recently detained or convicted, and to provide for the full
rehabilitation of former prisoners of conscience;
10. Urges the Government of Myanmar to step up its efforts to end remaining human rights violations and
abuses, including arbitrary arrest and detention, forced displacement, rape and other forms of sexual violence,
torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, arbitrary deprivation of property, including land, and violations
of international humanitarian law in some parts of the country, and repeats its call upon the Government to take
necessary measures to ensure accountability and end impunity;
11. Welcomes the signing of the nationwide ceasefire agreement by the Government of Myanmar with eight
armed groups as a significant step and as progress towards initiating an inclusive and comprehensive national
political dialogue with the objective of achieving lasting peace, encourages the Government and remaining nonsignatory ethnic armed groups to continue discussions towards realizing the signing of the agreement, and urges all
parties to end violence and to fully implement existing ceasefire agreements, including by protecting individuals
against ongoing violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law and by
granting safe, timely, full and unhindered humanitarian access to all areas;
12. Urges the Government of Myanmar to intensify its efforts to address discrimination, human rights
violations, displacement and economic deprivation affecting members of various ethnic and religious minorities and
stateless populations, and to counter incitement to hatred and hate speech leading to violence, and expresses concern
over the recent enactment of four laws relating to issues of race and religion and continuing concern over the
1982 Citizenship Law;
878

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

13. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to ensure the rule of law and to further increase its efforts to
promote tolerance and peaceful coexistence in all sectors of society by, inter alia, further facilitating interfaith and
intercommunal dialogue, and to issue identity documents that secure the legal status and rights of all former whitecard holders in accordance with the Government’s international commitments to respect human rights without
discrimination of any kind;
14. Reiterates its serious concern about the situation of the Rohingya in Rakhine State and of other
minorities subject to marginalization and instances of human rights violations and abuses, and calls upon the
Government of Myanmar to protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all individuals, including
persons belonging to the Rohingya minority, to allow for self-identification, to ensure equal access to full citizenship
and related rights, including civil and political rights, for all stateless persons, freedom of movement, as well as the
safe and voluntary return of internally displaced persons to their communities of origin, and rapid and unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance without discrimination, to ensure equal access to services, particularly health and
education, the right to marry and birth registration and to undertake full, transparent and independent investigations
into all reports of human rights violations and abuses in order to ensure accountability and bring about
reconciliation;
15. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to ensure its full cooperation with all parties and to allow full
access for humanitarian assistance to affected persons and communities, and in this regard urges the Government to
implement the various cooperation agreements not yet implemented, made between the authorities of Myanmar and
the international community for the distribution of humanitarian aid to all affected areas, including Rakhine State,
without discrimination;
16. Underlines its strong concern at the plight of migrants, including asylum seekers, and refugees in the
Andaman Sea and the Bay of Bengal and travelling along land routes, and, welcoming the commitment by
Governments in the region to provide temporary shelter and protection for refugees, encourages the continued
efforts of the Government of Myanmar, other countries in the region, regional organizations and the international
community to save lives, to take appropriate measures to prevent and counter trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of all categories of migrants, while extending protections to victims of trafficking and smuggled
migrants, and to address the root causes of this migration;
17. Welcomes the recent signature by the Government of Myanmar of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights776 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict,781 and the Government’s progress towards ending the recruitment and
use of child soldiers, encourages consideration of the ratification of additional international human rights
conventions, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights776 and the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,782 also welcomes the engagement of the
Government with the United Nations, regional organizations and other actors, and encourages the full
implementation of relevant agreements and commitments, notably the 2012 action plan to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by the armed forces and the commitment to end forced labour by 2015;
18. Urges the Government of Myanmar to further facilitate the work of the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in Myanmar and to grant her unimpeded access to the
country, bearing in mind the lack of such access, including to Rakhine State, during her last visit, and to fulfil its
commitment, without further delay, to establish a country office with a full mandate and in accordance with the
mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
19. Encourages the international community to continue to support the Government of Myanmar in the
fulfilment of its international human rights and international humanitarian law obligations and commitments, the
implementation of its democratic transitional process, its economic and social development and its efforts towards
achieving lasting peace;
_______________
781
782

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2173, No. 27531.
Ibid., vol. 1465, No. 24841.

879

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

20. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to provide his good offices and to pursue his discussions on human rights, democracy and
reconciliation in Myanmar, involving all relevant stakeholders, and to offer technical assistance to the Government
of Myanmar in this regard, bearing in mind the considerations contained in his report of 19 August 2015 relating to
the future of the mandate of his Special Adviser on Myanmar;783
(b) To give all assistance necessary to enable the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Myanmar and
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar to discharge their mandates fully, effectively
and in a coordinated manner;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, as well as to the Human Rights Council,
on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
21. Decides to remain seized of the matter on the basis of the reports of the Secretary-General and the
Special Rapporteur.
RESOLUTION 70/234
A/RE S/70 /234

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/70/489/Add.3,
para. 30),784 by a recorded vote of 104 to 13, with 37 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Algeria, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Abstaining: Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, Congo, Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Greece, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Mali, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Singapore, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, United
Republic of Tanzania, Zimbabwe

70/234. Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights785 and
relevant international human rights treaties, including the International Covenants on Human Rights,786
_______________
783

A/70/332 and Corr.1, para. 45.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritania,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America and Yemen.
785
Resolution 217 A (III).
786
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
784

880

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic and to the principles of the Charter,
Recalling its resolutions 66/176 of 19 December 2011, 66/253 A of 16 February 2012, 66/253 B of 3 August
2012, 67/183 of 20 December 2012, 67/262 of 15 May 2013, 68/182 of 18 December 2013 and 69/189 of
18 December 2014, Human Rights Council resolutions S-16/1 of 29 April 2011,787 S-17/1 of 23 August 2011,787
S-18/1 of 2 December 2011,788 19/1 of 1 March 2012,789 19/22 of 23 March 2012,789 S-19/1 of 1 June 2012,790
20/22 of 6 July 2012,791 21/26 of 28 September 2012,792 22/24 of 22 March 2013,793 23/1 of 29 May 2013,794 23/26
of 14 June 2013,794 24/22 of 27 September 2013,795 25/23 of 28 March 2014,796 26/23 of 27 June 2014,797 27/16 of
25 September 2014,798 28/20 of 27 March 2015,799 29/16 of 2 July 2015800 and 30/10 of 1 October 2015801 and
Security Council resolutions 2042 (2012) of 14 April 2012, 2043 (2012) of 21 April 2012, 2118 (2013) of
27 September 2013, 2139 (2014) of 22 February 2014, 2165 (2014) of 14 July 2014, 2170 (2014) of 15 August
2014, 2178 (2014) of 24 September 2014, 2191 (2014) of 17 December 2014, 2209 (2015) of 6 March 2015 and
2235 (2015) of 7 August 2015 and the statements by the President of the Council of 3 August 2011,802 2 October
2013803 and 17 August 2015,804
Condemning the grave deterioration of the human rights situation and the indiscriminate killing and deliberate
targeting of civilians as such, in violation of international humanitarian law, and acts of violence that foment
sectarian tensions,
Noting with concern the culture of impunity for serious violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights law committed during the present conflict, which has provided a fertile
ground for further violations and abuses,
Recalling that, amid expressions of popular discontent over restrictions on the enjoyment of civil, political,
economic and social rights, civilian protests erupted in Dar’a in March 2011, and noting that the excessive and
violent oppression of civilian protests by the Syrian authorities, which later escalated to the direct shelling of civilian
population areas, fuelled the escalation of armed violence and extremist groups, including so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh),
Expressing outrage at the continuing escalation of violence in the Syrian Arab Republic, which has caused
more than 250,000 fatalities, including the killing of many more than 10,000 children, and in particular at the
continued widespread and systematic gross violations, as well as abuses, of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law, including those involving the continued indiscriminate use of heavy weapons and
aerial bombardments, such as the indiscriminate use of ballistic missiles, cluster munitions, barrel and vacuum

_______________
787

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. I.
Ibid., Supplement No. 53B and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.2 and Corr.1), chap. II.
789
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
790
Ibid., chap. V.
791
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. A.
792
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
793
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
794
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
795
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
796
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
797
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
798
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. IV, sect. A.
799
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. II.
800
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
801
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), chap. II.
802
S/PRST/2011/16; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2011–31 July 2012 (S/INF/67).
803
S/PRST/2013/15; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2013–31 July 2014 (S/INF/69).
804
S/PRST/2015/15.
788

881

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

bombs and chlorine gas, and the starvation of civilians as a method of combat, which are prohibited under
international humanitarian law, by the Syrian authorities against the Syrian population,
Expressing grave concern at the disproportionate use of force by the Syrian authorities against its civilians,
which caused immense human suffering and fomented the spread of extremism and extremist groups and which
demonstrates the failure of the Syrian authorities to protect its population and to implement the relevant resolutions
and decisions of United Nations bodies,
Taking note of the identical letters dated 18 June 2015 addressed to the Secretary-General, the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security Council, on behalf of 71 Member States, expressing outrage
regarding the continued bloodshed and violence against civilians in Syria, caused in particular by the systematic use
of barrel bombs,
Expressing grave concern at the spread of extremism and extremist groups, terrorism and terrorist groups, and
strongly condemning all violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law
committed in the Syrian Arab Republic by any party to the conflict, in particular so-called Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (Da’esh), militias fighting on behalf of the regime, Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist groups and other
extremist groups,
Expressing support for the work carried out by the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic, and strongly condemning the lack of cooperation by the Syrian authorities with the
Commission of Inquiry,
Noting with serious concern the observation of the Commission of Inquiry that, since March 2011, the Syrian
authorities have conducted widespread attacks against the civilian population as a matter of policy,
Recalling the statements made by the Secretary-General, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the special procedures of the Human Rights Council that crimes against humanity and war crimes are
likely to have been committed in the Syrian Arab Republic, noting the repeated encouragement by the High
Commissioner for the Security Council to refer the situation to the International Criminal Court, and regretting that a
draft resolution805 was not adopted notwithstanding broad support from Member States,
Expressing its deepest concern about the findings of the Commission of Inquiry and also the allegations
contained in the evidence presented by “Caesar” in January 2014 regarding the torture and execution of persons
incarcerated by the Syrian authorities, and underscoring the need for those allegations and similar evidence to be
collected, examined and made available for future accountability efforts,
Expressing concern that the implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014) remains largely unfulfilled, and noting the urgent need to strengthen efforts to address the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, including through protection of civilians and rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access,
Recalling its commitment to Security Council resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
Alarmed that more than 4.2 million refugees, including more than 2.8 million women and children, have been
forced to flee the Syrian Arab Republic and that 12.2 million people in the Syrian Arab Republic, of whom
6.5 million are internally displaced, require urgent humanitarian assistance, which has resulted in an influx of Syrian
refugees into neighbouring countries, other countries in the region and beyond, and alarmed at the risk the situation
presents to regional and international stability,
Expressing its profound indignation at the death of many more than 10,000 children and the many more
injured since the beginning of the peaceful protests in March 2011, and at all grave violations and abuses committed
against children in contravention of applicable international law, such as their recruitment and use, killing and
maiming, rape and attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as their arbitrary arrest, detention, torture, ill-treatment
and their use as human shields,
_______________
805

882

S/2014/348.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing its deep appreciation for the significant efforts that have been made by neighbouring countries and
other countries in the region to accommodate Syrians, while acknowledging the increasing financial, socioeconomic
and political impact of the presence of large-scale refugee and displaced populations in those countries, notably in
Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq, Egypt and Libya,
Welcoming the hosting by the Government of Kuwait of the First, Second and Third International
Humanitarian Pledging Conferences for Syria, held on 30 January 2013, 15 January 2014 and 31 March 2015, and
expressing its deep appreciation for the significant pledges of humanitarian assistance that have been made,
Welcoming also the efforts of the United Nations and the League of Arab States and all diplomatic efforts to
achieve a political solution to the Syrian crisis based on the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012,806 and
expressing its full support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Expressing its regret that the parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular the Syrian
authorities, have failed to take advantage of the opportunities to achieve a political solution and form a transitional
government with full executive powers based on the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012,
1. Strongly condemns all violations and abuses of international human rights law and all violations of
international humanitarian law committed against the civilian population, in particular all indiscriminate attacks,
including the use of barrel bombs in civilian areas and against civilian infrastructure, and demands that all parties
immediately demilitarize medical facilities and schools and comply with their obligations under international law;
2. Deplores and condemns in the strongest terms the continued armed violence by the Syrian authorities
against its own people since the beginning of the peaceful protests in 2011, and demands that the Syrian authorities
immediately put an end to all indiscriminate attacks in civilian areas and public spaces, including those involving the
use of terror tactics, airstrikes, barrel and vacuum bombs, chemical weapons and heavy artillery;
3. Also deplores and condemns in the strongest terms the continued widespread and systematic gross
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms and all violations of international humanitarian law by the
Syrian authorities, the Government-affiliated shabbiha militias and those who fight on their behalf, including those
violations involving the use of heavy weapons, aerial bombardments, cluster munitions, ballistic missiles, barrel
bombs, chemical weapons and other force against civilians, as well as the starvation of the civilian population as a
method of combat, attacks on schools, hospitals and places of worship, massacres, arbitrary executions, extrajudicial
killings, the killing and persecution of peaceful protestors, human rights defenders and journalists, arbitrary
detention, enforced disappearances, violations of women’s and children’s rights, unlawful interference with access
to medical treatment, failure to respect and protect medical personnel, torture, systematic sexual and gender-based
violence, including rape in detention, and ill-treatment;
4. Strongly condemns all human rights abuses or violations of international humanitarian law by armed
extremists, as well as any human rights abuses or violations of international humanitarian law by armed antiGovernment groups;
5. Deplores and strongly condemns the terrorist acts and violence committed against civilians by so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) and Al-Nusrah Front and their continued gross, systematic and
widespread abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, and reaffirms that terrorism,
including the actions of so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), cannot and should not be associated
with any religion, nationality or civilization;
6. Condemns in the strongest terms the gross and systematic abuse of women’s and children’s rights by socalled Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), in particular the enslavement and sexual abuse of women and
girls and the forced recruitment, use and abduction of children;
7. Reminds the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic of its obligations under the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,807 including to take effective measures
to prevent acts of torture in any territory under its jurisdiction, and calls upon all States parties to the Convention to
_______________
806
807

Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), annex II.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.

883

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

comply with any relevant obligations under the Convention, including with respect to the extradite or prosecute
principle contained in article 7 of the Convention;
8. Strongly condemns the reported persistent and widespread use of sexual violence, abuse and
exploitation, including in government detention centres, including those run by the intelligence agencies, and notes
that such acts may constitute violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law, and in
this regard expresses deep concern at the prevailing climate of impunity for sexual violence crimes;
9. Also strongly condemns all violations and abuses committed against children in contravention of
applicable international law, such as their recruitment and use, killing and maiming, rape and all other forms of
sexual violence, abductions, denial of humanitarian access and attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as their
arbitrary arrest, detention, torture, ill treatment and their use as human shields;
10. Recalls the statement made by the Chair of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic on 21 September 2015 that the Syrian authorities remain responsible for the majority of the
civilian casualties, killing and maiming scores of civilians daily, reiterates its decision to transmit the reports of the
Commission of Inquiry to the Security Council, expresses its appreciation to the Commission of Inquiry for its
briefings to members of the Security Council, and recommends the continuation of such briefings;
11. Reaffirms the Syrian authorities’ responsibility for enforced disappearances, takes note of the assessment
of the Commission of Inquiry that the Syrian authorities’ use of enforced disappearances amounts to a crime against
humanity, and condemns the targeted disappearances of young men, following Government-brokered ceasefires;
12. Demands that the Syrian authorities cooperate fully with the Commission of Inquiry, including by
granting it immediate, full and unfettered access throughout the Syrian Arab Republic;
13. Also demands that the Syrian authorities meet their responsibilities to protect the Syrian population;
14. Strongly condemns the intervention in the Syrian Arab Republic of all foreign terrorist fighters and those
foreign organizations and foreign forces fighting on behalf of the Syrian regime, particularly the Al-Quds Brigades,
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and militia groups such as Hizbullah, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq and Liwa’ Abu
al-Fadl al-Abbas, and expresses deep concern that their involvement further exacerbates the deteriorating situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic, including the human rights and humanitarian situation, which has a serious negative
impact on the region;
15. Also strongly condemns all attacks against the Syrian moderate opposition, and calls for their immediate
cessation, given that such attacks benefit so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) and other terrorist
groups, such as Al-Nusrah Front, and contribute to a further deterioration of the humanitarian situation;
16. Demands that all foreign terrorist fighters, including those who are fighting in support of the Syrian
authorities, immediately withdraw from the Syrian Arab Republic;
17. Also demands that all parties immediately put an end to all violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian law, recalls, in particular, the obligation under international
humanitarian law to distinguish between civilians and combatants and the prohibition against indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks and all attacks against civilians and civilian objects, further demands that all parties to the
conflict take all appropriate steps to protect civilians, in compliance with international law, including by desisting
from attacks directed against civilian objects, such as medical centres, schools and water stations, immediately
demilitarize such facilities, avoid establishing military positions in populated areas and enable the evacuation of the
wounded and all civilians who wish to leave besieged areas, and recalls in this regard that the Syrian authorities bear
primary responsibility for protecting its population;
18. Condemns in the strongest terms the increasing number of massacres and other mass casualty incidents,
including those which may constitute a war crime, taking place in the Syrian Arab Republic, including the
outrageous attack in Douma by the Syrian regime that struck a busy marketplace on 16 August 2015, when at least
111 civilians were killed, including women and children, and requests the Commission of Inquiry to continue to
investigate all such acts;
19. Recalls the statements made by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, indicating that the overwhelming majority of the civilian casualties in the Syrian Arab Republic have been
caused by the indiscriminate use of aerial bombardments, demands in this regard that the Syrian authorities
884

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

immediately cease any attacks on civilians, any disproportionate attacks and any indiscriminate use of weapons in
populated areas, including any indiscriminate use of weapons involving shelling and aerial bombardment, in particular
the use of barrel bombs and methods of warfare which are of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary
suffering, and recalls in this regard the obligation to respect international humanitarian law in all circumstances;
20. Stresses the need to promote accountability for those responsible for the unlawful killing of civilians, and
also stresses the importance of holding to account those responsible for all violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law;
21. Condemns the reported forced displacement of the population in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
alarming impact on the demography of the country, and calls upon all parties concerned to immediately cease all
activities related to these actions, including any activities that may amount to crimes against humanity;
22. Deplores the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, and urges the
international community to assume its responsibility for providing urgent financial support to enable the host
countries to respond to the growing humanitarian needs of Syrian refugees, while emphasizing the principle of
burden-sharing;
23. Strongly condemns the intentional denial of humanitarian assistance to civilians, from whatever quarter,
and in particular the denial of medical assistance and the withdrawal of water and sanitation services to civilian
areas, which has recently worsened, stressing that the starvation of civilians as a method of combat is prohibited
under international law, noting especially the primary responsibility of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
in this regard, and deplores the deteriorating humanitarian situation;
24. Demands that the Syrian authorities and all other parties to the conflict do not hinder the full, immediate
and safe access of the United Nations and humanitarian actors, including to besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
consistent with Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014);
25. Strongly condemns practices including abduction, hostage-taking, incommunicado detention, torture, the
brutal murder of innocent civilians and summary executions carried out by non-State armed groups and terrorist
groups, most notably so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) and Al-Nusrah Front, and underlines
that such acts may amount to crimes against humanity;
26. Deplores the suffering and torture in detention centres throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, as depicted
in the reports of the Commission of Inquiry and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as well as in the evidence presented by “Caesar” in January 2014, demands that the Syrian authorities
immediately release all persons arbitrarily detained and ensure that detention conditions are consistent with
international law, and calls upon the Syrian authorities to publish a list of all detention facilities;
27. Demands that the Syrian authorities, so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Nusrah
Front and all other groups halt the arbitrary detention of civilians and release all detained civilians;
28. Calls for the appropriate international monitoring bodies to be granted access to detainees in government
prisons and detention centres, including all military facilities referred to in the reports of the Commission of Inquiry;
29. Strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons and all indiscriminate methods of warfare in the Syrian
Arab Republic, which is prohibited under international law, and notes with grave concern the Commission of
Inquiry’s findings that the Syrian authorities have repeatedly used chlorine gas as an illegal weapon, which
constitutes a violation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction808 and is prohibited under international law;
30. Welcomes the unanimous adoption of Security Council resolution 2235 (2015), in which the Council
established an Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism to identify those involved in certain uses of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic,
and emphasizes the need to hold those responsible to account;

_______________
808

Ibid., vol. 1974, No. 33757.

885

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

31. Demands that the Syrian Arab Republic respect fully its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the decision of 27 September 2013 of the Executive Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons809 and Security Council resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2235 (2015) requiring it to declare its
programme in full and eliminate it in its entirety;
32. Also demands that all parties take all appropriate steps to protect civilians, including members of ethnic,
religious and confessional communities, and stresses that, in this regard, the primary responsibility to protect its
population lies with the Syrian authorities;
33. Strongly condemns the damage and destruction of the cultural heritage of the Syrian Arab Republic, as
well as the organized looting and trafficking of its cultural property, as outlined by the Security Council in its
resolution 2199 (2015) of 12 February 2015;
34. Emphasizes the need to ensure that all those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law or
violations and abuses of human rights law are held to account through appropriate fair and independent domestic or
international criminal justice mechanisms in accordance with the principle of complementarity, and stresses the need to
pursue practical steps towards this goal, and for this reason encourages the Security Council to take appropriate action
to ensure accountability, noting the important role that the International Criminal Court can play in this regard;
35. Welcomes the efforts of those countries outside the region that have put in place measures and policies to
assist and host Syrian refugees, encourages them to do more, and encourages other States outside the region to
consider also implementing similar measures and policies, with a view to providing Syrian refugees with protection
and humanitarian assistance;
36. Urges the international community, including all donors, to provide urgent financial support to enable
the host countries to respond to the growing humanitarian needs of Syrian refugees, while emphasizing the principle
of burden-sharing;
37. Calls upon all members of the international community, including all donors, to fulfil their previous pledges
and continue to provide much-needed support to the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other humanitarian
actors to provide humanitarian assistance to the millions of Syrians displaced both internally and in host countries;
38. Urges all Syrian parties to the conflict to take all appropriate steps to ensure the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel, personnel of the specialized agencies and all other personnel engaged in
humanitarian relief activities as required by international humanitarian law, without prejudice to their freedom of
movement and access, stresses the need not to impede or hinder these efforts, recalls that attacks on humanitarian
workers may amount to war crimes, and notes in this regard that the Security Council reaffirmed in its resolution
2191 (2014) that it will take further measures in the event of non-compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) or 2191 (2014) by any Syrian party;
39. Calls upon the international community to support the leadership and full participation of women in all
efforts aimed at finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis, as envisaged by the Security Council in its
resolutions 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013 and 2242 (2015) of 13 October 2015;
40. Reaffirms its commitment to international efforts to find a political solution to the Syrian crisis that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people for a civil, democratic and pluralistic State, with the full and effective
participation of women, and where there is no room for sectarianism or discrimination on ethnic, religious,
linguistic, gender or any other grounds, and demands that all parties work urgently towards the comprehensive
implementation of the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012,806 aiming at bringing an end to all violence, violations
and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law and the launching of a Syrian-led
political process leading to a political transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and
enables them independently and democratically to determine their future, including through the establishment of an
inclusive transitional governing body with full executive powers, which shall be formed on the basis of mutual
consent while ensuring the continuity of governmental institutions;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution by the Syrian
authorities within 45 days of its adoption.
_______________
809

886

Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), annex I.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page



70/2.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations: requests under Article 19
of the Charter ....................................................................................................................................................... 888

70/8.

Programme planning............................................................................................................................................. 888

70/9.

Pattern of conferences ........................................................................................................................................... 889

70/111.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services ......................................................................... 899

70/112.

Administration of justice at the United Nations ....................................................................................................... 901

70/113.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali...................................... 906

70/238.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors............................................ 907

70/239.

Capital master plan ............................................................................................................................................... 909

70/240.

Programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015 .................................................................................................... 911
A.

Final budget appropriations for the biennium 2014–2015 ............................................................................... 911

B.

Final income estimates for the biennium 2014–2015 ...................................................................................... 913

70/241.

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda
and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 .......................................................................... 914

70/242.

Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 ........................ 916

70/243.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals .............................................................. 918

70/244.

United Nations common system: report of the International Civil Service Commission............................................. 921

70/245.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations .................................................... 926

70/246.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations .................... 931

70/247.

Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017 ................................................. 933

70/248.

Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017......................................... 944

70/249.

Programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017 .................................................................................................... 965
A.

Budget appropriations for the biennium 2016–2017 ....................................................................................... 965

B.

Income estimates for the biennium 2016–2017 .............................................................................................. 967

C.

Financing of appropriations for the year 2016 ................................................................................................ 967

70/250.

Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium 2016–2017 ...................................................................... 968

70/251.

Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2016–2017 ............................................................................................... 969

_______________


Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chair or another officer of the Bureau of the Committee.

887

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 70/2
A/RES/70/2

Adopted at the 29th plenary meeting, on 12 October 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/416, para. 6)

70/2.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations: requests under
Article 19 of the Charter
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the Committee on Contributions on its seventy-fifth session,1

Reaffirming the obligation of Member States under Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations to bear the
expenses of the Organization as apportioned by the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its role in accordance with the provisions of Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations
and the advisory role of the Committee on Contributions in accordance with rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly;
2.

Also reaffirms its resolution 54/237 C of 23 December 1999;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to bring to the attention of Member States the deadline
specified in resolution 54/237 C, including through an early announcement in the Journal of the United Nations and
through direct communication;
4. Urges all Member States requesting exemption under Article 19 of the Charter to submit as much
information as possible in support of their requests and to consider submitting such information in advance of the
deadline specified in resolution 54/237 C so as to enable the collation of any additional detailed information that
may be necessary;
5. Agrees that the failure of the Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia and Yemen to
pay the full minimum amount necessary to avoid the application of Article 19 of the Charter was due to conditions
beyond their control;
6. Decides that the Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia and Yemen shall be
permitted to vote in the General Assembly until the end of its seventieth session.
RESOLUTION 70/8
A/RES/70/8

Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 13 November 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/439, para. 6)

70/8.

Programme planning
The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 37/234 of 21 December 1982, 38/227 A of 20 December 1983, 41/213 of
19 December 1986, 55/234 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001, 57/282 of 20 December 2002,
58/268 and 58/269 of 23 December 2003, 59/275 of 23 December 2004, 60/257 of 8 May 2006, 61/235 of
22 December 2006, 62/224 of 22 December 2007, 63/247 of 24 December 2008, 64/229 of 22 December 2009,
65/244 of 24 December 2010, 66/8 of 11 November 2011, 67/236 of 24 December 2012, 68/20 of 4 December
2013 and 69/17 of 18 November 2014,
Recalling also the terms of reference of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, as outlined in the
annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976,
Having considered the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the work of its fifty-fifth
session,2
_______________
1
2

888

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/70/11).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/70/16).

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having also considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on strengthening the role of
evaluation and the application of evaluation findings on programme design, delivery and policy directives,3 concerning
proposed revisions to the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the
Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation,4 and the report of the Secretary-General
on the consolidated changes to the biennial programme plan as reflected in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016–2017 and proposals to improve the implementation of results-based budgeting,5
1. Reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as the main subsidiary organ of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for planning, programming and coordination;
2. Re-emphasizes the role of the plenary and the Main Committees of the General Assembly in reviewing
and taking action on the appropriate recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination relevant
to their work, in accordance with regulation 4.10 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the
Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation;6
3. Stresses that setting the priorities of the United Nations is the prerogative of the Member States, as
reflected in legislative mandates;
4. Also stresses the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget preparation process, from its
early stages and throughout the process;
5. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on
proposed revisions to the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the
Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation,7 on proposals to improve the
implementation of results-based budgeting,7 on evaluation,8 on the annual overview report of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 20149 and on United Nations system support for the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development.10
RESOLUTION 70/9
A/RES/70/9

Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 13 November 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/450, para. 6)

70/9.

Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the pattern of conferences, including resolution 69/250 of 29 December 2014,
Recalling also its previous resolutions on multilingualism, including resolution 69/324 of 11 September 2015,

Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
ensure the equal treatment of the official languages of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences for 201511 and the relevant report of the
Secretary-General,12
Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,13
_______________
3

A/70/72.
A/68/74 and Corr.1.
5
A/70/80, chap. II.
6
ST/SGB/2000/8.
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/70/16), chap. II.A.
8
Ibid., chap. II.B.
9
Ibid., chap. III.A.
10
Ibid., chap. III.B.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/70/32).
12
A/70/122.
13
A/70/432.
4

889

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the provisions relating to conference services in its resolutions on multilingualism, in particular
resolution 69/324,
Reaffirming also the role of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly in administrative and budgetary
matters,
Recalling its resolution 14 (I) of 13 February 1946 and the role of the Advisory Committee as a subsidiary
body of the General Assembly,
I
Calendar of conferences and meetings
1.

Welcomes the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2015;11

2. Approves the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 2016 and
2017, as submitted by the Committee on Conferences,14 taking into account the observations of the Committee and
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make any adjustments to the biennial calendar of
conferences and meetings for 2016 and 2017 that may become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken
by the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
4. Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat has taken into account the arrangements referred to in relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly regarding the pattern of conferences, including resolutions 53/208 A of
18 December 1998, 54/248 of 23 December 1999 and 69/250 concerning Orthodox Good Friday, Yom Kippur, the
Day of Vesak, Diwali, Gurpurab, Orthodox Christmas and the official holidays of Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, and
requests all relevant intergovernmental bodies to continue to observe the applicable decisions when planning their
meetings;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any modification to the calendar of conferences and
meetings is implemented strictly in accordance with the mandate of the Committee on Conferences and other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
6. Invites Member States to include in new legislative mandates adequate information on the modalities for
the organization of conferences or meetings;
7. Recalls rule 153 of its rules of procedure, and, for resolutions involving expenditure, requests the
Secretary-General to include the modalities of conferences, taking into account the trends of similar meetings, with
a view to mobilizing conference services and documentation in the most efficient and cost-effective manner
possible;
8. Reaffirms the need to address the issue of duplications and redundancies in conference servicing, and
notes in this regard that the Economic and Social Council decided in its resolution 2013/13 of 22 July 2013 to
consider at a later date the necessity of reviewing its provisional biennial calendar of conferences and meetings in
the light of the ongoing intergovernmental consultations on the further strengthening of the Council;
II
Utilization of conference-servicing resources
9. Reaffirms the practice that, in the use of conference rooms, priority must be given to meetings of
Member States;
10. Calls upon the Secretary-General and Member States to adhere to the guidelines and procedures
contained in the administrative instruction for the authorization of the use of United Nations premises for meetings,
conferences, special events and exhibits;15
_______________
14
15

890

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/70/32), annex II.
ST/AI/416.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Emphasizes that such meetings, conferences, special events and exhibits must be consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations;
12. Notes that the overall utilization factor at the four main duty stations in 2014 was 86 per cent, that
in 2013 it was 82 per cent and that in 2012 it was 84 per cent, which is above the established benchmark of
80 per cent;
13. Welcomes the steps taken by those bodies that have adjusted their programmes of work in order to
achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources, and requests the Committee on Conferences to
intensify consultations with the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their conference-servicing
resources;
14. Also welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General to increase the utilization rates of
conference-servicing resources, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to enhance the efficiency of
conference servicing and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
15. Urges those intergovernmental bodies whose average utilization factor has for the past 10 years been
below the benchmark of 80 per cent to take that factor into account when planning their future sessions in order to
achieve that benchmark;
16. Recognizes that late starts and unplanned early endings seriously affect the utilization factor of the
bodies owing to the amount of time lost, and invites the secretariats and bureaux of bodies to pay adequate attention
to avoiding late starts and unplanned early endings;
17. Notes that for meetings held in New York of bodies entitled to meet “as required”, 97 per cent of
requests for interpretation were met in 2014, compared with 98 per cent in 2013 and 97 per cent in 2012, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to impress upon such bodies the need to continue to improve the
utilization of the conference services provided and to report on the provision of conference services to those bodies
through the Committee on Conferences;
18. Reiterates its request to intergovernmental bodies to review their meeting entitlements and to plan and
adjust their programmes of work on the basis of their actual utilization of conference-servicing resources in order to
improve their efficient use of conference services;
19. Recognizes the importance of meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States for the
smooth functioning of the sessions of intergovernmental bodies, requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far
as possible, all requests for conference services for the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member
States are met, and requests the Secretariat to inform the requesters as early as possible about the availability of
conference services, including interpretation, as well as about any changes that might occur before the holding of
meetings;
20. Notes that the percentage of meetings held by regional and other major groupings of Member States that
were provided with interpretation services at the four main duty stations was 85 per cent in 2014, as compared with
93 per cent in 2013 and 91 per cent in 2012, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to employ innovative
means to address the difficulties experienced by Member States owing to the lack of conference services for some
meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States and to report thereon to the General Assembly
through the Committee on Conferences;
21. Once again urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the planning stage to take into account
the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their
programmes of work and to notify conference services, well in advance, of any cancellations so that unutilized
conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be reassigned to meetings of regional and other major
groupings of Member States;
22. Welcomes the efforts of all users of conference services to inform the Secretariat as early as possible of
any cancellation of service requests so as to allow for such services to be smoothly redeployed to other meetings;
23. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with several resolutions of the General Assembly, including
resolution 69/250, paragraph 28, in conformity with the headquarters rule, all meetings of Nairobi-based United
Nations bodies were held in Nairobi in 2014, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the Assembly
at its seventy-first session through the Committee on Conferences;
891

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Notes the ongoing efforts aimed at improving the conference facilities at the Economic Commission for
Africa, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to ensure that the improvement of the facilities, in
particular Africa Hall, is completed in a timely manner;
25. Recognizes the improvement in the rate of utilization of the conference centre of the Economic
Commission for Africa, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore, including with such
partners as the African Union, additional means to increase the utilization of the conference centre and to report
thereon, including on the impact of the initiatives of the Commission, to the General Assembly;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to encourage the heads of entities of the United Nations
system to use as a matter of priority, when applicable, the conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa
to ensure greater utilization of the conference facilities;
27. Recognizes the proactive efforts of the Secretary-General to identify ways to enhance efficiency and
effectiveness in conference services;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts aimed at improving conference servicing at the
four main duty stations, including through addressing or eliminating possible duplication, overlap and redundancy,
and identifying innovative ideas, potential synergies and other cost-saving measures, without compromising quality
or affecting the provision of services, and to report annually on the progress made in this regard;
29. Reiterates its request to the Committee on Conferences that it consult those bodies that have consistently
utilized less than the applicable benchmark of their allocated resources for the past three years, with a view to
making appropriate recommendations in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources,
and urges the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their conference-servicing resources to work more
closely with the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat and to consider
changes to their programmes of work, as appropriate, including adjustments based on previous patterns of recurring
agenda items, with a view to making improvements in their utilization factors;
30. Requests the Chair of the Committee on Conferences to continue the practice of addressing a letter to the
presiding officers of intergovernmental bodies based at duty stations other than New York if their utilization factor
falls below the benchmark of 80 per cent;
31. Notes the successful completion of the capital master plan and that meeting room capacity has been fully
restored, with the addition of three new rooms;
32. Re-emphasizes the need to continue to improve all conference facilities, including the videoconferencing
infrastructure, in all four main duty stations and in the regional commissions, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to report thereon no later than at the seventy-first session of the General Assembly;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Member States on initiatives that affect the utilization of
conference services and conference facilities;
34. Welcomes the measures taken to ensure access to and use of conference services and conference
facilities for persons with disabilities, including the establishment of the Accessibility Centre, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue further efforts in this regard and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to address issues related to the accessibility of conference
facilities as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
III
Integrated global management
36. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Secretary-General in the context of the integrated global
management initiative to establish and implement in the four main duty stations common performance indicators
and single information technology systems (such as gData, gDoc, gMeets and gText), and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
37. Recalls paragraph 24 of the report of the Secretary-General,12 and requests the Secretary-General to
complete internal reviews concerning accountability mechanisms and the clear delineation of responsibility between
892

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management and the Directors-General of the
United Nations Offices at Geneva, Nairobi and Vienna for conference management policies, operations and
resource utilization, requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session, and in this regard recalls section III, paragraph 15, of its resolution 66/233 of 24 December 2011,
section III, paragraph 2, of its resolution 67/237 of 24 December 2012, paragraph 38 of its resolution 68/251 of
27 December 2013 and paragraph 48 of its resolution 69/250;
38. Notes the initiatives undertaken in the context of integrated global management aimed at streamlining
procedures, achieving economies of scale and improving the quality of conference services, and in this regard
stresses the importance of ensuring the equal treatment of conference-servicing staff, as well as the principle of
equal grade for equal work at the four main duty stations;
39. Also notes that the effects of workload-sharing in the context of global document management remain
minimal, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek ways to promote workload-sharing among the four
main duty stations and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
40. Emphasizes that the major goals of the Department are to provide high-quality documents in a timely
manner in all official languages, in accordance with established regulations, as well as high-quality conference
services to Member States at all duty stations, and to achieve those aims as efficiently and cost-effectively as
possible, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
41. Notes that the pool of language professionals at duty stations is uneven in terms of language
combinations, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to develop recruitment, subcontracting and
outreach policies that take full account of these imbalances and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session;
42. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are
provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving the maximum quality
of services, with full respect for the specificities of the six official languages and taking into account their respective
workloads;
43. Reiterates the need for the Secretary-General to ensure the compatibility of technologies used in all duty
stations and to ensure that they are user-friendly in all official languages;
44. Takes note of the progress made in the development and implementation of the conference management
software gData, gDoc, gMeets and gText, and requests the Secretary-General to include all relevant information on
their operation, maintenance and harmonization with existing systems, as appropriate, in the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
45. Notes the development of an experimental statistical machine translation system (Tapta4UN) to
accelerate translation services for some categories of documents, and requests the Secretary-General to report on
updates, including cost-benefit analysis and quality preservation and control, about this system to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session, through the Committee on Conferences;
46. Reiterates that the satisfaction of Member States is a key performance indicator in conference
management and conference services;
47. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that measures taken by the Department to seek the
evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to them, as a key performance
indicator of the Department, provide equal opportunities to Member States to present their evaluations in the six
official languages of the United Nations and are in full compliance with relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly, through the Committee on Conferences, on
progress made in this regard;
48. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore best practices and techniques in client
satisfaction evaluations, to seek a larger rate of response to surveys on quality and to report regularly to the General
Assembly on the results achieved;
49. Welcomes the efforts made by the Department to seek the evaluation by Member States of the quality of
the conference services provided to them, taking into consideration comments and complaints raised by Member
States either in writing or during meetings, and requests the Secretary-General to intensify his exploration of
893

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

innovative ways to systematically capture and analyse feedback from Member States and Chairs and Secretaries of
committees on the quality of conference services and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the
Committee on Conferences;
50. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek evaluation of the quality of the conference services
provided by the Secretariat through meetings held at least once a year, but not exceeding twice a year, guaranteeing
that Member States are able to present their evaluations and seek information equally in any of the six official
languages of the United Nations on any conference-related or language-specific matter;
51. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly and its Committee on Conferences
apprised of progress made in achieving integrated global management and to provide accurate and up-to-date
information on new initiatives falling under the purview of the Committee;
52. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General provide in his next report on the pattern of conferences
information about the financial savings achieved through the implementation of the integrated global management
projects, as requested in section III, paragraph 4, of its resolution 63/248 of 24 December 2008, in section III,
paragraph 12, of its resolution 64/230 of 22 December 2009, in section III, paragraph 14, of its resolution 65/245 of
24 December 2010, in section III, paragraph 14, of its resolution 66/233, in section III, paragraph 15, of its
resolution 67/237, in paragraph 51 of its resolution 68/251 and in paragraph 63 of its resolution 69/250;
53. Recalls section VII of its resolution 69/274 A of 2 April 2015, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that the implementation of flexible workplace strategies takes into account the needs of language staff in
order to continue to ensure that the services provided to Member States meet the highest standard of quality;
54. Welcomes the integrated global management rule as an efficient approach, where feasible, to servicing
meetings away from duty stations, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts to
realize further savings by rigorously applying the integrated global management rule to applicable meetings without
jeopardizing the quality of services and to report thereon to the Committee on Conferences at its substantive session
in 2016;
IV
Matters related to documentation and publications
55. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of the United Nations;
56. Underlines that all the initiatives on the evolution of the working methods, including those introduced on
a trial basis, shall comply with the principle of parity among the official languages of the Organization, with a view
to preserving or enhancing the quality and scope of the services provided by the Secretariat;
57. Emphasizes the importance of multilingualism in the activities of the United Nations, and requests the
Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to ensure full parity among the six official languages in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 69/324 and to report thereon to the Assembly at its seventy-first session;
58. Recalls paragraph 69 of its resolution 69/250, welcomes the appointment of the Under-SecretaryGeneral for General Assembly and Conference Management as the Coordinator for Multilingualism, responsible for
the overall implementation of multilingualism Secretariat-wide, and emphasizes the need for the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat to continue to inform the public about the importance of this principle;
59. Emphasizes that multilingualism, as a core value of the Organization, entails the active involvement and
commitment of all stakeholders, including all United Nations duty stations and offices away from Headquarters;
60. Recalls paragraph 69 of its resolution 69/250, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its seventieth session detailed terms of reference for the Coordinator for Multilingualism
containing, inter alia, key responsibilities, working modalities, tasks, priorities, a programme of work, reporting
lines and anticipated support, in full compliance with relevant provisions of Assembly resolutions;
61. Reaffirms its decision in section IV of its resolution 64/230 that all reports adopted by the Working
Group on the Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council shall be issued as documents in all official
languages of the United Nations in a timely manner before their consideration by the Council, in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 36/117 A of 10 December 1981, 51/211 A to E of 18 December 1996, 52/214 of
894

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22 December 1997, 53/208 A to E of 18 December 1998 and 59/265 of 23 December 2004, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure the support necessary to that effect and to report to the Assembly thereon at its seventyfirst session;
62. Recalls section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222 of 23 December 2000, and reiterates with
concern its request that the Secretary-General ensure strict respect for the rules concerning the simultaneous
distribution of documents in all six official languages as regards both the distribution of printed copies and the
posting of parliamentary documentation on the Official Document System and the United Nations website;
63. Stresses that matters related to conference management, including documentation, fall within the
purview of the Fifth Committee;
64. Reiterates the importance of the timely issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee;
65. Welcomes the efforts made by the Secretariat, in particular the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management, regarding the timely availability of pre-session documentation for the Fifth Committee in
the six official languages of the United Nations, and encourages continued efforts by all stakeholders in this regard;
66. Takes note of the work done by the interdepartmental task force on documentation chaired by the
Department in positively addressing the problem of issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee;
67. Encourages the Chairs of the Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions to continue to promote cooperation between the two bodies in the sphere of documentation;
68. Welcomes the continued efforts of the task force to shepherd the submission of documents by the author
departments of the Secretariat;
69. Notes that accurate, timely and consistent information provided by the Secretariat to the Fifth Committee
during its informal consultations facilitates the decision-making process in the Committee;
70. Emphasizes the importance of enhancing accountability within the Secretariat for the timely production
and delivery of documents by ensuring that managers are fully informed of their responsibilities;
71. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include in the senior managers’ compacts the new
standard managerial indicator related to the timely issuance of official documentation to intergovernmental bodies
and General Assembly committees and to report thereon in future progress reports on accountability;
72. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in the relevant sections of future budget proposals, under
executive direction and management, an expected accomplishment of the Secretariat related to the timely
submission of documentation needed for meetings of relevant intergovernmental bodies;
73. Notes with satisfaction that 98.5 per cent of the documents submitted on time and within the word limit
were processed within four weeks by the Department at Headquarters, and stresses the importance of all the duty
stations taking measures to reach their targets in this regard;
74. Reaffirms its decision in section III, paragraph 9, of its resolution 59/265 that the issuance of documents
in all six official languages on planning, budgetary and administrative matters requiring urgent consideration by the
General Assembly shall be accorded priority;
75. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General direct all departments of the Secretariat to include the
following elements in their reports:
(a)

A summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

76. Reiterates its request that all documents submitted to legislative organs, including the Committee on
Conferences, by the Secretariat and intergovernmental and expert bodies for consideration and action have
conclusions and recommendations in bold print;
77. Notes with concern that only 70 per cent of the author departments reached the compliance rate of
90 per cent in the timely submission of their reports to the Department, and reiterates its request that the Secretary895

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

General enforce the slotting system more rigorously through a dedicated focus, such as the interdepartmental task
force on documentation, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its seventy-first session;
78. Urges author departments to fully adhere to deadlines in meeting the goal of 90 per cent submission
compliance, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that documents submitted late do not adversely affect the
issuance of documents submitted on time and in compliance with set guidelines;
79. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report to the General Assembly on concrete measures
taken by author departments and the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to improve
the predictability of document delivery and ensure accountability for the meeting of deadlines in order to ensure the
timely issuance of documentation;
80. Reiterates its request in paragraph 91 of its resolution 69/250 that the Secretary-General provide
information on the waiver process for documents that are submitted over the word limit;
81. Emphasizes the role of Member States and their intergovernmental bodies in determining the policies on
conference management;
82. Stresses that proposals to change such policies are to be approved by Member States in their relevant
intergovernmental bodies;
83. Notes that the Official Document System is the official digital repository of the United Nations, and
encourages the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Information and Communications Technology of the
Department of Management of the Secretariat, in consultation with other stakeholders, to consider means of
modernizing the Official Document System user interface to ensure its accessibility in all six official languages of
the United Nations;
84. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to upload all important older United Nations
documents onto the United Nations website in all six official languages on a priority basis so that these archives will
also be available to Member States and the general public;
85. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all measures necessary to ensure that the digitization of key
documents in the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and in the main duty stations is completed in a timely manner, as
appropriate;
86. Further requests the Secretary-General to present a proposal for the digitization of older important
United Nations documents for consideration by the General Assembly no later than at the main part of its seventyfirst session, outlining, inter alia, the definition of important older United Nations documents, as well as the scope
and estimated quantity, cost and time frame, with close coordination among the relevant departments of the
Secretariat;
87. Expresses concern that the anticipated lengthy digitization project may jeopardize the retention of
historical knowledge and information in view of the delicate state and risk of breakage of many of the related
documents;
88. Requests the Secretary-General to seek additional voluntary contributions for the digitization of
important older United Nations documents, including by broadening the donor base, and to report thereon in the
context of the report requested in paragraph 86 above;
89. Recalls paragraph 104 of its resolution 69/250, and notes the increased use of digital recordings by other
intergovernmental bodies, including the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report to the
General Assembly in this regard;
90. Stresses that verbatim and summary records remain the only official records of the meetings of United
Nations bodies;
91. Reiterates paragraph 105 of its resolution 69/250;
92. Recalls paragraph 5 of its resolution 49/221 B of 23 December 1994, and stresses that the timely
issuance of verbatim records constitutes an important part of the services provided to Member States;
896

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

V
Matters related to translation and interpretation
93. Requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to ensure the highest quality of interpretation and
translation services in all six official languages;
94. Underlines that the translation of official documents of the Organization must be provided in all required
languages and in due time, in full compliance with the rules of procedure of the respective legislative bodies;
95. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the terminology used in the translation and
interpretation services reflects the latest linguistic norms and terminology of the official languages in order to ensure
the highest quality;
96. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to maintain and update the global terminology portal in
order to ensure its availability to United Nations staff, Member States and the general public with a view to
achieving harmonization of the terminology used at all United Nations duty stations;
97. Further requests the Secretary-General, as the Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives
Board for Coordination, to invite the heads of participating funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system to consider using official United Nations terminology;
98. Reaffirms paragraph 110 of its resolution 69/250, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General,
when recruiting temporary assistance in the language services, including through the use of international or local
contracts, as appropriate, ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are provided with equally
favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of their services, with full
respect for the specificities of each of the six official languages and taking into account their respective workloads;
99. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts aimed at decreasing the vacancy rates for
language professionals at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session;
100. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to hold competitive examinations for the
recruitment of language staff sufficiently in advance in order to fill current and future vacancies in the language
services in a timely manner and to inform the General Assembly at its future sessions of efforts in this regard;
101. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to enhance access to
competitive examinations for applicants in all regions by bringing, to the extent possible, examination sites closer to
their locations in order to allow the greatest number of potentially qualified candidates to participate in them, and to
report to the General Assembly at its future sessions on progress made in this regard;
102. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the quality of translation of documents into the
six official languages, giving particular significance to the accuracy of translation;
103. Reiterates paragraph 8 of the annex to resolution 2 (I) of 1 February 1946 on the rules of procedure
concerning languages, whereby all resolutions and other important documents shall be made available in the official
languages and, upon the request of any representative, any other document shall be made available in any or all of
the official languages;
104. Stresses the need to ensure the highest possible quality of contractual and in-house translation, and
requests the Secretary-General to report on measures to be taken in this regard;
105. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General provide, at all duty stations, adequate staff at the
appropriate level, with a view to ensuring appropriate quality control for external translation, with due consideration
of the principle of equal grade for equal work;
106. Requests the Secretary-General to apply common standards for the quality control of documents
processed by external translators in all four duty stations in order to ensure high-quality translations in the six official
languages of the United Nations, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its future sessions;
107. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the experience, lessons learned and best practices of
the main duty stations in performing quality control of contractual and in-house translations, including on
requirements relating to the number and appropriate level of staff needed to carry out this function, are shared
among duty stations and regional commissions, as appropriate;
897

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

108. Encourages the Secretary-General to establish globally standardized performance indicators and costing
models aimed at a more cost-effective strategy for the in-house processing of documents, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit such information to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
109. Notes with appreciation the measures taken by the Secretary-General, in accordance with its resolutions,
to address, among other things, the issue of the replacement of retiring staff in the language services, and requests
the Secretary-General to maintain and intensify those efforts, including the strengthening of cooperation with
institutions that train language specialists, in order to meet the needs in the six official languages of the United
Nations;
110. Notes the need for energetic measures to avoid a disruptive shortage of applicants and a high turnover
rate in the language career fields, particularly where rare language combinations are involved, and requests the
Secretary-General to use the appropriate means to improve the internship programme, including through
partnerships with organizations that promote the official languages of the United Nations;
111. Welcomes the existing memorandums of understanding between the Organization and 22 universities as
a way to strengthen the training of language professionals in order to improve the recruitment of qualified language
staff, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to assess the appropriate number of memorandums
of understanding in order to fulfil the needs of the Organization;
112. Requests the Secretary-General to make further concerted efforts to promote outreach programmes, such
as traineeships and internships, and to introduce innovative methods to increase awareness of the programmes,
including through partnerships with Member States, relevant international organizations and language institutions in
all regions, in particular to close the wide gap in Africa and in the Latin American and Caribbean region, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
113. Notes that the “African project” has the aim of establishing postgraduate university programmes in
translation, conference interpreting and public service interpreting through centres of excellence on the African
continent, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the achievements of this project;
114. Also notes the difficulty of recruiting language professionals, in particular translators, at the main duty
stations, particularly New York and Nairobi, and welcomes the efforts made by the Secretariat to raise awareness
among all Member States and the general public of career opportunities in conference services, including through
the increased use of social media;
115. Further notes the pilot project related to the outposting to Vienna of translators from the French
Translation Service in New York, and requests the Secretary-General to provide to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session updates on this matter, including on the quality of services, a cost-benefit analysis, information
on workload-sharing and lessons learned;
116. Notes with appreciation the positive experience with language traineeships in training young
professionals and in attracting them to the United Nations, while enhancing the pool of qualified language
professionals in language combinations that are critical for succession-planning purposes, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard;
117. Notes the difficulties in identifying and retaining qualified language professionals and the need to
replenish the pool of language experts in order to prevent further negative impact on the capacity of the Secretariat
to provide services in the six official languages of the United Nations;
118. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve and strengthen his initiatives related to training
and to replenishing the language capacity of the Organization, including through the outreach programmes, to
ensure sufficient capacity to address the interpretation and translation requirements of the Organization;
119. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to liaise with permanent missions to identify outreach
opportunities with universities, educational institutions and language learning centres located worldwide, in order to
ensure the continued availability of high-quality professional language services in the six official languages of the
United Nations;
120. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve and expand the list of universities having
memorandums of understanding with the United Nations, ensuring the inclusion of universities, educational
institutions and language learning centres located in all geographical regions, whenever possible;
898

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

121. Requests the Secretary-General to refrain from making any change of a substantive nature to agreed
texts of both draft and adopted resolutions and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
122. Recalls section IV of its resolution 69/274 A, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the working
conditions of interpreters under review.
RESOLUTION 70/111
A/RES/70/111

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/563, para. 6)

70/111.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services

The General Assembly,
I
Activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December 1999, 59/272 of 23 December
2004, 60/259 of 8 May 2006, 63/265 of 24 December 2008, 64/232 of 22 December 2009, 64/263 of 29 March
2010, 65/250 of 24 December 2010, 66/236 of 24 December 2011, 67/258 of 12 April 2013, 68/21 of 4 December
2013 and 69/252 of 29 December 2014,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on its activities for the period from
1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015,16
1.
2.
matters;

Reaffirms its primary role in the consideration of and action taken on reports submitted to it;
Also reaffirms its oversight role and the role of the Fifth Committee in administrative and budgetary

3. Further reaffirms the independence and the separate and distinct roles of the internal and external
oversight mechanisms;
4. Recalls that the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat shall exercise operational
independence relating to the performance of its internal oversight functions, under the authority of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with the relevant resolutions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the annual reports of the Office continue to include a brief
description of any impairment of its independence;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote effective coordination and collaboration in
the Office, bearing in mind its operational independence;
7. Encourages United Nations internal and external oversight bodies to further enhance the level of
cooperation with one another, such as through joint work-planning sessions, without prejudice to the independence
of each;
8.

Takes note of the report of the Office;16

9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant resolutions pertaining to the work of the Office
are brought to the attention of the relevant managers;

_______________
16

A/70/318 (Part I) and Corr.1 and Add.1.

899

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant resolutions, including those of a crosscutting nature, are brought to the attention of relevant managers and that the Office also takes those resolutions into
account in the conduct of its activities;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the full implementation of the accepted
recommendations of the Office, including those relating to cost avoidance, recovery of overpayments, efficiency
gains and other improvements, in a prompt and timely manner, and to provide detailed justifications in cases in
which recommendations of the Office are not accepted;
12. Emphasizes the need for the Office to continue to refine its risk-based workplan in order to ensure that it
fully captures high-risk areas such as those relating to procurement activities at the mission level as well as those
related to fraud, including by contractors and implementing partners;
13. Encourages the Office, in future annual reports, to further enhance its analysis of general trends and
strategic challenges regarding internal oversight in the United Nations and to include an update of all critical
recommendations, taking into account the risk category, the target date for implementation and the office to be held
accountable for such implementation;
14. Stresses the need for the Office to increase emphasis on investigations involving cases of fraud, and
recognizes its role in supporting the Organization to assess, analyse and act upon all fraud risks;
15. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to update the administrative instructions related
to the work of the Office, in particular ST/AI/371 and ST/AI/371/Amend.1, so as to ensure that they reflect the
mandate of the Office as well as of other investigation functions;
16. Notes the lengthy delays in the average time to complete investigations, and emphasizes the need for the
Office to take appropriate steps to address those delays as a matter of priority and to report thereon in the context of
future annual reports;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to fill the remaining vacant posts,
particularly in the Investigations Division and in the field, in accordance with the relevant provisions governing
recruitment in the United Nations;
18. Notes the ongoing professional initiatives aimed at strengthening the functioning of the Office,
encourages continued efforts in this regard, including an assessment of working relationships across the divisions,
and looks forward to updates in the context of future annual reports;
II
Activities of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee
Recalling its resolutions 61/275 of 29 June 2007, 64/263, section II of its resolution 66/236, section II of its
resolution 67/258, section II of its resolution 68/21 and section II of its resolution 69/252,
Having considered the annual report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on its activities for the
period from 1 August 2014 to 31 July 2015,17
1.

Notes with appreciation the work of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee;

2.

Reaffirms the terms of reference of the Committee, as contained in the annex to resolution 61/275;

3. Recalls section VI, paragraph 67, of its resolution 69/307 of 25 June 2015, and in this regard invites the
Committee to continue to examine the operational independence of the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the
Secretariat, in particular in the area of investigation functions;
4. Endorses the observations, comments and recommendations contained in paragraphs 24, 33, 36, 42, 45,
46, 53, 57, 59, 62 to 64, 74, 78, 81 and 89 of the report of the Committee.17

_______________
17

900

A/70/284.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 70/112
A/RES/70/112

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/593, para. 6)

70/112.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001 and its resolutions 57/307 of 15 April 2003,
59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005, 61/261 of 4 April 2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007,
63/253 of 24 December 2008, 64/233 of 22 December 2009, 65/251 of 24 December 2010, 66/237 of 24 December
2011, 67/241 of 24 December 2012, 68/254 of 27 December 2013 and 69/203 of 18 December 2014,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of justice at the United Nations,18 on
the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services19 and on the amendment to
the rules of procedure of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal,20 the report of the Internal Justice Council on
administration of justice at the United Nations21 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,22 as well as the letter dated 3 November 2015 from the President of the General
Assembly to the Chair of the Fifth Committee,23
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of justice at the United Nations,18 on
the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services19 and on the amendment to
the rules of procedure of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal,20 the report of the Internal Justice Council on
administration of justice at the United Nations21 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;22
2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;
I
System of administration of justice

3. Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in the system of administration
of justice;
4. Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the system of administration of
justice, regardless of their duty station;
5. Acknowledges the evolving nature of the system of administration of justice and the need to carefully
monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains within the parameters set out by the General Assembly;
6. Stresses the importance of continuous consultation among relevant stakeholders in fostering a dialogueoriented culture across the Organization;
7. Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of its resolution 61/261, to establish a new, independent,
transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent
with the relevant rules of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to ensure respect for
the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability of managers and staff members alike;
8.

Decides to extend the three ad litem judge positions for one year, from 1 January to 31 December 2016;

_______________
18

A/70/187.
A/70/151.
20
A/70/189.
21
A/70/188.
22
A/70/420.
23
A/C.5/70/9.
19

901

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Stresses that any decision regarding the possible conversion of ad litem positions to full-time positions
and the eligibility criteria for the future permanent positions, including the eligibility of the current ad litem judges,
shall be taken after consideration of the recommendations of the panel of independent experts on this matter, as well
as the related comments of the Secretary-General, during the seventy-first session of the General Assembly;
10. Welcomes the establishment of the panel of experts and, recalling paragraph 23 of the report of the
Advisory Committee, trusts that the recommendations of the panel and the related comments of the SecretaryGeneral will be comprehensive and will cover all major aspects of the system of administration of justice;
11. Recalls that the objective of the interim independent assessment of the system of administration of
justice is the improvement of the current system;
12. Also recalls its decision that the interim independent assessment of the system of administration of justice
should include consideration of the relationship between the formal and informal systems and whether the aims and
objectives of the system set out in its resolution 61/261 are being achieved in an efficient and cost-effective manner;
13. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to transmit the recommendations of the panel of experts,
together with its final report and his comments, for consideration by the General Assembly at the main part of its
seventy-first session;
II
Informal system
14. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an efficient and effective option both
for staff who seek redress of grievances and for the participation of managers;
15. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of the system of administration of
justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be made of the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary
litigation, without prejudice to the basic right of staff members to access the formal system, and encourages recourse
to the informal resolution of disputes;
16. Recalls paragraph 38 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and encourages the continued
involvement of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services in the progressive
development and refinement of human resources policies and practices;
17. Emphasizes the importance of both staff and managers understanding and adopting conflict competency
skills in order to prevent conflicts, cope with potential or actual conflicts and maintain resilience, and in this regard
notes with appreciation the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services to
promote conflict competence at all levels of the Organization;
18. Commends efforts to resolve cases prior to litigation, including through enhanced conflict competence
and cooperation between the formal and informal parts of the system of administration of justice, and encourages
the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services to continue its outreach activities at all duty
stations to promote informal dispute resolution;
19. Recognizes that access to the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services is a
challenge for staff in the field, including for those in special political missions, encourages the development of
innovative measures to address these challenges, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General
Assembly at the main part of its seventy-first session;
20. Requests that information on the number and nature of cases from non-staff personnel continue to be
clearly set out in future reports on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services;
21. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services,19 and
stresses the importance of improving performance management and communication between staff members to help
to address the root causes of disputes;
22. Welcomes the recommendations to address systemic and cross-cutting issues contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, and
requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on progress made in the implementation of those
recommendations in his next report;
902

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Recalls paragraph 39 of the report of the Advisory Committee, regrets that the Secretary-General has
once again not fulfilled the request to ensure that the revised terms of reference and guidelines for the Office of the
United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services are promulgated, and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to do so as a matter of priority, by the end of February 2016 at the latest;
III
Formal system
24. Recognizes the ongoing positive contribution of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance to the system of
administration of justice;
25. Also recognizes the importance of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance as a filter in the system of
administration of justice, and encourages the Office to continue to advise staff on the merits of their cases, especially
when giving summary or preventive legal advice;
26. Reaffirms the need for the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal to have at their
disposal fully functional courtrooms, including appropriate information technology;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to track the data on the number of cases received by the
Management Evaluation Unit of the Department of Management of the Secretariat and the Dispute Tribunal in
order to identify any emerging trends and to include his observations on those statistics in future reports;
28. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to include information on disputes involving non-staff
personnel in the context of both management evaluation and informal mediation in his future reports, and requests
the Secretary-General to provide information on existing measures to institutionalize good management practices
that aim to avoid or mitigate disputes involving the various categories of non-staff personnel;
29. Notes with concern the increase in the number of pending cases before the Dispute Tribunal and the high
cost to the Organization due to financial compensation paid to staff, and in this regard encourages further efforts to
handle cases in an effective and efficient manner, including through enhanced cooperation between the formal and
informal parts of the system of administration of justice and proactive case management by the judges of the
Tribunal;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the accountability of managers whose decisions have been
established to be grossly negligent, according to the applicable Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,
and which have led to litigation and subsequent financial loss, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session;
31. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide further information with regard to the effectiveness of the
Management Evaluation Unit as a first step in the formal system of administration of justice and its review of
administrative decisions taken by managers that could potentially have legal and financial implications for the
Organization, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session;
32. Takes note of the information provided regarding the voluntary supplemental funding mechanism for
additional resources for the Office of Staff Legal Assistance, and decides to extend the experimental period for the
mechanism for one year, from 1 January to 31 December 2016;
33. Acknowledges the efforts made with respect to incentives for staff not to opt out of the voluntary
supplemental funding mechanism, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen such
incentives, particularly in locations where the participation rate is low;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to collect and examine data relating to staff contributions to
the Office of Staff Legal Assistance and to report thereon to the General Assembly in his next report;
35. Stresses the need to continue to explore means to raise awareness among staff of the importance of
financial contributions to the Office of Staff Legal Assistance;
36. Recalls paragraph 44 of its resolution 69/203, regrets the delay in the finalization of a single code of
conduct for all legal representatives, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to submit the code of conduct
to the General Assembly, no later than at the main part of its seventy-first session;
903

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

37. Also recalls paragraph 41 of its resolution 69/203, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
provide to the General Assembly a report on the implementation of the amendment to article 11, paragraph 3, of the
statute of the Dispute Tribunal and to article 7, paragraph 5, of the statute of the Appeals Tribunal, including with
respect to the administrative implications, any implications for the timely disposal of these cases, the ultimate
disposition of appeals of orders, if any, and any costs saved by reason of stays pending such appeals, and to do so at
the main part of its seventy-first session;
38. Approves the proposal of the Secretary-General to harmonize the privileges and immunities of the
judges of the Dispute and Appeals Tribunals, and decides to amend article 4 of the statute of the Dispute Tribunal
and article 3 of the statute of the Appeals Tribunal as follows:
(a)

Statute of the Dispute Tribunal, article 4, new paragraph 12:

12. The judges of the Dispute Tribunal shall be considered officials other than Secretariat officials under the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;
(b)

Statute of the Appeals Tribunal, article 3, new paragraph 12:

12. The judges of the Appeals Tribunal shall be considered officials other than Secretariat officials under the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;
39. Also approves the proposal of the Secretary-General to amend article 8 (Appeals) of the rules of
procedure of the Appeals Tribunal, and decides to amend it as follows:
Article 8 (Appeals), new paragraph 6:
`

6.

The filing of an appeal shall suspend the execution of the judgement or order contested;

40. Further approves the proposal of the Secretary-General with respect to the mechanism for addressing
complaints regarding alleged misconduct or incapacity of the judges of the Tribunals and the amendment suggested
by the Sixth Committee contained in the letter dated 3 November 2015 from the President of the General Assembly
to the Chair of the Fifth Committee,24 and decides to adopt the mechanism with the amendment as proposed therein
and annexed to the present resolution;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to publish the statutes of the Dispute and Appeals Tribunals, as amended
since their initial adoption by the General Assembly, as soon as possible, but no later than at its seventy-first session;
IV
Other issues
42. Stresses that the Internal Justice Council can help to ensure independence, professionalism and
accountability in the system of administration of justice, and requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Council
with including the views of both the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal in its reports;
43. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report to be submitted by the SecretaryGeneral, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with responsibilities
for administrative and budgetary matters.
Annex
Mechanism for addressing complaints regarding alleged misconduct or incapacity of the judges of the United
Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal
1. Allegations regarding misconduct or incapacity of a judge should be made, in writing, directly to the President
of the relevant Tribunal. In the event that a complaint is against a serving President, it shall be addressed to the most
senior judge after the President (“receiving judge”).
2.

The complainant shall receive a written acknowledgement of receipt of the complaint.

_______________
24

904

See A/C.5/70/9, appendix.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. A complaint shall not be receivable unless it is received within 60 days of the date on which the alleged
misconduct or incapacity took place, except as set out in paragraph 4 below.
4. By way of a transitional measure only, a complaint may be filed against a judge of either Tribunal related to
alleged misconduct or incapacity during the period from the date of the General Assembly’s approval of the
mechanism for addressing possible misconduct of judges in resolution 67/241 of 24 December 2012 to the date of
approval of this mechanism, provided such complaint is filed within 60 days of the date of such approval.
5. The types of conduct that would warrant the sanctioning of a judge are violations of the standards established
in the code of conduct for the judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals
Tribunal approved by the General Assembly in resolution 66/106 of 9 December 2011. The types of incapacity that
would warrant removal from the Dispute Tribunal or the Appeals Tribunal would involve either a physical or a
mental condition that would prevent a judge from performing his or her judicial functions and that cannot be
addressed by a reasonable accommodation of such condition.
6. Consistent with the principles of the independence of the administration of justice and judicial independence,
judicial decisions are not matters of conduct and shall not be the subject of a complaint under this mechanism.
Recusal – whether a particular judge should preside over a case or sit on a hearing – cannot be dealt with under the
complaints mechanism.25 A complaint is not an appeal.
7.

As a general rule, filed complaints relating to a pending case will not be dealt with until the case is disposed of.

8.

Complaints regarding the misconduct or incapacity of a judge shall contain:
(a)

The name and address of the complainant;

(b)

The date and location of the alleged misconduct;

(c)

The name of the judge against whom the complaint is made;

(d)

A detailed description of the alleged misconduct or incapacity, including the date on which it took place;

(e) Any other relevant information, including the names and contact details of witnesses, if any, to the event
complained of, and documentary evidence if available;
(f)
9.

The signature of the complainant and date of submission.

A complainant may be represented by another person, at his or her own expense.

10. Upon receipt of a complaint, the President or receiving judge shall review it in order to determine what action,
if any, is warranted.
11. If the President or receiving judge decides that no further action is appropriate, he or she will so inform the
complainant in writing, within seven days, providing reasons for the decision and sending a copy to the judge
against whom the complaint was made (“judge concerned”).
12. If the President or receiving judge decides that further action is warranted, he or she shall provide the judge
concerned with a copy of the complaint and any supporting documentation thereto and invite him or her to provide
comments in writing within two weeks, unless the President or receiving judge grants an extension of time to do so.
13. If the complaint is informally resolved to the satisfaction of the parties at any time during its pendency before
the President or receiving judge, the complainant will inform the President or receiving judge accordingly and the
complaint will be closed.
14. If, following a preliminary review, the President or receiving judge is of the view that further inquiry is
appropriate, the complainant will be so advised.
15. If the President or receiving judge is of the view that there are sufficient grounds to warrant a formal
investigation, he or she shall establish a panel of outside experts to investigate the allegations and report its
conclusions and recommendations to the President or receiving judge. The panel of experts shall comprise three
_______________
25

Recusal of judges of the Dispute Tribunal or the Appeals Tribunal is covered in articles 4.9 and 3.9 of the respective statutes of the
Tribunals.

905

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

members who shall be judges, former judges or other eminent jurists. When appointing the panel, the President or
receiving judge shall take into account geographical distribution and gender balance.
16. The President or receiving judge shall establish the terms of reference for the panel of experts. Such terms of
reference should ensure that the judge concerned is accorded all requisite due process safeguards.
17. The judge concerned may be represented by another person, at his or her own expense.
18. The panel of experts shall complete their inquiries and report in writing to the President or receiving judge
within three months of the date of referral of the complaint to the panel.
19. All judges of the relevant Tribunal, with the exception of the judge concerned, shall review the report of the
panel and recommend one of the following courses of action:
(a) If a majority of the judges are of the opinion that the complaint is not well founded, the complaint shall
be closed and the President or receiving judge shall advise the judge concerned and complainant in writing;
(b) If a majority of the judges are of the opinion that the complaint is well founded but the removal of the
judge concerned is not warranted, the President or receiving judge shall take such corrective action as he or she
deems appropriate;
(c) If the judges are of the unanimous opinion that the complaint is well founded and that the matter is of
sufficient severity to suggest that the removal of the judge concerned is warranted, they shall so advise the President
or receiving judge of the Tribunal. The President or receiving judge shall report the matter to the General Assembly,
through the Internal Justice Council, to request the removal of the judge concerned. The judge concerned will be
advised of such recommendation as soon as possible by the President or receiving judge;
(d) If a majority of the judges are of the opinion that the complaint is well founded and the matter is of
sufficient severity to suggest that the removal of the judge concerned is warranted, the President or receiving judge
shall take such corrective action as he or she deems appropriate. The judge concerned shall be given an opportunity
to make final written representations regarding the sanction proposed;
(e) When the process described in this paragraph is complete, the complainant will be advised of the
disposition of his or her complaint.
20. The process of review of the complaint up to the final disposition thereof shall be confidential. If the final
disposition is that set out in paragraph 11, 13 or 19 (a), the name of the judge concerned shall continue to remain
confidential following completion of the process.
21. The respective Presidents of the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal shall submit an annual report to
the General Assembly on the disposition of complaints through the Internal Justice Council.
22. This mechanism shall come into effect upon approval by the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 70/113
A/RES/70/113

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/594, para. 6)

70/113.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/289 A of 19 June 2015,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the cash position of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali as at 9 October 201526 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,27

_______________
26
27

906

A/70/443.
A/70/575.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;26

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.27
RESOLUTION 70/238
A/RES/70/238

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/624, para. 7)

70/238.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/212 B of 31 March 1998 and its decision 57/573 of 20 December 2002,
Recalling also its resolutions 69/249 A of 29 December 2014 and 69/249 B of 25 June 2015,
Having considered, for the period ended 31 December 2014, the financial reports and audited financial
statements and the reports and audit opinions of the Board of Auditors on the United Nations,28 the International
Trade Centre,29 the United Nations University,30 the United Nations Development Programme,31 the United Nations
Capital Development Fund,32 the United Nations Children’s Fund,33 the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,34 the United Nations Institute for Training and Research,35 the voluntary
funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,36 the Fund of the United Nations
Environment Programme,37 the United Nations Population Fund,38 the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme,39 the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,40 the United Nations Office for Project Services,41
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),42 the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994,43 the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 199144 and the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,45 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
concise summary of the principal findings and conclusions contained in the reports of the Board of Auditors for the

_______________
28

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. I and corrigendum (A/70/5 (Vol. I) and Corr.1).
Ibid., vol. III and corrigendum (A/70/5 (Vol. III) and Corr.1).
30
Ibid., vol. IV (A/70/5 (Vol. IV)).
31
Ibid., Supplement No. 5A (A/70/5/Add.1).
32
Ibid., Supplement No. 5B (A/70/5/Add.2).
33
Ibid., Supplement No. 5C (A/70/5/Add.3).
34
Ibid., Supplement No. 5D and corrigendum (A/70/5/Add.4 and Corr.1).
35
Ibid., Supplement No. 5E (A/70/5/Add.5).
36
Ibid., Supplement No. 5F (A/70/5/Add.6).
37
Ibid., Supplement No. 5G (A/70/5/Add.7).
38
Ibid., Supplement No. 5H (A/70/5/Add.8).
39
Ibid., Supplement No. 5I (A/70/5/Add.9).
40
Ibid., Supplement No. 5J and corrigendum (A/70/5/Add.10 and Corr.1).
41
Ibid., Supplement No. 5K and corrigendum (A/70/5/Add.11 and Corr.1).
42
Ibid., Supplement No. 5L (A/70/5/Add.12).
43
Ibid., Supplement No. 5M (A/70/5/Add.13).
44
Ibid., Supplement No. 5N and corrigendum (A/70/5/Add.14 and Corr.1).
45
Ibid., Supplement No. 5O (A/70/5/Add.15).
29

907

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

annual financial period 2014,46 the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations
of the Board of Auditors contained in its reports for the year ended 31 December 2014 on the United Nations and on
the capital master plan,47 and on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board contained in its reports
on the United Nations funds and programmes for the year ended 31 December 2014,48 and the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,49
1. Accepts the financial reports and audited financial statements and the reports and audit opinions of the
Board of Auditors for the above-mentioned organizations;28–45
2.

Approves the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Board of Auditors;

3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;49
4. Reaffirms that the Board of Auditors shall be completely independent and solely responsible for the
conduct of audits;
5. Decides to consider further the reports of the Board of Auditors on the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda,43 the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia44 and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals45 under the respective agenda items relating to the Tribunals and the Mechanism;
6.
thereof;

Commends the Board of Auditors for the continued high quality of its reports and the streamlined format

7. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Board of Auditors contained in its reports for the year ended 31 December 2014 on the United Nations and on the
capital master plan,47 and on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board contained in its reports on the
United Nations funds and programmes for the year ended 31 December 2014;48
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the funds and programmes of
the United Nations to ensure the full implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the
related recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt and timely manner, to continue to hold
programme managers accountable for the non-implementation of recommendations and to effectively address the
root causes of the problems highlighted by the Board;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide in his reports on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors a full explanation for the delays in the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board, in particular those recommendations not yet fully implemented that are two or more
years old;
10. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to indicate in future reports an expected time frame
for the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors, as well as the priorities for their
implementation and the office holders to be held accountable;
11. Expresses concern about the continued deficiencies and weaknesses identified by the Board of Auditors
in the United Nations, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to address these
weaknesses, as a matter of priority, taking into account the comments, observations and recommendations of the
Board;
12. Also expresses concern about the cross-cutting and systemic risks identified by the Board of Auditors in
the other United Nations entities, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to invite the heads of the United Nations entities
to take corrective actions to address these weaknesses, as a matter of priority, taking into account the comments,
observations and recommendations of the Board of Auditors;
_______________
46

A/70/322 and Corr.1 and 2.
A/70/338 and Corr.1, sects. I and II.
48
A/70/338/Add.1.
49
A/70/380.
47

908

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Notes with concern the general deficiencies identified by the Board of Auditors with respect to control
and fraud prevention, activities that are particularly necessary given the high-risk environments in which the United
Nations and all its entities operate, and stresses the need for the United Nations and all its entities to take measures to
address these deficiencies, including through the development of comprehensive fraud risk assessments and
counter-fraud strategies, the issuance of a standard definition of fraud for application across the United Nations
system and standard operating procedures for fraud prevention;
14. Stresses that the report of the Board of Auditors on the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund should
be submitted separately to the General Assembly, as is the case with other United Nations entities, and decides that a
copy should continue to be annexed to the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;
15. Decides to continue to consider the report of the Board of Auditors on the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund in the context of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board.
RESOLUTION 70/239
A/RES/70/239

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/631, para. 10)

70/239.

Capital master plan

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999, 55/238 of 23 December 2000, 56/234 and 56/236 of
24 December 2001 and 56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its resolution 57/292 of 20 December 2002, its
resolution 59/295 of 22 June 2005, section II of its resolution 60/248 of 23 December 2005, its resolutions 60/256 of
8 May 2006, 60/282 of 30 June 2006, 61/251 of 22 December 2006, 62/87 of 10 December 2007, 63/270 of 7 April
2009, 64/228 of 22 December 2009 and 65/269 of 4 April 2011, section III of its resolution 66/258 of 9 April 2012,
section V of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012, section IV of its resolution 68/247 A of 27 December 2013,
section VII of its resolution 68/247 B of 9 April 2014 and section VIII of its resolution 69/274 A of 2 April 2015 and
its decisions 58/566 of 8 April 2004, 65/543 of 24 December 2010 and 66/555 of 24 December 2011,
Having considered the thirteenth annual progress report of the Secretary-General,50 the report of the Board of
Auditors on the capital master plan for the year ended 31 December 2014,51 the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the year ended
31 December 201452 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,53
1. Takes note of the thirteenth annual progress report of the Secretary-General,50 the report of the Board of
Auditors51 and the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors;52
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;53
3.

Accepts the report of the Board of Auditors;

4.

Approves the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report;

5. Stresses the special role of the host country Government with regard to support for United Nations
Headquarters, in New York;

_______________
50

A/70/343.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. V (A/70/5 (Vol. V)).
52
A/70/338 and Corr.1, sect. III.
53
A/70/441.
51

909

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Notes the benefits, including economic benefits, accruing to host countries from the presence of the
United Nations, and the costs incurred;
7. Recalls section VIII, paragraph 10, of its resolution 69/274 A, notes with concern the continued delays in
the demolition of the temporary North Lawn Building, which is within the scope of the capital master plan project,
and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the deconstruction and demolition of the building is completed
without any further delay and to report thereon in the context of his next report;
8.

Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the commemorative value of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library;

9. Reaffirms its commitment to the renovation of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and South Annex
Buildings, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, for its consideration and approval,
future proposals relating to the renovation of these two buildings as separate projects outside the scope of the capital
master plan through established procedures;
10. Recalls section IV, paragraph 12, of its resolution 68/247 A, and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to continue to engage in high-level conversations with the host city with a view to addressing the pending
security concerns in relation to the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and South Annex Buildings and to report on this
matter in the context of the fourteenth annual progress report;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the timely conclusion of the procurement process and the
completion of the security-related work at 42nd and 48th Streets before the end of 2016;
12. Regrets that data on utility consumption were not made available to benchmark the benefits achieved
against utility consumption prior to the capital master plan, and requests the Secretary-General to provide in his
fourteenth annual progress report data on current utility consumption, including consumption patterns prior to the
capital master plan;
13. Acknowledges the handover of post-renovation activities to the Office of Central Support Services of the
Department of Management of the Secretariat, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure proper mechanisms of
accountability and clear reporting lines after the closure of the Office of the Capital Master Plan and to report
thereon in the context of the fourteenth annual progress report;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the costs of the remaining activities will be met from the
existing resources of the capital master plan project;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any cost changes are kept to a minimum and that
detailed and comprehensive information is provided in the next progress report;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide updated information with respect to the latest
expenditure, obligations and disbursement of the project, the breakdown of the requirements for the remaining
activities until project completion and the anticipated potential savings from the closure of contracts in the
fourteenth annual progress report;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the remaining activities and the final financial close-out of
the project;
18. Reiterates its request to the Advisory Committee to request the Board of Auditors to continue to report
annually on the capital master plan, including the remaining activities of the project, until the final close-out of the
accounts;
19. Recalls paragraph 18 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide data on the quantifiable benefits reportedly derived from the capital master plan;
20. Notes the forthcoming issuance of the guidelines for the management of construction projects of the
Organization, and encourages the Secretary-General to take on board all related recommendations of the Board of
Auditors and the Advisory Committee, as appropriate;
21. Requests the Advisory Committee to request the Board of Auditors to update, if appropriate, its paper on
lessons learned from the capital master plan and to include it as an annex to the next report of the Board of Auditors
on the capital master plan.
910

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTIONS 70/240 A and B
A/RES/70/240AandB

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/631, para. 10)

70/240.

Programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
A
FINAL BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE BIENNIUM 2014–2015

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the programme budget for the
biennium 2014–2015,54 and endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;55
2.

Resolves that, for the biennium 2014–2015:

(a) The amount of 5,831,919,300 United States dollars appropriated by it in its resolutions 69/263 A of
29 December 2014, 69/274 A of 2 April 2015 and 69/274 B of 25 June 2015 shall be decreased by 23,353,800
dollars, as follows:
Amount approved in resolutions
69/263 A and 69/274 A and B
Section

Increase/
(decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

Part I. Overall policymaking, direction and
coordination
1.

Overall policymaking, direction and coordination

119 229 300

(1 126 100)

118 103 200

2.

General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management

673 510 200

(13 398 800)

660 111 400

Subtotal, part I

792 739 500

(14 524 900)

778 214 600

Part II. Political affairs
3.

Political affairs

1 305 790 200

(14 982 300)

1 290 807 900

4.

Disarmament

25 379 700

2 329 600

27 709 300

5.

Peacekeeping operations

113 818 500

(3 795 700)

110 022 800

6.

Peaceful uses of outer space

8 159 600

(135 000)

8 024 600

1 453 148 000

(16 583 400)

1 436 564 600

Subtotal, part II
Part III. International justice and law
7.

International Court of Justice

51 403 100

(343 400)

51 059 700

8.

Legal affairs

48 087 100

197 300

48 284 400

99 490 200

(146 100)

99 344 100

Subtotal, part III
Part IV. International cooperation for development
9.

Economic and social affairs

163 789 000

(424 500)

163 364 500

10.

Least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States

11 579 100

(2 669 000)

8 910 100

_______________
54
55

A/70/557.
A/70/619.

911

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Amount approved in resolutions
69/263 A and 69/274 A and B
Section

11.

Increase/
(decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

United Nations support for the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development

17 010 400

(2 925 200)

14 085 200

12.

Trade and development

147 915 300

(419 200)

147 496 100

13.

International Trade Centre

39 454 900

(559 200)

38 895 700

14.

Environment

34 510 700

(1 860 600)

32 650 100

15.

Human settlements

23 130 300

1 892 900

25 023 200

16.

International drug control, crime and terrorism
prevention and criminal justice

43 938 300

(82 900)

43 855 400

17.

UN-Women

15 356 500

(36 400)

15 320 100

496 684 500

(7 084 100)

489 600 400

Subtotal, part IV
Part V. Regional cooperation for development
18.

Economic and social development in Africa

150 951 900

(3 777 800)

147 174 100

19.

Economic and social development in Asia and the
Pacific

102 515 700

(2 167 900)

100 347 800

20.

Economic development in Europe

72 532 600

2 930 000

75 462 600

21.

Economic and social development in Latin America
and the Caribbean

114 050 000

3 063 600

117 113 600

22.

Economic and social development in Western Asia

72 073 800

1 913 100

73 986 900

23.

Regular programme of technical cooperation

57 792 200

(995 400)

56 796 800

569 916 200

965 600

570 881 800

Subtotal, part V
Part VI. Human rights and humanitarian affairs
24.

Human rights

208 381 700

1 839 500

210 221 200

25.

International protection, durable solutions and
assistance to refugees

90 868 900

(1 187 700)

89 681 200

26.

Palestine refugees

55 302 400

38 400

55 340 800

27.

Humanitarian assistance

119 777 300

(705 500)

119 071 800

474 330 300

(15 300)

474 315 000

190 079 900

(535 100)

189 544 800

190 079 900

(535 100)

189 544 800

Office of the Under-Secretary-General for
Management

56 736 200

461 800

57 198 000

29B.

Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts

37 179 500

12 273 200

49 452 700

29C.

Office of Human Resources Management

77 412 200

(228 700)

77 183 500

29D.

Office of Central Support Services

194 287 500

2 687 400

196 974 900

29E.

Office of Information and Communications
Technology

74 453 100

(775 600)

73 677 500

29F.

Administration, Geneva

155 802 700

3 356 900

159 159 600

29G.

Administration, Vienna

40 929 800

(3 817 300)

37 112 500

Subtotal, part VI
28.

Part VII. Public information
Public information
Subtotal, part VII
Part VIII. Common support services

29A.

912

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Amount approved in resolutions
69/263 A and 69/274 A and B
Section

29H.

Increase/
(decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

Administration, Nairobi

31 467 900

188 600

31 656 500

668 268 900

14 146 300

682 415 200

40 632 100

406 300

41 038 400

Subtotal, part IX

40 632 100

406 300

41 038 400

31.

Part X. Jointly financed administrative activities and
special expenses
Jointly financed administrative activities

11 411 400

188 200

11 599 600

32.

Special expenses

143 660 200

(9 457 400)

134 202 800

155 071 600

(9 269 200)

145 802 400

109 864 500

1 618 600

111 483 100

109 864 500

1 618 600

111 483 100

243 866 400

7 730 800

251 597 200

243 866 400

7 730 800

251 597 200

28 398 800

–

28 398 800

28 398 800

–

28 398 800

509 428 400

(63 300)

509 365 100

Subtotal, part XIV

509 428 400

(63 300)

509 365 100

Total

5 831 919 300

(23 353 800)

5 808 565 500

Subtotal, part VIII
30.

Part IX. Internal oversight
Internal oversight

Subtotal, part X
33.

Part XI. Capital expenditures
Construction, alteration, improvement and major
maintenance
Subtotal, part XI
Part XII. Safety and security

34.

Safety and security
Subtotal, part XII

35.

Part XIII. Development Account
Development Account
Subtotal, part XIII

36.

Part XIV. Staff assessment
Staff assessment

(b) The Secretary-General shall be authorized to transfer credits between sections of the budget, with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee;
(c) In addition to the appropriations approved under paragraph 2 (a) above, an amount of 75,000 dollars
shall be appropriated for each year of the biennium 2014–2015 from the accumulated income of the Library
Endowment Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps and library equipment and for such other expenses
of the Library at the Palais des Nations in Geneva as are in accordance with the objects and provisions of the
endowment.
B
FINAL INCOME ESTIMATES FOR THE BIENNIUM 2014–2015
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the biennium 2014–2015:
(a) The estimates of income of 546,833,500 United States dollars approved by it in its resolutions 69/263 B
of 29 December 2014 and 69/274 B of 25 June 2015 shall be increased by 27,822,300 dollars, as follows:

913

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Amount approved in resolutions
69/263 B and 69/274 B
Income section

1.

Final estimates

(United States dollars)

Income from staff assessment

513 890 900

(580 100)

513 310 800

513 890 900

(580 100)

513 310 800

37 897 100
(4 954 500)

29 001 500
(599 100)

66 898 600
(5 553 600)

Subtotal, income sections 2 and 3

32 942 600

28 402 400

61 345 000

Total

546 833 500

27 822 300

574 655 800

Subtotal, income section 1
2.
3.

Increase/
(decrease)

General income
Services to the public

(b) The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
(c) Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, catering and related
services, garage operations, television services and the sale of publications not provided for under the budget
appropriations shall be charged against the income derived from those activities.
RESOLUTION 70/241
A/RES/70/241

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/632, para. 6)

70/241.

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994

The General Assembly,
I
Second performance report on the budget of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda for the biennium 2014–2015
Having considered the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget, for the biennium
2014–2015, of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 199456 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,57
Recalling its resolution 49/251 of 20 July 1995 on the financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which were resolutions 68/255 of 27 December 2013
and 69/254 of 29 December 2014,
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the biennium 2014–201556 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;57
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in section II.A of the report of the Advisory
Committee, subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
_______________
56
57

914

A/70/553.
A/70/600.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Decides to consider the treatment of the accrued liabilities for the after-service health insurance benefits
payable to former staff and the accrued liabilities for the pensions of retired judges, and their surviving spouses, of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda under agenda item 146, Financing of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals;
4. Resolves that, for the biennium 2014–2015, the amount of 94,883,600 United States dollars gross
(88,316,800 dollars net) approved in its resolution 69/254 for the financing of the Tribunal shall be adjusted by the
amount of 11,184,500 dollars gross (9,156,600 dollars net), for a total amount of 106,068,100 dollars gross
(97,473,400 dollars net);
II
Budget for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
for the biennium 2016–2017: liquidation
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the liquidation of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the biennium 2016–201758 and on the revised estimates arising from the effects
of changes in rates of exchange and inflation,59
Having also considered the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,60
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the liquidation of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the biennium 2016–201758 and on the revised estimates arising from the effects of
changes in rates of exchange and inflation;59
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,60 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.

Decides to approve 43 positions and related non-post resources as proposed by the Secretary-General;

4.

Takes note of paragraph 15 of the report of the Advisory Committee;57

5. Notes that the liquidation of the Tribunal is estimated to be completed in five months, beginning
1 January 2016, and encourages the Secretary-General to ensure that the liquidation activities are completed in a
timely manner;
6. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 a total amount of 2,086,100
dollars gross (1,978,800 dollars net) for the biennium 2016–2017, as detailed in the annex to the present resolution;
7. Also decides that the total assessment for 2016 under the Special Account, amounting to 13,270,600
dollars, shall consist of:
(a)

2,086,100 dollars, being the estimated appropriation approved for the biennium 2016–2017;

(b) 11,184,500 dollars, being the increase in the final appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015 approved
by the General Assembly in paragraph 4 of section I above;
8. Further decides to apportion the amount of 6,635,300 dollars gross (5,567,700 dollars net) among
Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations
for 2016;
9. Decides to apportion the amount of 6,635,300 dollars gross (5,567,700 dollars net) among Member
States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations for 2016;
_______________
58

A/70/448.
A/70/606.
60
A/70/600 and A/70/7/Add.35.
59

915

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 8 and 9 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated staff assessment income of 2,135,200 dollars
approved for the Tribunal for 2016.
Annex
Financing for the biennium 2016–2017 of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
Gross

Net of staff assessment

(United States dollars)

Estimated appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017

2 628 200

2 495 100

Revised estimates: effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation

(525 200)

(500 000)

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions

(328 400)

(303 700)

Recommendations of the Fifth Committee

311 500

287 400

2 086 100

1 978 800

Total assessment for 2016
Requirements representing the estimated appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017

Estimated initial appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017

2 086 100

1 978 800

Requirements arising from the final appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015

11 184 500

9 156 600

Net contributions assessed on Member States for 2016

13 270 600

11 135 400

Of which:
Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2016

6 635 300

5 567 700

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations for 2016

6 635 300

5 567 700

RESOLUTION 70/242
A/RES/70/242

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/633, para. 6)

70/242.

Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991

The General Assembly,
I
Second performance report on the budget of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia for the biennium 2014–2015
Having considered the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget, for the biennium
2014–2015, of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 199161 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,62
_______________
61
62

916

A/70/554.
A/70/600.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling its resolution 47/235 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which were resolutions 68/256 of
27 December 2013 and 69/255 of 29 December 2014,
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for the biennium 2014–2015;61
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in section III.A of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;62
3. Resolves that, for the biennium 2014–2015, the amount of 201,054,800 United States dollars gross
(179,074,200 dollars net) approved in its resolution 69/255 for the financing of the Tribunal shall be adjusted by the
amount of 9,947,400 dollars gross (11,876,900 dollars net), for a total amount of 191,107,400 dollars gross
(167,197,300 dollars net);
II
Budget for the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
for the biennium 2016–2017
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia for the biennium 2016–201763 and on the revised estimates arising from the effects of changes in
rates of exchange and inflation,64
Having also considered the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,65
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia for the biennium 2016–201763 and on the revised estimates arising from the effects of changes in
rates of exchange and inflation;64
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,65 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Recalls paragraph 21 of the report of the Advisory Committee,62 notes with concern the delay in the
implementation of the completion strategy, and emphasizes the importance of the continued efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to implement the completion strategy for the Tribunal in an efficient and timely manner;
4. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 a total amount of 95,747,100 dollars gross (85,024,600 dollars net) for the biennium
2016–2017, as detailed in the annex to the present resolution;
5. Also decides that the total assessment for 2016 under the Special Account, amounting to 37,550,650
dollars, shall consist of:
(a)

47,783,550 dollars, being half of the estimated appropriation approved for the biennium 2016–2017;

(b) Less 10,232,900 dollars, being the decrease in the final appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015
approved by the General Assembly in paragraph 3 of section I above;
6. Further decides to apportion the amount of 18,775,325 dollars gross (15,272,700 dollars net) among
Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations
for 2016;
7. Decides to apportion the amount of 18,775,325 dollars gross (15,272,700 dollars net) among Member
States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations for 2016;
_______________
63

A/70/397.
A/70/606.
65
A/70/600 and A/70/7/Add.35.
64

917

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 6 and 7 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated staff assessment income of 7,005,250 dollars
approved for the Tribunal for 2016.
Annex
Financing for the biennium 2016–2017 of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Gross

Net of staff assessment

(United States dollars)

Estimated appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017

113 098 700

100 856 400

Revised estimates: effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation

(17 325 000)

(15 805 200)

(26 600)

(26 600)

–

–

Estimated initial appropriation for the biennium 2016-2017
Less: estimated income for the biennium 2016–2017

95 747 100
(180 000)

85 024 600
(180 000)

Amount to be assessed for the biennium 2016-2017,
net of estimated income
Total assessment for 2016

95 567 100

84 844 600

Requirements representing half of the estimated appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017

47 783 550

42 422 300

Requirements arising from the final appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015

(10 232 900)

(11 876 900)

37 550 650

30 545 400

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2016

18 775 325

15 272 700

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations for 2016

18 775 325

15 272 700

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Recommendations of the Fifth Committee

Net contributions assessed on Member States for 2016
Of which:

RESOLUTION 70/243
A/RES/70/243

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/634, para. 6)

70/243.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The General Assembly,
I
Second performance report on the budget of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2014–2015
Having considered the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2014–201566 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,67
_______________
66
67

918

A/70/558.
A/70/600.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling its resolution 66/240 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which were resolutions
68/257 of 27 December 2013 and 68/267 of 4 April 2014, as well as its resolutions 69/256 of 29 December 2014
and 69/276 of 2 April 2015,
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2014–2015;66
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in section IV.A of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;67
3. Resolves that, for the biennium 2014–2015, the amount of 115,521,800 United States dollars gross
(108,345,000 dollars net) approved in its resolution 69/256 for the financing of the Mechanism shall be adjusted by
the amount of 43,932,900 dollars gross (41,730,700 dollars net), for a total amount of 71,588,900 dollars gross
(66,614,300 dollars net);
II
Budget for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
for the biennium 2016–2017
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2016–201768 and on the revised estimates arising from the
effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation,69
Having also considered the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,70
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2016–201768 and on the revised estimates arising from the
effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation;69
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,70 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Stresses the importance of using the videoconferencing facilities in the work of the Mechanism, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mechanism strictly abides by the provisions of its resolutions on
the standard of accommodation for air travel;
4. Takes note of paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee,67 and decides to establish one
temporary P-3 post in the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts at Headquarters;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a sub-account within the Mechanism to manage, on a payas-you-go basis, the accrued liabilities for the after-service health insurance benefits to former staff and the accrued
liabilities for the pensions of retired judges, and their surviving spouses, of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 and the
International Residual Mechanism;
6. Also authorizes the Secretary-General, after the closure of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991, to extend the aforementioned sub-account to manage, on a pay-as-you-go basis, the
accrued liabilities for the after-service health insurance benefits to former staff and the accrued liabilities for the
pensions of retired judges, and their surviving spouses, of the Tribunal;
7. Decides to appropriate for the biennium 2016–2017 the additional amount of 2,639,000 dollars
corresponding to the requirement for the pensions of retired judges, and their surviving spouses, of the International
_______________
68

A/70/378.
A/70/606.
70
A/70/600 and A/70/7/Add.35.
69

919

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and the amount of 881,100 dollars, corresponding to the requirement for the afterservice health insurance benefits to former staff of the Tribunal;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of future budget submissions for the Mechanism, to
include a provision to fund the liabilities due within the related biennium for the pensions of retired judges, and their
surviving spouses, and for after-service health insurance benefits to former staff of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the Mechanism and, as appropriate, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the next budget submission for the Mechanism, to
include, for the consideration of the General Assembly, alternative options for financing through the sub-account
mentioned in paragraph 5 above the liabilities for the pensions of retired judges, and their surviving spouses, as well
as for the after-service health insurance benefits to former staff, including through possible transfer of unspent
balances following the liquidation of the Tribunals;
10. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals a total amount of 137,404,200 dollars gross (126,945,300 dollars net) for the biennium 2016–2017, as
detailed in the annex to the present resolution;
11. Also decides that the total assessment for 2016 under the Special Account amounting to 24,769,200
dollars shall consist of:
(a)

68,702,100 dollars, being half of the estimated appropriation approved for the biennium 2016–2017;

(b) Less 43,932,900 dollars, being the decrease in the final appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015,
approved by the General Assembly in paragraph 3 of section I above;
12. Further decides to apportion the amount of 12,384,600 dollars gross (10,870,975 dollars net) among
Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations
for 2016;
13. Decides to apportion the amount of 12,384,600 dollars gross (10,870,975 dollars net) among Member States
in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations for 2016;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 12 and 13
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated staff assessment income in the amount of
3,027,250 dollars approved for the Mechanism for 2016.
Annex
Financing for the biennium 2016–2017 of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Gross

Net of staff assessment

(United States dollars)

Estimated appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017

150 688 500

139 829 400

Revised estimates: effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation

(16 733 100)

(16 332 500)

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions

(433 100)

(399 300)

Recommendations of the Fifth Committee

3 881 900

3 847 700

137 404 200

126 945 300

Requirements representing half of the estimated appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017

68 702 100

63 472 650

Requirements arising from the final appropriation for the biennium 2014–2015

(43 932 900)

(41 730 700)

24 769 200

21 741 950

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2016

12 384 600

10 870 975

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations for 2016

12 384 600

10 870 975

Estimated initial appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017
Total assessment for 2016

Net contributions assessed on Member States for 2016
Of which:

920

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 70/244
A/RES/70/244

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/635, para. 6)

70/244.

United Nations common system: report of the International Civil Service Commission

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/198 of 21 December 1989, 51/216 of 18 December 1996, 52/216 of 22 December
1997, 53/209 of 18 December 1998, 55/223 of 23 December 2000, 56/244 of 24 December 2001, 57/285 of
20 December 2002, 58/251 of 23 December 2003, 59/268 of 23 December 2004, 60/248 of 23 December 2005,
61/239 of 22 December 2006, 62/227 of 22 December 2007, 63/251 of 24 December 2008, 64/231 of 22 December
2009, 65/248 of 24 December 2010, 66/235 A of 24 December 2011, 66/235 B of 21 June 2012, 67/257 of 12 April
2013, 68/253 of 27 December 2013 and 69/251 of 29 December 2014,
Having considered the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 2015,71
Reaffirming its commitment to a single, unified United Nations common system as the cornerstone for the
regulation and coordination of the conditions of service of the United Nations common system,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the work of the International Civil Service Commission;

2.

Takes note of the report of the Commission for 2015;71

3. Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in approving conditions of service and entitlements for all
staff serving in the organizations of the United Nations common system, bearing in mind articles 10 and 11 of the
statute of the Commission;72
4. Recalls articles 10 and 11 of the statute of the Commission, and reaffirms the central role of the
Commission in regulating and coordinating conditions of service and entitlements for all staff serving in the
organizations of the United Nations common system;
I
Conditions of service applicable to both categories of staff
Mandatory age of separation
Decides that the mandatory age of separation for staff recruited before 1 January 2014 should be raised by the
organizations of the United Nations common system to 65 years, at the latest by 1 January 2018, taking into account
the acquired rights of staff;
II
Conditions of service of staff in the Professional
and higher categories
A.

Base/floor salary scale

Recalling its resolution 44/198, by which it established a floor net salary level for staff in the Professional and
higher categories by reference to the corresponding base net salary levels of officials in comparable positions
serving at the base city of the comparator civil service (the United States federal civil service),
Approves, with effect from 1 January 2016, as recommended by the Commission in paragraph 35 of its report,
the revised base/floor scale of gross and net salaries for staff in the Professional and higher categories, as contained
in annex IV to the report;

_______________
71
72

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/70/30).
Resolution 3357 (XXIX), annex.

921

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

B.

Evolution of the margin and margin management around the desirable midpoint

Recalling section I.B of its resolution 51/216 and the standing mandate from the General Assembly, in which
the Commission is requested to continue its review of the relationship between the net remuneration of the United
Nations staff in the Professional and higher categories in New York and that of the comparator civil service
employees in comparable positions in Washington, D.C. (referred to as “the margin”),
1. Reaffirms that the range of 110 to 120 for the margin between the net remuneration of officials in the
Professional and higher categories of the United Nations in New York and officials in comparable positions in the
comparator civil service should continue to apply, on the understanding that the margin would be maintained at a
level around the desirable midpoint of 115 over a period of time;
2. Notes that the estimated margin between net remuneration of the United Nations staff in grades P-1 to
D-2 in New York and that of officials in comparable positions in the United States federal civil service in
Washington, D.C., for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2015 is 117.2 and that its five-year average (2011–
2015) also stands at 117.2, which is above the desirable midpoint of 115;
3. Recalls its request, contained in its resolution 69/251, that the Commission continue action to bring the
calendar year margin to around the desirable midpoint and further examine issues relating to margin management;
4. Approves the recommendations of the Commission on the margin management methodology as stated
in paragraph 302 of its report;
5. Decides that, if the margin trigger levels of 113 or 117 are breached, the Commission should take
appropriate action through the operation of the post adjustment system;
III
Review of the common system compensation package
1. Approves the proposals on the common system compensation package,73 subject to the provisions of the
present resolution;
2.

Decides that, unless otherwise established, these provisions should come into force on 1 July 2016;

3. Takes note of the fact that, following the submission of the Commission’s report on the comprehensive
review to the General Assembly, the freeze in the increases of allowances requested in section I.A, paragraph 5, of
its resolution 68/253 will be discontinued, effective 1 January 2016 for the General Service and related categories
and effective 1 January 2017 for the Professional and higher categories;
4. Recalls section I.A, paragraph 5, of its resolution 68/253, and requests the Commission to review all
allowances under its purview in order to assess the requirements for upward revisions;
5. Encourages the Commission to continue its inclusive approach with the representatives of the different
stakeholders of the common system;
1.

Unified salary scale and transitional measures

6. Approves the proposed unified base/floor salary scale structure, as recommended by the Commission in
paragraph 210 (a) and as shown in annex II, section A, of its report, as of 1 January 2017;
7. Decides that the unified salary scale should be updated, as recommended in paragraph 211 (a) and as
shown in annex II, section A, of the report of the Commission, to reflect any adjustments in base/floor salaries that
may be approved before its implementation;
8. Approves the grade and step matching of staff for conversion from the current salary scale structure to
the unified salary scale structure, as recommended in paragraph 249 (a) and as shown in annex II, section B, of the
report of the Commission;
_______________
73

922

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/70/30), chap. VI, sect. C.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9.

Decides that:

(a) The salary levels of staff members that are higher than those at the maximum step of their grade upon
conversion to the unified salary scale should be maintained by the Commission as a pay protection measure;
(b) Those salaries should be adjusted for any changes in post adjustment, including consolidation of post
adjustment to base salaries approved by the General Assembly;
(c)
salaries;

The Commission will maintain and adjust the applicable pensionable remuneration amounts for such

10. Also decides that:
(a) Staff members in receipt of the dependency rate of salary in respect of a dependent child at the time of
conversion to the unified salary scale structure will receive a transitional allowance of 6 per cent of net remuneration
in respect of that dependent child and that no child allowance should be paid concurrently in that case;
(b)

The allowance will be reduced by 1 percentage point of net remuneration every 12 months thereafter;

(c) When the amount of the transitional allowance becomes equal to or less than the amount of the child
allowance, the latter amount will be payable in lieu thereof;
(d) The transitional allowance will be discontinued if the child in respect of whom the allowance is payable
loses eligibility;
11. Further decides that the net base salaries of the Assistant Secretaries-General and Under-SecretariesGeneral in the unified salary scale shall be established at the level of their present dependency rate of pay, reduced
by 6 per cent, and that the pensionable remuneration of these grades should be maintained at their current levels;
2.

Staff assessment rates

12. Approves the staff assessment rates to be used in conjunction with gross base salaries upon
implementation of the unified salary scale, as recommended in paragraph 210 (b) and as shown in annex II,
section C, of the report of the Commission;
13. Decides that these staff assessment rates should be reviewed two years after the implementation of the
revised compensation system to ensure that there continues to be no adverse impact on the Tax Equalization Fund;
3.

Pensionable remuneration scale

14. Approves the proposed pensionable remuneration scale, upon implementation of the proposed unified
salary scale, as recommended in paragraph 210 (c) and as shown in annex II, section D, of the report of the
Commission;
15. Decides that the proposed pensionable remuneration scale should be updated to reflect any changes in
net remuneration that may occur in New York before it is implemented to ensure that staff continue to receive at
least the same pensionable remuneration;
16. Also decides that the pensionable remuneration scale should continue to be updated on the same date
and by the same percentage as net remuneration changes in New York;
4.

Spouse allowance

17. Approves the establishment of a dependent spouse allowance at the level of 6 per cent of net
remuneration, as recommended in paragraph 210 (d) of the report of the Commission;
18. Decides that serving staff members with a dependent spouse should be paid a spouse allowance at the time
of conversion to the unified salary scale, as recommended in paragraph 249 (b) of the report of the Commission;
5.

Single parent allowance

19. Decides that staff members who are single parents and who provide main and continuous support for
their dependent children shall receive an allowance in respect of the first dependent child, which shall be at the level
of 6 per cent of net remuneration, and should be provided in lieu of the child allowance;
923

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6.

Step increments and performance incentives

20. Decides to grant within-grade step increments annually from step I to step VII and biennially thereafter
for grades P-1 to P-5 and to maintain biennial steps at the D-1 and D-2 levels in accordance with the current system,
as recommended in paragraph 279 (a) of the report of the Commission;
21. Also decides to maintain present eligibility arrangements for step increments;
22. Further decides to discontinue the current practice of granting accelerated step increments;
23. Requests the Commission to conduct a study on the performance management schemes in common
system organizations and to formulate recommendations on performance incentives based on merit that are not
related to cash rewards, such as the possibility of accelerated step increments, and invites the Commission to review
its recommendations contained in annex III to its report in the light of its findings and to report thereon no later than
the seventy-second session of the General Assembly;
24. Also requests the Commission to conduct a detailed study on the budgetary and administrative
arrangements necessary for the establishment of a cash reward system, including funding, oversight and
accountability mechanisms, and to report thereon no later than the seventy-second session of the General Assembly;
7.

Education grant

25. Decides that the revised education grant scheme shall be introduced as of the school year in progress on
1 January 2018;
26. Also decides to revise the criteria covering post-secondary education to make the grant payable up to the
end of the school year in which the child completes four years of post-secondary studies or attains a first postsecondary degree, whichever comes first, subject to the upper age limit of 25 years;
27. Further decides that admissible expenses should comprise tuition (including mother tongue tuition) and
enrolment-related fees, as well as assistance with boarding expenses;
28. Decides that tuition- and enrolment-related expenses should be reimbursed under a global sliding scale
consisting of seven brackets, with declining reimbursement levels ranging from 86 per cent at the lowest bracket to
61 per cent at the sixth bracket and no reimbursement at the seventh bracket, as outlined in table 5 in the report of
the Commission;
29. Also decides that boarding-related expenses should be paid by a lump sum of 5,000 United States
dollars, and only to staff serving in field locations whose children are boarding to attend school outside the duty
station at the primary or secondary level, and that, in exceptional cases, boarding assistance should be granted to
staff at category H duty stations under the discretionary authority of executive heads;
30. Further decides that round-trip education grant travel between the staff member’s duty station and the
location of study should be provided for each academic year for a child of staff in receipt of assistance with boarding
expenses;
31. Decides that capital assessment fees should be covered outside the education grant scheme by the
organizations of the common system;
32. Also decides that the global sliding scale should be reviewed for possible adjustment, based on
movements in tuition fees tracked biennially for a list of representative schools and upon assessment by the
Commission;
33. Further decides that the amount of assistance with boarding expenses should be reviewed for possible
adjustment, based on the movements in fees charged by boarding facilities of International Baccalaureate schools
tracked biennially and upon assessment by the Commission;
34. Decides that the lists of both the representative schools and the International Baccalaureate schools
mentioned in paragraph 356 (f) and (g) of the report of the Commission should be reviewed every six years for
possible updating;
924

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

35. Also decides that the current scheme of the special education grant for children with disabilities shall
continue to apply after the introduction of the revised regular education grant scheme, subject to the overall global
ceiling equal to the upper limit of the sliding scale plus the amount equivalent to the boarding lump sum under the
regular education grant scheme;
36. Further decides that the maximum admissible expenses for the special education grant should be
synchronized with those of the education grant, so as to set the maximum at an amount equal to the upper limit of
the top bracket of the applicable global sliding scale;
37. Decides that, for boarding assistance under the special education grant for children with disabilities,
actual expenses should be used in the calculation of the total admissible expenses for reimbursement, up to the
overall grant ceiling equal to the upper limit of the top bracket of the global sliding scale plus the amount of 5,000
dollars, equivalent to the boarding lump sum paid under the regular education grant scheme;
8.

Repatriation grant

38. Confirms the rationale of the repatriation grant as an earned service benefit payable to expatriate staff
members who leave the country of the last duty station upon separation;
39. Decides that a threshold of five years of expatriate service should be established as an eligibility
requirement for the repatriation grant, as recommended in paragraph 375 of the report of the Commission;
40. Also decides that, upon transition to the revised scheme, current staff members should retain their
eligibility within the current grant schedule up to the number of years of expatriate service accrued at the time of the
implementation of the revised scheme;
9.

Relocation-related elements
41. Approves the Commission’s recommendation to discontinue the non-removal allowance;

42. Decides, for staff who move before the implementation date of the new relocation package and who
choose the option of non-removal of household goods, to continue to pay the non-removal allowance for up to five
years at the same duty station or until the staff member moves to another duty station, as a transitional measure;
43. Also decides to retain the current approach to relocation travel, which would remain the responsibility of
the organizations of the common system;
44. Approves the options concerning relocation shipments provided by the Commission in paragraph 399 (d)
and (f) of its report;
45. Decides to provide a settling-in grant equivalent to 30 days of local daily subsistence allowance for staff,
plus 15 days of local daily subsistence allowance for each accompanying eligible family member, and a lump-sum
amount equivalent to one month of net base pay plus applicable post adjustment;
10. Field allowances and benefits
46. Approves the adjusted hardship system consisting of five categories, as proposed in paragraphs 122 and
413 of the report of the Commission, which would be effective immediately upon implementation and for which no
transitional measures would be required;
47. Also approves the new non-family service allowance, in lieu of the current additional hardship
allowance, as described in paragraph 421 of the report of the Commission, and underlines that no transitional
measures would be put in place for this allowance;
48. Further approves the new mobility incentive to encourage mobility of staff to field duty stations, as
recommended by the Commission in paragraphs 129 and 431 of its report, which would apply to staff with five
consecutive years of prior service in an organization of the common system and from their second assignment, and
which would exclude category H duty stations;
49. Decides to increase the proposed mobility incentive by 25 per cent upon the fourth assignment of a staff
member and by 50 per cent upon the seventh assignment;
925

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

50. Also decides to maintain the provisions of the current rest and recuperation framework, as proposed by
the Commission in paragraph 443 (a) of its report;
51. Further decides to discontinue accelerated home leave travel, except at category D and E duty stations
that do not fall under the rest and recuperation framework;
11.

Compensation review and other issues
52. Takes note of the Commission’s intention to review the use of different categories of staff;

53. Approves an incentive payment for the recruitment of experts in highly specialized fields in instances in
which the Organization is unable to attract suitably qualified personnel, as described and recommended in
paragraphs 271 and 279 (c) of the report of the Commission, and decides that the Commission should assess the
scheme after a period of three years from the date of its implementation;
54. Recalls its request contained in its resolution 69/251 that the Commission continue to monitor progress
in achieving gender balance, and requests the Commission to provide information to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session on the progress made by organizations of the common system in the implementation of
existing gender policies and measures towards achieving the goal of 50/50 gender balance in the common system;
55. Recalls the decisions of the Commission contained in paragraph 137 of its report for 2014,74 and in this
regard requests the Commission to provide information to the General Assembly in future annual reports on how the
new compensation package contributes to the strengthening of gender balance and geographical diversity;
56. Invites the organizations of the United Nations common system to make efforts to ensure work-life
balance and provide career development opportunities, which are important elements in motivating and
retaining staff;
57. Invites the Commission to present to the General Assembly, at its seventy-first session, a progress report
on the implementation of the new common system compensation package, and a comprehensive assessment report,
including a global staff survey on the conditions of service, no later than its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 70/245
A/RES/70/245

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/416/Add.1, para. 6)

70/245.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions and decisions on the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations, including its resolutions 55/5 B and C of 23 December 2000, 57/4 B of
20 December 2002, 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, 61/237 of 22 December 2006, 64/248 of 24 December 2009 and
67/238 of 24 December 2012 and its decision 68/548 of 27 December 2013,
Reaffirming Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations and rule 160 of its rules of procedure,
Recalling paragraphs 5 and 6 of its resolution 58/1 B,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Contributions on its seventy-fifth session75 and the report
of the Secretary-General on multi-year payment plans,76

_______________
74

Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/69/30).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/70/11).
76
A/70/69.
75

926

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Committee on Contributions on its seventy-fifth session;75

2. Reaffirms that the determination of the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the
United Nations shall remain the prerogative of the General Assembly;
3. Also reaffirms the fundamental principle that the expenses of the Organization shall be apportioned
broadly according to capacity to pay;
4. Further reaffirms the obligation of all Member States to bear the expenses of the United Nations,
as apportioned by the General Assembly, in conformity with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations;
5. Reaffirms that the Committee on Contributions as a technical body is required to prepare the scale of
assessments strictly on the basis of reliable, verifiable and comparable data;
6. Decides that the scale of assessments for the period from 2016 to 2018 shall be based on the following
elements and criteria:
(a)

Estimates of gross national income;

(b)

Average statistical base periods of three and six years;

(c) Conversion rates based on market exchange rates, except where that would cause excessive fluctuations
and distortions in the income of some Member States, when price-adjusted rates of exchange or other appropriate
conversion rates should be employed, taking due account of its resolution 46/221 B of 20 December 1991;
(d)

The debt-burden approach employed in the scale of assessments for the period from 2013 to 2015;

(e) A low per capita income adjustment of 80 per cent, with a threshold per capita income limit of the
average per capita gross national income of all Member States for the statistical base periods;
(f)

A minimum assessment rate of 0.001 per cent;

(g)

A maximum assessment rate for the least developed countries of 0.01 per cent;

(h)

A maximum assessment rate of 22 per cent;

7.
to pay;

Recognizes that the current methodology can be enhanced, bearing in mind the principle of capacity

8. Requests the Committee on Contributions, in accordance with its mandate and the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly, to review and make recommendations on the elements of the methodology of the scale of
assessments in order to reflect the capacity of Member States to pay, and to report thereon to the Assembly by the
main part of its seventy-third session;
9.

Notes that there were limitations in the data set available for the preparation of the scale of assessments;

10. Requests the Committee on Contributions, in accordance with rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, to consider all relevant data in appeals submitted by Member States that may affect their
capacity to pay;
11. Encourages Member States to submit national accounts data under the 1993 and the 2008 System of
National Accounts on a timely basis;
12. Supports the efforts of the Statistics Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
Secretariat in supporting statistics at the national level and in providing support to countries and regional
organizations to enhance coordination, advocacy and resources for the implementation of the 1993 and the 2008
System of National Accounts;
13. Resolves that the scale of assessments for the contributions of Member States to the regular budget of the
United Nations for 2016, 2017 and 2018 shall be as follows:

927

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

928

Member State

Percentage

Member State

Percentage

Afghanistan

0.006

Costa Rica.................................................................................

0.047

Albania......................................................................................

0.008

Côte d’Ivoire ............................................................................

0.009

Algeria.......................................................................................

0.161

Croatia .......................................................................................

0.099

Andorra .....................................................................................

0.006

Cuba ..........................................................................................

0.065

Angola.......................................................................................

0.010

Cyprus .......................................................................................

0.043

Antigua and Barbuda ..............................................................

0.002

Czech Republic ........................................................................

0.344

Argentina ..................................................................................

0.892

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea ..............................

0.005

Armenia ....................................................................................

0.006

Democratic Republic of the Congo.......................................

0.008

Australia....................................................................................

2.337

Denmark ...................................................................................

0.584

Austria .......................................................................................

0.720

Djibouti .....................................................................................

0.001

Azerbaijan ................................................................................

0.060

Dominica ..................................................................................

0.001

Bahamas ...................................................................................

0.014

Dominican Republic ...............................................................

0.046

Bahrain......................................................................................

0.044

Ecuador .....................................................................................

0.067

Bangladesh ...............................................................................

0.010

Egypt .........................................................................................

0.152

Barbados ...................................................................................

0.007

El Salvador ...............................................................................

0.014

Belarus ......................................................................................

0.056

Equatorial Guinea ....................................................................

0.010

Belgium ....................................................................................

0.885

Eritrea ........................................................................................

0.001

Belize ........................................................................................

0.001

Estonia.......................................................................................

0.038

Benin .........................................................................................

0.003

Ethiopia .....................................................................................

0.010

Bhutan .......................................................................................

0.001

Fiji..............................................................................................

0.003

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)...............................................

0.012

Finland ......................................................................................

0.456

Bosnia and Herzegovina .........................................................

0.013

France........................................................................................

4.859

Botswana ..................................................................................

0.014

Gabon........................................................................................

0.017

Brazil .........................................................................................

3.823

Gambia......................................................................................

0.001

Brunei Darussalam ..................................................................

0.029

Georgia......................................................................................

0.008

Bulgaria.....................................................................................

0.045

Germany ...................................................................................

6.389

Burkina Faso ............................................................................

0.004

Ghana ........................................................................................

0.016

Burundi .....................................................................................

0.001

Greece .......................................................................................

0.471

Cabo Verde ...............................................................................

0.001

Grenada.....................................................................................

0.001

Cambodia .................................................................................

0.004

Guatemala.................................................................................

0.028

Cameroon .................................................................................

0.010

Guinea .......................................................................................

0.002

Canada ......................................................................................

2.921

Guinea-Bissau ..........................................................................

0.001

Central African Republic ........................................................

0.001

Guyana ......................................................................................

0.002

Chad ..........................................................................................

0.005

Haiti ...........................................................................................

0.003

Chile ..........................................................................................

0.399

Honduras...................................................................................

0.008

China .........................................................................................

7.921

Hungary ....................................................................................

0.161

Colombia ..................................................................................

0.322

Iceland.......................................................................................

0.023

Comoros ...................................................................................

0.001

India...........................................................................................

0.737

Congo........................................................................................

0.006

Indonesia...................................................................................

0.504

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Member State

Percentage

Member State

Percentage

Iran (Islamic Republic of).......................................................

0.471

Namibia ....................................................................................

0.010

Iraq.............................................................................................

0.129

Nauru.........................................................................................

0.001

Ireland .......................................................................................

0.335

Nepal .........................................................................................

0.006

Israel ..........................................................................................

0.430

Netherlands...............................................................................

1.482

Italy............................................................................................

3.748

New Zealand ............................................................................

0.268

Jamaica .....................................................................................

0.009

Nicaragua..................................................................................

0.004

Japan..........................................................................................

9.680

Niger..........................................................................................

0.002

Jordan ........................................................................................

0.020

Nigeria.......................................................................................

0.209

Kazakhstan ...............................................................................

0.191

Norway .....................................................................................

0.849

Kenya ........................................................................................

0.018

Oman.........................................................................................

0.113

Kiribati ......................................................................................

0.001

Pakistan .....................................................................................

0.093

Kuwait.......................................................................................

0.285

Palau ..........................................................................................

0.001

Kyrgyzstan................................................................................

0.002

Panama......................................................................................

0.034

Lao People’s Democratic Republic .......................................

0.003

Papua New Guinea..................................................................

0.004

Latvia ........................................................................................

0.050

Paraguay ...................................................................................

0.014

Lebanon ....................................................................................

0.046

Peru............................................................................................

0.136

Lesotho .....................................................................................

0.001

Philippines ................................................................................

0.165

Liberia .......................................................................................

0.001

Poland .......................................................................................

0.841

Libya .........................................................................................

0.125

Portugal .....................................................................................

0.392

Liechtenstein ............................................................................

0.007

Qatar ..........................................................................................

0.269

Lithuania ...................................................................................

0.072

Republic of Korea ...................................................................

2.039

Luxembourg .............................................................................

0.064

Republic of Moldova ..............................................................

0.004

Madagascar ..............................................................................

0.003

Romania....................................................................................

0.184

Malawi ......................................................................................

0.002

Russian Federation ..................................................................

3.088

Malaysia....................................................................................

0.322

Rwanda .....................................................................................

0.002

Maldives ...................................................................................

0.002

Saint Kitts and Nevis...............................................................

0.001

Mali ...........................................................................................

0.003

Saint Lucia................................................................................

0.001

Malta .........................................................................................

0.016

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines..........................................

0.001

Marshall Islands .......................................................................

0.001

Samoa........................................................................................

0.001

Mauritania ................................................................................

0.002

San Marino ...............................................................................

0.003

Mauritius...................................................................................

0.012

Sao Tome and Principe ...........................................................

0.001

Mexico ......................................................................................

1.435

Saudi Arabia .............................................................................

1.146

Micronesia (Federated States of) ...........................................

0.001

Senegal......................................................................................

0.005

Monaco .....................................................................................

0.010

Serbia ........................................................................................

0.032

Mongolia...................................................................................

0.005

Seychelles .................................................................................

0.001

Montenegro ..............................................................................

0.004

Sierra Leone .............................................................................

0.001

Morocco....................................................................................

0.054

Singapore ..................................................................................

0.447

Mozambique ............................................................................

0.004

Slovakia ....................................................................................

0.160

Myanmar ..................................................................................

0.010

Slovenia ....................................................................................

0.084

929

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Member State

Percentage

Member State

Percentage

Solomon Islands ......................................................................

0.001

Tunisia.......................................................................................

0.028

Somalia .....................................................................................

0.001

Turkey .......................................................................................

1.018

South Africa..............................................................................

0.364

Turkmenistan ...........................................................................

0.026

South Sudan .............................................................................

0.003

Tuvalu .......................................................................................

0.001

Spain..........................................................................................

2.443

Uganda ......................................................................................

0.009

Sri Lanka...................................................................................

0.031

Ukraine .....................................................................................

0.103

Sudan.........................................................................................

0.010

United Arab Emirates..............................................................

0.604

Suriname...................................................................................

0.006

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ....

4.463

Swaziland .................................................................................

0.002

United Republic of Tanzania..................................................

0.010

Sweden......................................................................................

0.956

United States of America ........................................................ 22.000

Switzerland...............................................................................

1.140

Uruguay ....................................................................................

0.079

Syrian Arab Republic ..............................................................

0.024

Uzbekistan ................................................................................

0.023

Tajikistan...................................................................................

0.004

Vanuatu .....................................................................................

0.001

Thailand ....................................................................................

0.291

Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) ......................................

0.571

The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .....................

0.007

Viet Nam...................................................................................

0.058

Timor-Leste ..............................................................................

0.003

Yemen .......................................................................................

0.010

Togo...........................................................................................

0.001

Zambia ......................................................................................

0.007

Tonga.........................................................................................

0.001

Zimbabwe.................................................................................

0.004

Trinidad and Tobago ...............................................................

0.034

Total

100.000

14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on multi-year payment plans76 and the related
conclusions and recommendations of the Committee on Contributions;75
15. Reaffirms paragraph 1 of its resolution 57/4 B;
16. Urges all Member States to pay their assessed contributions in full, on time and without imposing
conditions;
17. Urges all Member States currently in arrears to settle those arrears promptly and in full;
18. Encourages Member States in arrears with their assessed contributions to the United Nations to consider
submitting multi-year payment plans;
19. Resolves that:
(a) Notwithstanding the terms of financial regulation 3.10 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the
United Nations,77 the Secretary-General shall be empowered to accept, at his discretion and after consultation with
the Chair of the Committee on Contributions, a portion of the contributions of Member States for the calendar years
2016, 2017 and 2018 in currencies other than the United States dollar;
(b) In accordance with financial regulation 3.9, the Holy See, which is not a member of the United Nations
but which participates in certain of its activities, shall be called upon to contribute towards the expenses of the
Organization for 2016, 2017 and 2018 on the basis of a notional assessment rate of 0.001 per cent, which represents
the basis for the calculation of the flat annual fees to be charged to the Holy See in accordance with its resolution
44/197 B of 21 December 1989;
_______________
77

930

ST/SGB/2013/4.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(c) In accordance with financial regulation 3.9, the State of Palestine, which is not a member of the United
Nations but which participates in certain of its activities, shall be called upon to contribute towards the expenses of
the Organization for 2016, 2017 and 2018 on the basis of a notional assessment rate of 0.007 per cent, which
represents the basis for the calculation of the flat annual fees to be charged to the State of Palestine in accordance
with its resolution 44/197 B.
RESOLUTION 70/246
A/RES/70/246

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/636, para. 6)

70/246.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of United Nations
peacekeeping operations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/235 and 55/236 of 23 December 2000, 58/256 of 23 December 2003, 61/243 of
22 December 2006, 64/249 of 24 December 2009 and 67/239 of 24 December 2012,
Reaffirming the principles set out in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of
11 December 1973 and 55/235,
Recalling its request to the Secretary-General, in paragraph 15 of its resolution 55/235, to update the
composition of the levels of contribution of Member States for peacekeeping operations described in the resolution
on a triennial basis, in conjunction with the regular budget scale of assessment reviews, in accordance with the
criteria established in the resolution, and to report thereon to the General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions 55/235
and 55/236,78
1. Reaffirms that the determination of the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
United Nations peacekeeping operations shall remain the prerogative of the General Assembly;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General78 and of the updated composition of levels of
contribution for peacekeeping operations for the period from 2016 to 2018 contained therein;79
3. Reaffirms the following general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations:
(a) The financing of such operations is the collective responsibility of all States Members of the United
Nations and, accordingly, the costs of peacekeeping operations are expenses of the Organization to be borne by
Member States in accordance with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations;
(b) In order to meet the expenditures caused by such operations, a different procedure is required from that
applied to meet expenditures under the regular budget of the United Nations;
(c) Whereas the economically more developed countries are in a position to make relatively larger
contributions to peacekeeping operations, the economically less developed countries have a relatively limited
capacity to contribute towards peacekeeping operations involving heavy expenditures;
(d) The special responsibilities of the permanent members of the Security Council for the maintenance of
peace and security should be borne in mind in connection with their contributions to the financing of peace and
security operations;

_______________
78
79

A/70/331.
Ibid., annex II.

931

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(e) Where circumstances warrant, the General Assembly should give special consideration to the situation
of any Member States which are victims of, and those which are otherwise involved in, the events or actions leading
to a peacekeeping operation;
4. Also reaffirms that assessment rates for the financing of peacekeeping operations should be based on the
scale of assessments for the regular budget of the United Nations, with an appropriate and transparent system of
adjustments based on the levels of Member States, consistent with the principles outlined above;
5. Recognizes the need to reform the current methodology for apportioning the expenses of peacekeeping
operations;
6. Reaffirms that the permanent members of the Security Council should form a separate level and that,
consistent with their special responsibilities for the maintenance of peace and security, they should be assessed at a
higher rate than for the regular budget;
7. Also reaffirms that all discounts resulting from adjustments to the regular budget assessment rates of
Member States in levels C to J shall be borne on a pro rata basis by the permanent members of the Security Council;
8. Further reaffirms that the statistical data used for setting the rates of assessment for peacekeeping should
be the same as the data used in preparing the regular budget scale of assessments, subject to the provisions of the
present resolution;
9. Reaffirms that the least developed countries should be placed in a separate level and receive the highest
rate of discount available under the scale;
10. Also reaffirms the decision to create levels of discount to facilitate automatic, predictable movement
between categories on the basis of the per capita gross national income of Member States;
11. Decides that, as from 1 January 2016, the rates of assessment for peacekeeping should be based on the
10 levels of contribution and parameters set forth in the table below:

Level

Criterion

Threshold in United States dollars
(2016–2018)

Discount
(percentage)

A

Permanent members of the Security Council

Not applicable

Premium

B

All Member States, except those covered below and level A

Not applicable

0

C

As listed in the annex to General Assembly resolution 55/235

Not applicable

7.5

D

Member States with per capita gross national income less than 2 times Under 19,722
the average for all Member States (except level A, C and J
contributors)

20

E

Member States with per capita gross national income less than 1.8
times the average for all Member States (except level A, C and J
contributors)

Under 17,750

40

F

Member States with per capita gross national income less than 1.6
times the average for all Member States (except level A, C and J
contributors)

Under 15,778

60

G

Member States with per capita gross national income less than 1.4
times the average for all Member States (except level A, C and J
contributors)

Under 13,805

70

H

Member States with per capita gross national income less than 1.2
times the average for all Member States (except level A, C and J
contributors)

Under 11,833

80 (or 70 on a voluntary
basis)a

I

Member States with per capita gross national income less than the
average for all Member States (except level A, C and J contributors)

Under 9,861

80

J

Least developed countries (except level A and C contributors)

Not applicable

90

a

932

Member States in level H* have a discount of 70 per cent.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Encourages States Members of the United Nations at all levels to move up voluntarily in their level of
contribution;
13. Welcomes with appreciation the commitment of certain Member States to undertake voluntarily to
contribute to peacekeeping operations at a rate higher than required by their per capita income;
14. Recalls its decision that, at any time during the scale period, a Member State may make a voluntary
commitment to contribute at a rate higher than its current rate by informing the General Assembly through the
Secretary-General, and that the Assembly may take note of that decision;
15. Reaffirms that Member States will be assigned to the lowest level of contribution with the highest
discount for which they are eligible, unless they indicate a decision to move to a higher level;
16. Also reaffirms that, for purposes of determining the eligibility of Member States for contribution in
particular levels during the 2016–2018 scale period, the average per capita gross national income of all Member
States will be 9,861 United States dollars and the per capita gross national income of Member States will be the
average of 2008 to 2013 figures;
17. Further reaffirms that transition periods of two years will apply to countries moving up by two levels,
and that transition periods of three years will apply to countries moving up by three or more levels without prejudice
to paragraph 15 above;
18. Reaffirms that transitions as specified above will occur in equal increments over the transition period as
designated above;
19. Endorses the updated composition of levels to be applied in adjusting regular budget scale rates to
establish Member States’ rates of assessment for peacekeeping operations for the period from 2016 to 2018;80
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to update the composition of the levels described above on a
triennial basis, in conjunction with the regular budget scale of assessment reviews, in accordance with the criteria
established above, and to report thereon to the General Assembly;
21. Decides to review the structure of the levels of the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations during its seventy-third session.
RESOLUTION 70/247
A/RES/70/247

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/648, para. 43)

70/247.

Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 42/211 of 21 December 1987, 45/248 B, section VI,
of 21 December 1990, 55/231 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001, 58/269 and 58/270 of
23 December 2003, 59/276, section XI, of 23 December 2004, 60/283 of 7 July 2006, 61/263 of 4 April 2007,
62/236 of 22 December 2007, 63/262 of 24 December 2008, 64/243 of 24 December 2009, 65/259 of 24 December
2010, 66/246 and 66/247 of 24 December 2011, 68/246 of 27 December 2013 and 69/262 and 69/264 of
29 December 2014,
Reaffirming also the respective mandates of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and the Committee for Programme and Coordination in the consideration of the proposed programme
budget,
Reaffirming further the role of the General Assembly, through the Fifth Committee, in carrying out a thorough
analysis and approval of posts and financial resources, as well as of human resources policies,

_______________
80

A/70/331/Add.1, annex.

933

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017,81 the ninth progress report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of projects financed from the Development Account,82 the report of
the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on internal oversight: proposed programme budget for the biennium
2016–201783 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,84
Having also considered the relevant parts of chapter II, section A, of the report of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination on its fifty-fifth session85 and chapter I of the report of the Secretary-General on the
consolidated changes to the biennial programme plan as reflected in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016–2017 and proposals to improve the implementation of results-based budgeting,86
Having further considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on the review of the management and administration of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights,87 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments on the recommendations
thereon,88 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on records and
archives management in the United Nations89 and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and
those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon,90
1. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly
entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters, and reaffirms the role of the Fifth
Committee in carrying out a thorough analysis and approving human and financial resources and policies, with a
view to ensuring full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the
implementation of policies in this regard;
2. Also reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as the main subsidiary organ
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for planning, programming and coordination;
3.

Further reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

4. Reaffirms the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the
Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation;91
5.

Also reaffirms the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;92

6. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as
contained in the relevant parts of chapter II, section A, of its report;85
7. Also endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,84 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
8. Stresses that all Member States should fulfil their financial obligations as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations on time, in full and without conditions;
9. Reaffirms the established budgetary procedures and methodologies, based on its resolutions 41/213
and 42/211;
_______________
81

A/70/6 (Introduction), (Sect. 1), (Sect. 2) and Corr.1, (Sect. 3) and Corr.1, (Sect. 4), (Sect. 5) and Corr.1, (Sect. 6), (Sect. 7), (Sect. 8) and
Corr.1, (Sects. 9–12), (Sect. 13) and Add.1/Rev.1, (Sect. 14) and Corr.1, (Sect. 15), (Sect. 16), (Sect. 17) and Corr.1, (Sect. 18) and Corr.1,
(Sects. 19–23), (Sect. 24) and Corr.1, (Sects. 25–27), (Sect. 28) and Corr.1 and 2, (Sect. 29), (Sect. 29A) and Corr.1, (Sect. 29B), (Sect.
29C) and Corr.1, (Sect. 29D), (Sect. 29E), (Sect. 29F) and Corr.1, (Sect. 29G), (Sect. 29H) and (Sects. 30–36) and (Income Sects. 1–3).
82
A/70/97.
83
A/70/86.
84
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/70/7).
85
Ibid., Supplement No. 16 (A/70/16).
86
A/70/80.
87
A/70/68.
88
A/70/68/Add.1.
89
A/70/280.
90
A/70/280/Add.1.
91
ST/SGB/2000/8.
92
ST/SGB/2013/4.

934

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Also reaffirms that no changes to the budget methodology, to established budgetary procedures and
practices or to the financial regulations may be implemented without prior review and approval by the General
Assembly, in accordance with established budgetary procedures;
11. Reiterates the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget preparation process, from its
early stages and throughout the process;
12. Emphasizes the importance of providing the consistent and timely information necessary to enable
Member States to make well-informed decisions;
13. Reiterates the priorities of the Organization for the biennium 2016–2017 as outlined in General
Assembly resolution 69/264;
14. Recalls its resolutions 69/313 of 27 July 2015 and 70/1 of 25 September 2015, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide, at the first part of its resumed seventieth session, a comprehensive proposal
addressing the effective and efficient delivery of mandates in support of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development93 and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development94 by the Secretariat, within the broader United Nations system, including the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the regional commissions
and the United Nations Development Account;
15. Reiterates that the allocation of resources should reflect fully the priorities established in the biennial
programme plan;
16. Recognizes the need for measures to improve the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations, with a view to strengthening its effectiveness in dealing with political, economic
and social issues;
17. Also recognizes, furthermore, that efforts to achieve savings and the efficient utilization of resources
constitute an ongoing process and should not adversely affect the full implementation of mandated programmes and
activities;
18. Recalls paragraph 21 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and reaffirms that the budget proposals of
the Secretary-General should reflect resource levels commensurate with mandates for their full, efficient and
effective implementation;
19. Also recalls paragraphs 44 and 45 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that future budget proposals are prepared on the basis of the preliminary estimates for the overall
budget level provided in the budget outline resolution;
20. Further recalls paragraph 66 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to evaluate and consider the entire quantum of resources necessary to carry out the programmes and
activities mandated by the General Assembly and other organs and to report thereon in the context of his next
budget proposal;
21. Recalls paragraph 17 of its resolution 64/243, notes the practice of incremental budgeting where only
new requirements are justified, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, whenever new proposals lead to
requests for additional resources, sufficient efforts are made to meet the new requirements using existing resources;
22. Stresses that the contingency fund should be used in strict accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9
of annex I to resolution 41/213 and paragraph 3 of section C of the annex to resolution 42/211;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take advantage of the potential of new systems and
standards, such as the Umoja enterprise resource planning system and the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards, in preparing his budget proposals, with a view to enhancing the quality and accuracy of information
provided to Member States;
_______________
93
94

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.

935

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Reiterates section IX of its resolution 69/274 A of 2 April 2015, and requests its full and immediate
implementation;
25. Acknowledges the use by the Secretary-General of forward purchasing in order to reduce the
Organization’s exposure to exchange rate fluctuations, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on
the experience of forward purchasing, including the amount of forward currency purchased and the total
expenditure in those currencies in the context of the budget performance reports;
26. Endorses the proposal of the Secretary-General with regard to the presentation of performance measures
and outputs and the recommendation of the Advisory Committee that future proposed programme budgets include
actual past performance information so as to allow for the comparison of trends;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to include an equivalent to schedule 10 in the introduction to the
proposed programme budget95 for each duty station in forthcoming proposed programme budgets;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to disseminate, as supplementary information, budgetary tables in
spreadsheet format for ease of analysis and review;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit reports to the Advisory Committee no later than two weeks in
advance of its scheduled consideration of items so as to ensure that the Committee will, in turn, provide its advice to the
General Assembly no later than two weeks in advance of formal introduction of an item, with an exception for revised
estimates and programme budget implications arising in the course of the main part of the session of the Assembly;
30. Stresses that results-based budgeting and results-based management are mutually supportive
management tools and that improved implementation of results-based budgeting enhances both management and
accountability in the Secretariat, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard;
31. Reaffirms that the vacancy rate is a tool for budgetary calculations and should not be used to achieve
budgetary savings;
32. Recalls paragraphs 56 and 57 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to apply the vacancy
rate of 50 per cent for new General Service posts and 6 per cent for continuing General Service posts as a basis for
the calculation of the budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
33. Decides that the staffing table for the biennium 2016–2017 shall be as set out in the annex to the present
resolution;
34. Reaffirms paragraph 3 of Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, reiterates that the principle of
equitable geographical distribution and gender balance in the composition of the Secretariat does not conflict with
the paramount consideration in the employment of staff, namely, the necessity of securing the highest standards of
efficiency, competence and integrity, and requests the Secretary-General to recruit staff to fill the posts approved in
the budget for the biennium 2016–2017 with a view to improving geographical representation and gender balance in
the Secretariat;
35. Regrets the slow pace of recruitment in the Organization, and requests the Secretary-General to fill
vacancies expeditiously, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and existing provisions
governing recruitment in the United Nations;
36. Recalls paragraph 34 of its resolution 67/255 of 12 April 2013, regrets that the Office of Human
Resources Management has set a target of 180 days from the date of issuance of vacancy announcements to the date
of selection for all regular vacancies advertised, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake the
efforts necessary to achieve the target of 120 days;
37. Requests the Secretary-General not to propose the freezing of posts in future budget proposals;
38. Decides not to freeze the following posts contained in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016–2017:81
(a)

Two General Service (Other level), Statistics Assistant, section 12, Trade and development;

_______________
95

936

See A/70/6 (Introduction), annex.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(b)

One P-3, Economic Affairs Officer, section 18, Economic and social development in Africa;

(c)

One P-4, Chief of Unit, section 18, Economic and social development in Africa;

(d)
Pacific;

One Local level, Finance Assistant, section 19, Economic and social development in Asia and the

(e) One Local level, Computer Systems Assistant, section 19, Economic and social development in Asia
and the Pacific;
(f)

One Local level, Assistant, section 19, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific;

(g) One Local level, Staff Assistant, section 21, Economic and social development in Latin America and the
Caribbean;
(h) One Local level, Library Assistant, section 21, Economic and social development in Latin America and
the Caribbean;
(i) One P-4, Computer Systems Officer, section 21, Economic and social development in Latin America
and the Caribbean;
(j)

One Local level, Statistics Assistant, section 22, Economic and social development in Western Asia;

(k)

One P-3, Information Officer, section 28, Public information;

(l)

One P-5, Human Resources Officer, Outreach, section 29C, Office of Human Resources Management;

(m) One P-3, Language Coordinator, section 29H, Administration, Nairobi;
39. Also decides to abolish the remaining 67 posts proposed for freezing immediately or upon the starting
date of the proposed freeze;
40. Takes note of paragraph 79 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
41. Recalls paragraph 88 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General, when
presenting staffing proposals, to reflect their impact on the grade structure of the Organization, with a view to
addressing the persistent problem of the increasing number of posts at the level of D-1 and above;
42. Decides to reduce the resources for supplies and materials by 5 per cent;
43. Also decides to reduce other staff costs by 5 per cent;
44. Further decides to reduce resources for furniture and equipment by 5 per cent;
45. Recalls paragraph 116 of the report of the Advisory Committee, reaffirms that the use of external
consultants should be kept to an absolute minimum and their services be used only when necessary, and stresses the
need for using in-house capacity of the Organization to perform core activities or to fulfil functions that are recurrent
over the long term;
46. Decides to reduce the proposed resources for consultants by 10 per cent, in addition to the reductions
recommended by the Advisory Committee;
47. Emphasizes the importance of training in improving the quality of staff performance, and requests the
Secretary-General to assess how training programmes contribute to the implementation of mandates and the goals
of the Organization;
48. Decides to reduce the resources for travel of staff by 5 per cent in addition to the reductions already
recommended by the Advisory Committee, with the exception of travel required under sections 9 and 18 to 23 of
the proposed programme budget;
49. Stresses that all extrabudgetary posts must be administered and managed with the same rigour as regular
budget posts;
50. Also stresses that extrabudgetary resources shall be used in consistency with the policies, aims and activities
of the Organization, and requests the Secretary-General to provide information on the financial and human resource
implications of the use of extrabudgetary resources in the Organization in his next proposed programme budget;
937

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Part I
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
Section 1
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
51. Stresses the importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and of ensuring greater
accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for the effective and efficient implementation
of legislative mandates and the use of human and financial resources;
52. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in the context of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2018–2019, proposals to review the budget allocation to the Office of the President of the General
Assembly in accordance with existing procedures;
Section 2
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management
53. Recalls that the Conference of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
has held six meetings over three days for the past three years, and decides that future annual meetings of States
parties to the Convention shall be accorded conference servicing to cover the full three days of meetings;
Part II
Political affairs
Section 3
Political affairs
54. Encourages the Secretary-General to consider including proposals to strengthen capacities for conflict
prevention and mediation in future budget submissions;
55. Recalls paragraph 11 of section IV of its resolution 69/262, and expresses serious concern about the
failure to comply with the provision contained in the said resolution;
56. Approves the reclassification of one Assistant Secretary-General post as an Under-Secretary-General in
the United Nations Office to the African Union;
57. Recalls paragraph II.16 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to approve the
reclassification of six posts of Close Protection Officer (Security Service) in the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process;
58. Emphasizes the need for collaboration between the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support of the Secretariat, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure systemic cooperation so as to prevent duplication among the three departments;
59. Decides to reduce resources for supplies and materials and furniture and equipment by 5 per cent;
60. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that there is no duplication in the existing
coordination mechanisms for the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system, as well as in the
organizational and governance arrangements and functions of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
Office and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre;
Section 4
Disarmament
61. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the United Nations regional centres for peace and
disarmament with the resources necessary to discharge their mandates;
Section 5
Peacekeeping operations
62. Takes note of paragraph II.54 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
63. Also takes note of paragraph II.55 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to establish the
one P-3 post of Political Affairs Officer for the Analysis Team in the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization;
938

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

64. Further takes note of paragraph II.57 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to
abolish the seven posts (two Field Service and five Local level);
65. Requests the Secretary-General to make further concrete efforts to ensure proper representation of troopcontributing countries in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, taking
into account their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping;
Part III
International justice and law
Section 7
International Court of Justice
66. Recalls paragraph III.5 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to abolish three General
Service (Other level) posts in view of the expected realization of the electronic document management system;
Part IV
International cooperation for development
67. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his fundraising efforts to support the mandates related to
sections 10 and 11 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
Section 9
Economic and social affairs
68. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure that the Organization’s support for small island developing
States, including for the implementation of the sustainable development priorities identified in the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway)96 and set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, is adequately addressed, given the mandates following the adoption of the Samoa Pathway and the
2030 Agenda, and bearing in mind that small island developing States remain a special case for sustainable
development, in the light of their unique and particular vulnerabilities;
69. Takes note of paragraph IV.8 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to approve the
proposed post for one P-4 under subprogramme 3;
70. Also takes note of paragraph IV.10 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish
the one P-5 post (Chief of the Small Island Developing States Unit);
71. Decides to maintain the Small Island Developing States Unit as a separate entity dedicated to the
sustainable development of small island developing States under subprogramme 3 in the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs;
72. Recalls paragraphs IV.24 to IV.28 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide further detailed information on the proposed Secretariat contribution to support the resident
coordinator system at the first part of the resumed seventieth session of the General Assembly;
Section 10
Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States
73. Recalls that, within the context of the priority for the promotion of sustainable economic growth and
sustainable development, particular attention should be paid to the needs of the least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, and requests the Secretary-General to continue
his efforts to support their sustainable development needs;
Section 11
United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
74. Recalls that the development of Africa is an established priority of the United Nations, and reaffirms its
commitment to address the special needs of Africa;
_______________
96

Resolution 69/15, annex.

939

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Section 12
Trade and development
75. Decides to establish one P-5 post, Senior Statistician, one P-4 post, Statistician, and one P-2 post,
Associate Statistician;
Section 14
Environment
76. Recalls that the conversion of posts from extrabudgetary resources to the regular budget are subject to
the pertinent rules and regulations for new posts;
77. Takes note of paragraph IV.118 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to approve the
following conversions:
(a)

Under subprogramme 1, Climate change: two P-4;

(b)

Under subprogramme 2, Disasters and conflicts: one P-4 and one P-3;

(c)

Under subprogramme 3, Ecosystem management: two P-4;

(d)

Under subprogramme 4, Environmental governance: four P-4 and one P-3;

(e)

Under subprogramme 5, Chemicals and waste: one P-4 and one P-3;

(f)
one P-3;
(g)

Under subprogramme 6, Resource efficiency and sustainable consumption and production: one P-4 and
Under subprogramme 7, Environment under review: four P-4 and two P-3;

Section 16
International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice
78. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen the provision of technical assistance through
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to the West Africa Coast Initiative in order to support the
implementation of a regional action plan to address the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking, organized crime
and drug abuse in West Africa;
Part V
Regional cooperation for development
79. Emphasizes the important contribution that the regional commissions are making towards the
implementation of the development agenda and other mandates given to them arising from the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the outcomes of other major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields;
Section 19
Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific
80. Recalls paragraph V.40 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to approve the
provision of the share of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific to the Inter-Agency
Support Unit;
Section 20
Economic development in Europe
81. Takes note of paragraph V.54 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to abolish one vacant
General Service post at the Economic Commission for Europe;
82. Decides to abolish three General Service (Other level) posts under subprogrammes 1, 2 and 6;

940

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Section 21
Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean
83. Takes note of paragraph V.69 of the report of the Advisory Committee, recognizes the differentiated
impact of across-the-board cuts between duty stations, and decides to increase the budget allocation for travel of
staff for the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean by 9.9 per cent;
Part VI
Human rights and humanitarian affairs
Section 24
Human rights
84. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a revised
proposal on the regional restructuring of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for
consideration and approval;
Section 25
International protection, durable solutions and assistance to refugees
85. Requests the Secretary-General to review the level of regular budget funding in the light of the growth in
the administrative budget of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
Section 26
Palestine refugees
86. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that measures to improve health
programmes and education programmes, including for children with special needs and disabilities, are implemented
in a timely manner;
87. Notes with appreciation the valuable work done by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and expresses concern regarding the financial stress under which the Agency
currently operates, despite the critical work it carries out;
88. Recalls paragraph VI.58 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
further examine the financing modalities of the Agency and to present his findings to the General Assembly in the
context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019;
89. Decides to establish one D-1 post, Director for Information Management, one P-5 post, Senior Adviser
on Staff Relations and Internal Communications, one P-4 post, Investigation Officer, and two P-3 posts, Legal
Officer;
Section 27
Humanitarian assistance
90. Takes note of paragraph VI.76 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
Part VII
Public information
Section 28
Public information
91. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure intensive collaboration with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support to promote a positive image of the peacekeeping
activities of the Organization and to support the public information components of peacekeeping missions;
92. Decides not to approve the new posts requested by the Department of Public Information;
93. Also decides to reduce non-post resources by 5 per cent;
941

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

94. Further decides to abolish six posts that have been vacant for more than two years as of
31 October 2015;
Part VIII
Common support services
95. Requests the Secretary-General to reduce by 5 per cent the overall number of General Service staff
funded under section 29;
Section 29C
Office of Human Resources Management
96. Takes note of paragraph VIII.68 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to reclassify one
P-4 general temporary assistance position for a medical specialist in infectious diseases under component 4, Medical
services, as a P-5 position;
97. Recalls paragraph 18 of its resolution 68/265 of 9 April 2014, notes with concern that the SecretaryGeneral has not provided in his current budget proposal a full estimate of and rationale for the financial resources
required for mobility in 2016 and 2017, including requests for any additional geographic moves necessary to
achieve the strategic objectives of mobility, and urges the Secretary-General to provide such information, including
details on the overexpenditure of 613,300 United States dollars under consultants during the biennium 2014–2015,
in the context of his next progress report on mobility;
Section 29D
Office of Central Support Services
98. Recalls paragraph VIII.96 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to reduce resources for
utilities by 10,979,200 dollars;
Section 29E
Office of Information and Communications Technology
99. Takes note of paragraph VIII.115 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to establish one
Associate Information Systems Officer (P-2) in the Global Security and Architecture Section and one Associate
Information Systems Officer (P-2) in the Executive Solutions and Knowledge Management Service of the Global
Services Division;
100. Also takes note of paragraph VIII.125 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to abolish
the post of Senior Information Systems Officer (P-5) in the Infrastructure Management Service;
Section 29F
Administration, Geneva
101. Takes note of paragraph VIII.145 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to approve
the proposed reclassification of the post of Chief of the Information and Communication Technology Service from
the P-5 to the D-1 level;
102. Also takes note of paragraph VIII.147 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to
approve the proposed reclassification of the post of Chief of the Transportation, Visa and Travel Unit from the P-3 to
the P-4 level;
Section 29H
Administration, Nairobi
103. Recalls paragraph 101 of its resolution 52/220 of 22 December 1997, and welcomes the measures taken
by the Secretary-General to bring the financial arrangements of the United Nations Office at Nairobi in line with
those of similar United Nations administrative offices;

942

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Part IX
Internal oversight
Section 30
Internal oversight
104. Takes note of paragraph IX.28 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
Part X
Jointly financed administrative activities and special expenses
Section 31
Jointly financed administrative activities
105. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his future budget submissions summary information on the
cost-sharing methodology applied in establishing the United Nations share of jointly financed activities under the
relevant budget section;
International Civil Service Commission
106. Takes note of paragraph X.12 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to appropriate
558,800 dollars for the travel of the secretariat of the International Civil Service Commission;
Joint Inspection Unit
107. Requests the Secretary-General to consider options for hosting the Joint Inspection Unit website inhouse and to report on this matter in the context of the forthcoming report on the implementation of the information
and communications strategy for the Secretariat;
Part XI
Capital expenditures
Section 33
Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance
108. Recalls paragraph XI.17 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to allocate 550,000
dollars for the feasibility study in Nairobi, 50,800 dollars for the renovation of the North Building at the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and 400,000 dollars for the renovation of the cafeteria and library
at the Economic Commission for Africa;
109. Takes note of paragraph XI.32 of the report of the Advisory Committee, decides to reduce the amount of
resources by 3.5 million dollars, and requests the Secretary-General to reprioritize the proposed projects under
“Alteration and improvement” for section 33;
Part XIII
Development Account
Section 35
Development Account
110. Recalls that the Secretary-General proposed the establishment of the Development Account to be funded
by savings from reduced non-programme costs and other management efficiencies;
Income section 3
Services to the public
111. Takes note of paragraphs IS3.18 and IS3.19 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
112. Stresses that the United Nations is an intergovernmental organization that does not seek profit.
943

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex
Staffing table for the biennium 2016–2017
Category

Number of posts

Professional and higher
Deputy Secretary-General

1

Under-Secretary-General

34

Assistant Secretary-General

30

D-2

112

D-1

292

P-5

863

P-4/3

2 915

P-2/1

521
Subtotal

4 768

General Service and related
Principal level

274

Other level

2 463
Subtotal

2 737

Other
Security Service

313

Local level

1 948

Field Service

110

National Professional Officer

82

Trades and Crafts

97
Subtotal

2 550

Total

10 055

RESOLUTION 70/248
A/RES/70/248

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/648, para. 43)

70/248.

Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017

The General Assembly,
I
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
Recalling section IV of its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006, section V of its resolution 63/262 of 24 December
2008, its resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009, its resolution 65/243 A and section II.B of its resolution 65/259 of
24 December 2010, section I of its resolution 66/232 B of 21 June 2012, its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011,
section IV of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012, its resolution 68/246 of 27 December 2013, section II of
its resolution 68/247 A of 27 December 2013 and section I of its resolution 69/262 of 29 December 2014,
944

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the eighth progress report of the Secretary-General on the adoption of the International
Public Sector Accounting Standards by the United Nations97 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;97

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;98
II
Limited budgetary discretion
Recalling its resolution 60/246 of 23 December 2005, section III of its resolution 60/283, its resolution 64/243,
section III of its resolution 64/260 of 29 March 2010, paragraph 115 of its resolution 66/246, section I of its
resolution 66/258 of 9 April 2012 and its resolution 68/246,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General99 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,100
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;99

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;100
III
Request for a subvention to the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research resulting from the recommendations
of the Board of Trustees of the Institute on the work programme
of the Institute for 2016–2017

Having considered the note by the Secretary-General101 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,102
1.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;101

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;102

3. Approves the request for a subvention to the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research of
584,600 United States dollars (before recosting) for the biennium 2016–2017 from the regular budget of the United
Nations, for which provision has already been included under section 4, Disarmament, of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
IV
Subvention to the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia
Recalling section I of its resolution 68/247 B of 9 April 2014 and section I of its resolution 69/274 A of
2 April 2015,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the request for a subvention to the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia103 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,104
_______________
97

A/70/329.
A/70/7/Add.2.
99
A/70/396.
100
A/70/7/Add.5.
101
A/70/349.
102
A/70/7/Add.9.
103
A/70/403.
104
A/70/7/Add.20.
98

945

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;103

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;104

3. Reaffirms the high priority accorded to the work of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an exceptional measure, to enter into commitments in an amount
not to exceed 12.1 million dollars to supplement the voluntary financial resources of the international component of
the Extraordinary Chambers for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2016, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on the use of commitment authority in the context of the next report;
5. Encourages all Member States to provide voluntary support for both the international and national
components of the Extraordinary Chambers, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his intensive efforts to
obtain additional voluntary contributions, including by broadening the donor base, for funding the future activities
of the Extraordinary Chambers;
V
Information and communications technology
in the United Nations
Recalling section II of its resolution 60/283, its resolutions 63/262, 63/269 of 7 April 2009 and 64/243,
section XVII of its resolution 65/259, its resolution 66/246, section I of its resolution 67/254 A of 12 April 2013,
section XV of its resolution 68/247 A and section II of its resolution 69/262,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the status of implementation of the information and
communications technology strategy for the United Nations105 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,106
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;105

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;106

3. Underlines the importance of information and communications technology in meeting the growing
demands of the Organization and of its role as a key enabler for business transformation initiatives at the global level
and for the harmonization of services across duty stations and field missions;
4. Also underlines the importance of information and communications technology in strengthening
oversight and accountability and in increasing the availability of accurate and timely information to support
decision-making, and encourages the continuing efforts of the Office of Information and Communications
Technology of the Department of Management of the Secretariat in this regard;
5. Notes the progress achieved in implementing the elements of the information and communications
technology strategy, emphasizes the importance of the full and timely implementation of the strategy across the
Organization, and requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the next progress report, to provide updated
information on, inter alia, its implementation, timeline, goals, benchmarks and deliverables, in order to measure its
performance, and on qualitative and quantitative benefits and risk management and mitigation mechanisms, as well
as on measures to reduce fragmentation;
6. Expresses concern at the lack of information and analysis on information and communications
technology resources for peacekeeping in the report, and requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive
assessment of information and communications technology as requested in section II of its resolution 69/262, taking
into account the comments and recommendations of the Advisory Committee, and to present an indicative, fiveyear, overall information and communications technology budget projection for the Secretariat in the context of the
next progress report;
_______________
105
106

946

A/70/364 and Corr.1.
A/70/7/Add.18.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to foster deeper coordination and collaboration within the
Organization, and emphasizes that the full support and commitment of senior management, as well as close and
continuous engagement with all stakeholders, keeping in mind the need to address all operational requirements, is
integral to the timely and successful implementation of the information and communications technology strategy;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of priority, to exercise proactive and strong leadership to
ensure full compliance by all entities of the Secretariat with the provisions of section II of its resolution 69/262,
including to report to the Chief Information Technology Officer on all issues relating to information and
communications technology activities, resource management, standards, security, architecture, policies and
guidance, and further requests the Secretary-General to update Member States regularly on progress made and to
provide information in this regard in the next progress report;
9. Welcomes the update related to the implementation of the 10-point information security action plan, and
underlines the need for a full application of a common security policy, with enhanced disaster recovery capabilities,
across the Secretariat, including in all peacekeeping entities;
10. Recalls paragraph 9 of section II of its resolution 69/262 and paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory
Committee, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to reduce the level of
fragmentation of the current information and communications technology environment across the Secretariat and at
all duty stations and field missions;
11. Also recalls paragraph 11 of section II of its resolution 69/262, and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to invite
the heads of United Nations entities to consider the possible harmonization and sharing of services as well as the
related costs of information and communications technology, as appropriate, in particular at field locations, and to
report thereon in the context of future progress reports;
12. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring the availability of appropriate in-house expertise to implement
the strategy, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard;
VI
Administrative expenses of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund
Recalling section VII of its resolution 68/247 A and its resolution 69/113 of 10 December 2014,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board on the administrative expenses
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund,107 the report of the Secretary-General on the administrative and
financial implications arising from the report of the Pension Board108 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee,109
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board107 and the report of the
Secretary-General;108
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,109
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Accepts the report of the Board of Auditors on the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund for the year
ended 31 December 2014;110

_______________
107

A/70/325.
A/C.5/70/2.
109
A/70/7/Add.6.
110
A/70/325, annex VI.
108

947

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Approves the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report, and requests the Pension
Board to ensure that all the recommendations of the Board of Auditors are implemented in full and in a timely
manner;
5. Welcomes the progress made by the Fund in the implementation of the integrated pension administration
system, and looks forward to receiving further updates in the context of the next report of the Pension Board;
6. Notes with concern the delays in the receipt of payments by some new beneficiaries and retirees of the
Fund, stresses the need for the Pension Board to take appropriate steps to ensure that the Fund addresses the causes
of such delays, and in this regard requests an update in the context of the next report of the Pension Board;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to invite the heads of member organizations participating in the Fund to expedite information
processing for new beneficiaries and retirees;
8. Recalls paragraph 42 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and encourages the Fund to incorporate
lessons learned, in particular regarding cost escalations and delays, for future information technology requirements;
9. Also recalls paragraph 37 of the report of the Advisory Committee, stresses the importance of having a
comprehensive anti-fraud policy in the Fund, including in the Investment Management Division, and requests the
Pension Board to report thereon in the context of the next report;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in the context of future reports on the investments of the
Fund, to provide information on the performance of his representative in discharging his or her responsibilities;
11. Reaffirms that, in accordance with article 19 of the regulations of the Fund, the Secretary-General serves
as fiduciary for the investment of the assets of the Fund and has fiduciary responsibility for deciding upon the
investment of the assets of the Fund;
12. Stresses the need to avoid any action that would compromise the fiduciary responsibilities and long-term
sustainability of the Fund;
13. Recalls paragraph 35 of the report of the Advisory Committee, emphasizes the importance of the Fund
meeting its target annual real rate of return of 3.5 per cent over the long term, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to make all efforts to improve the Fund’s investment performance and to report thereon in the
context of future reports on the investments of the Fund;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, as fiduciary for the investment of the assets of the Fund, to continue to
diversify its investments between developed, developing and emerging markets, wherever this serves the interests of
the participants and the beneficiaries of the Fund, and also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that decisions
concerning the investments of the Fund in any country are implemented prudently, taking fully into account the four
main criteria for investment, namely safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility, under volatile market
conditions;
15. Recalls paragraph 29 of its resolution 69/113, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to
continue to take all measures to ensure that the costs for non-discretionary advisory fees are reduced and to report
thereon in the context of future reports;
16. Invites the Pension Board, in consultation with the Board of Auditors, to make arrangements that would
enable the Pension Board to consider, at its annual meeting, the final financial report and audited financial
statements of the Board of Auditors on the Fund;
17. Recalls paragraph 46 of the report of the Advisory Committee, stresses that the report of the Board of
Auditors on the Fund should be submitted separately to the General Assembly, as is the case with other United
Nations entities, and decides that a copy should continue to be annexed to the report of the Pension Board;
18. Decides to continue to consider the report of the Board of Auditors on the Fund in the context of the
report of the Pension Board;

948

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

19. Also decides to establish the 14 additional posts set out in the table below:
Organizational unit

Title of post

Number of posts

Category/level

Administration
Programme of work
Operations (New York)

Benefits Officer

1

P-3

Benefits Assistant

2

General Service (Other level) as at
1 January 2016

Benefits Assistant

3

General Service (Other level) as at
1 January 2017

Chief, Client Communication and
Liaison

1

P-5

Benefits Officer

1

P-4

Finance Officer

1

P-3

Financial services

Cashier’s Assistant

1

General Service (Other level)

Risk Management and Legal Service
Section

Legal Officer (New York)

1

P-3

Legal Assistant (Geneva)

1

General Service (Other level)

Information Management Systems
Service

Data Manager

1

P-3

Information and Communications
Technology Security Officer

1

P-3

Operations (Geneva)

Total

14

20. Approves the reclassification of the posts set out in the table below:
Organizational unit

Title of post

Programme of work
Financial services
Risk Management and Legal Service
Section
Investments
Office of the Representative of the
Secretary-General
Operations and Information Systems
Section

Number of posts

Category/level

Deputy Chief Financial Officer

1

P-4 to P-5

Senior Legal Officer

1

P-5 to P-4

Senior Administrative Assistant

1

General Service (Other level) to
General Service (Principal level)

Associate Accountant

1

General Service (Other level) to P-2

Total

4

21. Recalls paragraph 49 of the report of the Advisory Committee, notes the further explanation by the
Secretary-General of the issues therein, and decides to charge 64.4 per cent of the United Nations share in the
administrative and audit costs relating to the Fund to the proposed programme budget;
22. Approves the revised estimates of 176,550,800 dollars for the biennium 2014–2015 for the
administration of the Fund;
23. Also approves expenses, chargeable directly to the Fund, totalling 157,213,000 dollars net for the
biennium 2016–2017;
24. Further approves the amount of 21,865,300 dollars as the United Nations share of the cost of the
administrative expenses of the Fund for the biennium 2016–2017, of which 14,081,300 dollars would represent the share
of the regular budget and the balance of 7,784,000 dollars would represent the share of the funds and programmes;
949

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

25. Approves the increase of 246,000 dollars in the United Nations share of the cost of the administrative
expenses of the central secretariat of the Fund under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, of
the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, which would represent a charge against the
contingency fund;
26. Authorizes the Pension Board to supplement the voluntary contributions to the Emergency Fund for the
biennium 2016–2017 by an amount not to exceed 225,000 dollars;
27. Recalls paragraph 20 of its resolution 69/113, and requests the Pension Board to inform the General
Assembly of the outcome of the revision of the memorandum of understanding between the Office of Human
Resources Management of the Secretariat and the Fund in the context of its next report to the Assembly;
VII
Request for a subvention to the Residual Special Court
for Sierra Leone
Recalling its resolution 58/284 of 8 April 2004, section VII of its resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004,
section II of its resolution 59/294 of 22 June 2005, section XII of its resolution 65/259, section IX of its resolution
66/247 of 24 December 2011 and section I of its resolution 67/246,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General111 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,112
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;111

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;112

3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed 2,438,500
dollars to supplement the voluntary financial resources of the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone for the period
from 1 January to 31 December 2016 as a bridging financing mechanism, and requests the Secretary-General to
report, during the main part of the seventy-first session of the General Assembly, on the use of the commitment
authority;
4.

Affirms the high priority accorded to the work of the Residual Special Court;

5.

Encourages all Member States to provide voluntary support for the Residual Special Court;
VIII

Revised estimates resulting from the decisions contained in General Assembly resolution 69/292,
entitled “Development of an international legally binding instrument under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
of areas beyond national jurisdiction”
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General113 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,114
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;113

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;114

3. Approves an additional appropriation in the amount of 670,000 dollars under section 2, General Assembly
and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management, of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016–2017, which would represent a charge against the contingency fund for the biennium 2016–2017;
_______________
111

A/70/565.
A/70/7/Add.30.
113
A/70/543.
114
A/70/7/Add.25.
112

950

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

IX
Progress in the construction of new office facilities at the Economic
Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa, and update on the renovation
of conference facilities, including Africa Hall
Recalling its resolution 56/270 of 27 March 2002, section IX of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007,
section I of its resolution 63/263 of 24 December 2008, its resolution 64/243, section III of its resolution 65/259,
section VII of its resolution 66/247, section II of its resolution 67/246, section III of its resolution 68/247 A and
section V of its resolution 69/262,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General115 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,116
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;115

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,116
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Welcomes the continued efforts of the Government of Ethiopia, as the host country, in facilitating the
construction of additional office facilities at the Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa;
4. Looks forward to receiving updated information on the outcome of the independent assessment of the
project in the context of the next progress report;
5. Reaffirms paragraph 5 of section V of its resolution 69/262, and reiterates its request that the SecretaryGeneral pursue his efforts to bring the matter of potential claims management to a swift conclusion and to provide
an update in the next progress report;
6. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to include local knowledge and capacity
throughout the implementation of the construction projects, as appropriate;
7. Also encourages the Secretary-General to assess the implementation of the flexible workplace strategy
and to provide information in this regard in the context of the next progress report;
8.
dollars;

Approves the project scope, schedule and the maximum overall cost in the amount of 56.9 million

9. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the annual progress report, to include information on
progress related to the implementation of the Africa Hall renovation project;
10. Stresses the importance of governance, effective oversight, transparency and accountability in the
management of the project to ensure that the project objectives are achieved within budget;
11. Expresses serious concern about the delay in the recruitment of the Project Manager and the
Administrative Assistant, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all recruitment processes are completed
in a timely manner;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to mitigate potential risks and to monitor
closely the Africa Hall renovation project in order to avoid any further delay;
13. Emphasizes that the Office of Central Support Services of the Department of Management of the
Secretariat should be actively involved in overseeing the project to ensure the central supervision of capital projects,
including risk management and alignment with lessons learned;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to update Member States, through the Office of Central Support
Services, on the progress of the construction projects;
15. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring integrated and independent project assurance for the Africa Hall
renovation project;
_______________
115
116

A/70/363 and Corr.1.
A/70/7/Add.21.

951

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Requests the Secretary-General to further clarify the roles and responsibilities of the internal control
mechanism and the stakeholders committee, to ensure that their working arrangements are set out in clear terms, and
to report thereon in the next progress report;
17. Recalls paragraph 46 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and encourages the Secretary-General to
establish an advisory board that is independent and impartial, with its membership reflecting a wide geographical
representation while ensuring the required expertise;
18. Emphasizes the need for the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat to continue to
provide oversight of the construction projects at the Commission, in particular the renovation of Africa Hall, and to
continue to include information on key findings in the context of the annual reports of the Office on its activities;
19. Also emphasizes that contingency provisions approved for construction projects serve to provide
necessary safeguards against unforeseen cost overruns during project implementation, underlines that the estimation
of project contingencies should be based on the identification of risks associated with the different phases of the
project, and requests that the estimated contingencies be separated from the base project cost for presentation
purposes only;
20. Recalls paragraph 52 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides that unused contingency
funds may be carried over to subsequent years and reallocated as new risks emerge and older risks are retired,
consistent with industry best practice, and that all remaining unused contingency funds shall be returned to Member
States at the conclusion of the project;
21. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the next progress report, to provide detailed
information on the management of the contingency provision;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek voluntary contributions for the Africa Hall
renovation project and to report thereon to the General Assembly in future reports;
23. Further requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the next progress report, to present an updated
business case for the visitors’ centre that is based on, among other things, clearly formulated objectives, the total cost
projections for start-up and initiation and for the period thereafter, as well as costs by component, including
information on the permanent exhibition analysis, estimated annual operational costs and revenue generation, direct
and indirect benefits to the Organization and the public and a plan for realizing such benefits;
24. Approves the establishment, effective 1 July 2016, of six temporary positions (1 P-4, 3 National
Professional Officer and 2 Local level) related to the dedicated project management team and one temporary
position (P-3) for project support, under section 18, Economic and social development in Africa, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
25. Also approves an amount of 13,438,600 dollars under the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2016–2017, comprising 1,253,300 dollars under section 18, Economic and social development in Africa, and
12,185,300 dollars under section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, at initial rates;
26. Further approves the appropriation under the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017
of the amounts corresponding to the relevant sections indicated in paragraph 25 above;
27. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a multi-year construction-in-progress account for the
expenditure related to the Africa Hall renovation project;
X
Strategic heritage plan of the United Nations Office at Geneva
Recalling part XI of its resolution 64/243, section VII of its resolution 66/247, section V of its resolution
68/247 A and sections III and VII of its resolution 69/262,
Having considered the second annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the strategic heritage plan of
the United Nations Office at Geneva117 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,118
_______________
117
118

952

A/70/394 and Corr.1.
A/70/7/Add.8.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;117

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,118
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Welcomes the continued support of the Government of Switzerland for the construction project
in Geneva;
4. Approves the proposed project scope, schedule and estimated cost of the strategic heritage plan in the
maximum amount of 836,500,000 Swiss francs for the period from 2014 to 2023, and therefore authorizes the
renovation and construction phases of the project to begin;
5. Recalls paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that any change that affects the scope of the strategic heritage plan project is presented for the consideration
and decision of the General Assembly;
6. Stresses the importance of effective governance, oversight, transparency and accountability in the
management of the project to ensure that the project objectives are achieved within budget;
7. Acknowledges the establishment of the Advisory Board, encourages it to continue its work, and requests
the Secretary-General to present more detailed information on the scope, composition, technical expertise and
decision-making mechanisms, as well as the functional arrangements, including the respective roles and
responsibilities of the Steering Committee and the Advisory Board in the overall governance framework, in the
context of the next progress report;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the next progress report, to include information on how
the recommendations and observations of the Advisory Board are incorporated into the overall management and
strategic oversight structure of the project;
9. Emphasizes that the Advisory Board shall be independent and impartial, with its membership reflecting
a wide geographical representation while ensuring the required expertise;
10. Also emphasizes the importance of ensuring integrated and independent project assurance for the
strategic heritage plan;
11. Recalls paragraph 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General, in
the context of the next progress report, to provide detailed information on the role of the risk management firm in
providing independent project assurance;
12. Also recalls paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General,
in the context of the selection of external contractual expertise, to follow all relevant regulations and rules governing
procurement procedures of the Organization and to ensure that the use of such expertise is kept under review by the
project oversight and monitoring mechanisms;
13. Acknowledges that space optimization is one of the key objectives of the strategic heritage plan, and
requests the Secretary-General to apply flexible workplace strategies, taking into account the observations and
recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the provisions of section VII of its resolution 69/274 A, and to
include detailed information on concrete steps taken in this regard in the context of the next progress report;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the application of flexible workplace strategies at the
Palais des Nations takes into account the physical characteristics and the specific heritage preservation needs, as
well as ongoing business transformation initiatives, in a cost-effective manner;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to gather data on building occupancy
utilization throughout the entire site of the Palais des Nations in order to increase space efficiencies above the 700
additional spaces already identified, including by setting optimized space utilization targets, and to report on the
concrete steps taken in this regard in the context of the next progress report;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to avoid budget increases through sound
project management practices and to ensure that the strategic heritage plan is completed within the approved budget
and the envisaged time schedule;
953

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17. Emphasizes that contingency provisions approved for construction projects serve to provide necessary
safeguards against unforeseen cost overruns during project implementation, underlines that the estimation of project
contingencies should be based on the identification of risks associated with the different phases of the project, and
requests that the estimated contingencies be separated from the base project cost for presentation purposes only;
18. Recalls paragraph 51 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides that unused contingency
funds may be carried over to subsequent years and reallocated as new risks emerge and older risks are retired,
consistent with industry best practice, and that all remaining unused contingency funds shall be returned to Member
States at the conclusion of the project;
19. Welcomes the loan package offered by the Government of Switzerland, approves the financing of the
project in part through a loan at a zero interest rate from the host country, and authorizes the Secretary-General to
formally apply for the loan in the amount of 400 million Swiss francs;
20. Decides to revert to the establishment of an assessment scheme and currency of appropriation and
assessment for the strategic heritage plan at the main part of the seventy-first session of the General Assembly, and
requests the Secretary-General to provide updated detailed information on these issues;
21. Also decides to revert to the establishment of the multi-year special account for the strategic heritage
plan at the main part of the seventy-first session of the General Assembly;
22. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the next progress report, to include detailed
information on possible measures that could be taken to avoid negative interest rates in relation to the currency
holdings of the United Nations;
23. Decides to appropriate the additional amount of 32,634,900 dollars (equivalent to 33,091,800 Swiss
francs) for 2016, under section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
24. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a multi-year construction-in-progress account for the
expenditure related to the strategic heritage plan for 2014–2016;
25. Approves the donation policy as described in the report of the Secretary-General, subject to the
observations of the Advisory Committee in paragraphs 35 and 36 of its report;
26. Reiterates the importance of ensuring that alternative funding mechanisms are factored into the overall
financing scheme in order to reduce the assessments of Member States, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide detailed information in the next progress report on the next steps towards identifying additional sources of
income through, among other things, the valorization at market price of land owned or occupied by the United
Nations Office at Geneva, including but not limited to that currently occupied by the Club international de tennis,
the Fondation de l’École internationale de Genève and the Parc des Feuillantines;
27. Appreciates the existing voluntary contributions received from Member States to finance the strategic
heritage plan, and requests the Secretary-General to remain proactive in seeking both voluntary and in-kind
contributions from Member States, as well as donations by private entities, in full compliance with all relevant rules
and regulations of the Organization, in order to reduce the overall assessments on Member States;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore the possibility of attracting additional United
Nations entities to be accommodated at the renovated Palais des Nations and to report thereon in the next progress
report;
29. Reiterates the provisions of paragraph 18 of section III of its resolution 69/262;
30. Reaffirms paragraph 19 of section III of its resolution 69/262, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that the implementation of the strategic heritage plan takes into account measures to eliminate physical,
communications and technical barriers to persons with disabilities, taking into account relevant resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly, while ensuring compliance with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities,119 and to report on this subject in future annual progress reports;
_______________
119

954

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

XI
Revised estimates resulting from the decisions contained in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development and
the outcome document of the United Nations summit for
the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General120 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,121
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;120

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;121

3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount not exceeding 7,547,300
dollars in the first year of the biennium 2016–2017 for the implementation of the decisions contained in the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development122 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development;123
XII
Seismic mitigation retrofit and life-cycle replacements project
at the Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific premises in Bangkok
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the proposal for the seismic mitigation retrofit and
life-cycle replacements project at the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific premises in
Bangkok124 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,125
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;124

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;125
3. Notes with appreciation the continued efforts of the Government of Thailand, as the host country, in
facilitating the work of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok;
4. Notes with concern the continued health and safety risks related to seismic threats at the Commission as
presented in the report of the Secretary-General, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to present an
expeditious timeline in the context of the next report to address these concerns;
5. Recalls paragraphs 10, 14 and 15 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to present an updated proposal and costing estimates for multiphase and single-phase implementation
methods, including an option to address the seismic risk on its own and an option in combination with renovation,
life-cycle replacement or other works, ensuring the most cost-effective and efficient method of implementation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the next report, to include detailed information on the
effects of construction on rental income to the Commission from tenants, the application of flexible workplace
strategies and the applicable seismic codes of the host country;

_______________
120

A/70/589 and Corr.1.
A/70/7/Add.39.
122
Resolution 69/313, annex.
123
Resolution 70/1.
124
A/70/356.
125
A/70/7/Add.3.
121

955

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide specific information in the next report about possible
measures to be taken to eliminate physical, communications or technical barriers to persons with disabilities at the
Commission, while ensuring compliance with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;119
8. Recalls paragraph 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee, regrets that the host country was not
approached first and at an early stage for the possible provision of swing space, and requests the Secretary-General
to engage the host country on an urgent and continuous basis;
9. Also recalls paragraph 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard encourages the
Secretary-General to seek voluntary contributions and to report thereon in the context of the next report;
10. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring the availability of appropriate in-house expertise, and requests
the Secretary-General to report thereon in the context of the next report;
11. Also emphasizes the importance of guidance, interaction and coordination between the Secretariat in
New York, on the one hand, and the Commission in Bangkok, on the other, with clear reporting lines;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, through the Office of Central Support Services, to take into account
lessons learned and best practices from past construction and renovation projects, in particular to draw from
experience and know-how acquired from other capital projects;
13. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed 400,000 dollars,
also authorizes expenditure from this amount to cover expenses related to the implementation of paragraph 5 of the
present section, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon in the context of the first performance report on
the programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a revised proposal to the General Assembly for its
consideration at the main part of its seventy-first session;
XIII
Administrative and financial implications of the decisions
and recommendations contained in the report of the
International Civil Service Commission for the year 2015
Having considered the statement submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly126 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,127
1.

Recalls its resolution 70/244 of 23 December 2015;

2.

Takes note of the statement submitted by the Secretary-General;126

3.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;127
XIV
Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted
by the Human Rights Council at its twenty-eighth, twenty-ninth
and thirtieth sessions and twenty-third special session

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General128 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,129
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;128

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;129

_______________
126

A/C.5/70/3.
A/70/7/Add.4.
128
A/70/562.
129
A/70/7/Add.28.
127

956

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Approves the establishment of two posts (P-3) under section 24, Human rights, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, with effect from 1 January 2016;
4. Also approves an additional appropriation in the amount of 11,040,900 dollars, comprising 3,354,600
dollars under section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management,
7,665,400 dollars under section 24, Human rights, 4,200 dollars under section 28, Public information, and 16,700
dollars under section 29F, Administration, Geneva, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
5. Further approves the amount of 62,000 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, to be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1,
Income from staff assessment;
XV
International Trade Centre
Having considered the programme budget proposals for the International Trade Centre for the biennium
2016–2017130 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,131
1.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;131

2. Decides to approve resources in the amount of 35,697,300 dollars (the United Nations share equivalent
to 50 per cent of 72,394,100 Swiss francs at the exchange rate of 1.014 Swiss francs to 1 dollar) proposed for the
biennium 2016–2017 under section 13, International Trade Centre, of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016–2017;
XVI
Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions
adopted by the Economic and Social Council during
its 2015 session (21 July 2014–23 July 2015)
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General132 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,133
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;132

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,133
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Approves the establishment of four posts (1 D-1 and 1 P-3 under subprogramme 9, Energy, 1 P-4 under
subprogramme 1, Macroeconomic policy and inclusive development, and 1 P-4 under subprogramme 2, Trade and
investment) under section 19, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, and requests the Secretary-General to fill these posts subject to the
recommendation of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the new subprogramme 9 in 2016;
4. Also approves the establishment of four temporary posts (1 P-4, 2 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other
level)) in the secretariat of the United Nations Forum on Forests under section 9, Economic and social affairs, of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, with effect from 1 January 2016;
5. Further approves the redeployment of one P-5, two P-4, one P-2 and four Local level posts from
subprogramme 4, Environment and development, to subprogramme 9, Energy, under section 19, Economic and
social development in Asia and the Pacific, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, and
requests the Secretary-General to fill these posts subject to the recommendation of the Committee for Programme
and Coordination on the new subprogramme 9 in 2016;
_______________
130

A/70/6 (Sect. 13) and A/70/6 (Sect. 13)/Add.1/Rev.1.
A/70/7/Add.1.
132
A/70/430.
133
A/70/7/Add.23.
131

957

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Approves the redeployment of non-post resources in the amount of 52,000 dollars from subprogramme
4, Environment and development, to subprogramme 9, Energy, under section 19, Economic and social development
in Asia and the Pacific, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, comprising 14,000 dollars
for consultancies, 24,000 dollars for the ad hoc expert group, 8,000 dollars for the travel of staff and 6,000 dollars
for external printing;
7. Also approves an appropriation amounting to 3,048,100 dollars (1,491,400 dollars arising from
Economic and Social Council resolution 2015/30 of 22 July 2015 and 1,556,700 dollars arising from Council
resolution 2015/33 of 22 July 2015), comprising 1,275,100 dollars under section 9, Economic and social affairs,
1,491,400 dollars under section 19, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific, and 281,600 dollars
under section 29D, Office of Central Support Services, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–
2017, which would represent a charge against the contingency fund;
8. Further approves the amount of 303,600 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, to be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1,
Income from staff assessment;
XVII
Enterprise resource planning project, Umoja
Recalling section II of its resolution 60/283, section II of its resolution 63/262, its resolution 64/243,
section II.A of its resolution 65/259, its resolution 66/246, section III of its resolution 66/263 of 21 June 2012,
section III of its resolution 67/246, its resolution 68/246 and sections IV and VI of its resolution 69/274 A,
Having considered the seventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the enterprise resource planning
project,134 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the fourth annual progress report of the Board of Auditors
on the implementation of the United Nations enterprise resource planning system135 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee,136
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General134 and the note by the Secretary-General;135

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,136
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.

Accepts the report of the Board of Auditors;135

4.

Approves the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report;

5. Welcomes the progress made in the implementation of Umoja since the previous progress report, and
requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to complete implementation without further delay;
6. Regrets the delays in the implementation of extension 2 and cluster 5 of Umoja, and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement the project within the approved timeline and budget and to
provide detailed information on the full implementation of the Umoja solution no later than at the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in the further roll-out plan for the implementation of Umoja, to conduct
an objective assessment of the organizational readiness for business change to avoid deviations from the project’s
plans and cost projections, identify opportunities for further improvement and maximize the expected benefits;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to take proactive measures to address the remaining challenges and
risks relating to the implementation of Umoja and to ensure that the project is fully deployed by December 2018, in
line with the revised timeline approved by the General Assembly in section III of its resolution 67/246;

_______________
134

A/70/369 and Corr.1 and 2.
A/70/158.
136
A/70/7/Add.19.
135

958

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Further requests the Secretary-General to report on the process and outcome of the post-implementation
reviews in the next progress report;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, for the next implementation phases of the project, to
establish clear and transparent procedures and maintain a detailed accounting of indirect costs, including those
related to preparatory activities, and to provide fully transparent information on those costs in the next progress
report;
11. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to absorb the indirect costs within the approved budget of
each department;
12. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make every effort to eliminate cost overruns through
efficiency measures and sound project management and to avoid any further upward revision of the budget during
the remaining project schedule, up to the time at which Umoja is fully deployed;
13. Reiterates that the successful implementation of Umoja requires the full support and commitment of
senior management, as well as close and continuous engagement with key stakeholders, and calls upon the
Secretary-General to ensure this through performance management and accountability mechanisms;
14. Stresses the importance of effective training for the successful implementation of Umoja, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure that senior managers include necessary and sufficient training on
Umoja for all users of the system as part of an integrated approach to training and capacity development in their
work units;
15. Notes that insufficient progress has been made in the development of benefit realization plans, and
requests the Secretary-General to accelerate the development of such plans, taking into account the relevant
recommendations of the Board of Auditors, and to report thereon in the next progress report, without prejudice to
established budgetary procedures and the prerogatives of the Fifth Committee, which is entrusted with responsibility
for administrative and budgetary matters;
16. Underlines the importance of close cooperation between the Umoja and International Public Sector
Accounting Standards project teams in aligning their benefit realization pillars and enhancing their mutual efforts in
identifying benefits of these major transformational projects, and identifying possible synergies;
17. Recalls paragraphs 38 and 39 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to develop detailed transition plans for the long-term support arrangements for the Umoja
solution to be provided by the Chief Information Technology Officer and for the mainstreaming of Umoja, to
provide detailed information on the governance, management and operational arrangements for the deployed phases
and to report thereon in the next progress report;
18. Also recalls paragraph 44 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General
to continue to develop and retain in-house expertise on Umoja and to develop, as a matter of priority, a detailed
action plan to ensure the transfer of knowledge from consultants to programme and project staff and that the
knowledge acquired is maintained within the Organization, and to provide detailed information in the context of the
next progress report;
19. Further recalls paragraph 45 of the report of the Advisory Committee, authorizes the Secretary-General,
as an exceptional and temporary measure, to postpone the downsizing of the Umoja project team until 31 December
2016, and decides in this regard that any financial costs arising from this measure should be accommodated within
the approved budget for Umoja for the biennium 2016–2017;
20. Approves the amount of 8,143,700 dollars, as presented in section 29A, Office of the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Management, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017, representing the regular
budget share for the Umoja project;
21. Notes that an amount of 31,306,700 dollars was approved by the General Assembly in its resolution
69/308 of 25 June 2015 under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial period from 1 July
2015 to 30 June 2016, of which 22,891,500 dollars was for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2015 and
8,415,200 dollars for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2016;
959

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Also notes that requirements in the amount of 12,487,100 dollars will be funded from extrabudgetary
resources in the financial period from 1 January 2016 to 31 December 2017;
XVIII
Study on the long-term accommodation needs at United Nations
Headquarters for the period from 2015 to 2034
Recalling its resolution 60/282 of 30 June 2006, section III of its resolution 67/254 A and section VII of its
resolution 69/262,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General137 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,138
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;137

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;138

3.

Recalls paragraph 4 of section VII of its resolution 69/262;
XIX
Framework for a global service delivery model
of the United Nations Secretariat

Recalling section III of its resolution 67/246, paragraph 13 of section VII of its resolution 69/262 and
paragraph 19 of its resolution 69/273 of 2 April 2015,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General139 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,140
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;139

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,140
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Notes with appreciation the initiative of the Secretary-General to establish a global service delivery
model of the United Nations Secretariat;
4. Stresses that the development of the global service delivery model shall be limited to the provision of
administrative support services, and emphasizes that functions primarily involving direct interactions with Member
States, including troop-contributing countries, will continue to be located at Headquarters;
5. Recalls that any changes to the existing and future service delivery model must be approved by the
General Assembly;
6. Emphasizes the importance of drawing upon the experience and knowledge of the Umoja project team,
as well as the need to develop and maintain in-house capacity with regard to shared service delivery;
7. Also emphasizes that a detailed proposal should consist of a business case, including the establishment of
an end-state vision, clear goals and objectives, as well as a detailed cost-benefit analysis containing information on
qualitative and quantitative benefits;
8. Further emphasizes that future proposals related to the global service delivery model, including budget
proposals related to qualitative and quantitative benefits from the development and implementation of the model,
will be contingent on the presentation by the Secretary-General of clear benefit realization plans containing specific
information on potential benefits to be achieved;

_______________
137

A/70/398.
A/70/7/Add.22.
139
A/70/323.
140
A/70/436.
138

960

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the development of a global service delivery model at the
main part of the seventy-first session of the General Assembly and to continue to gather information to support the
business case for such a model, including comprehensive baseline information on the provision of services for each
process;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to review his proposal for taking February 2016 as a baseline for the
development of the global service delivery model business case, taking into account the necessary stabilization
period for Umoja, and to report thereon in the context of the next report;
11. Recalls paragraph 61 of its resolution 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and paragraph 15 of the report of the
Advisory Committee, reiterates the importance of ensuring that the global service delivery model fully takes into
account lessons learned and best practices of all ongoing business transformation initiatives so as to maximize
benefits and avoid possible duplication and overlap, and requests the Secretary-General to provide in his detailed
proposal information on the efforts to ensure such coherence, including information on the use of common
infrastructure and resources;
12. Also recalls paragraph 32 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General
to include staff costs as one of the criteria in his evaluation of possible locations for administrative services;
13. Stresses that the report should take into account the use of all existing United Nations infrastructure,
including that away from Headquarters;
14. Recalls paragraph 46 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide in the detailed report proposals for a cost-sharing formula for future requirements related to the
implementation of the global service delivery model;
15. Also recalls paragraph 48 (a) of the report of the Advisory Committee, takes note of paragraphs 48 (b),
(c) and (d) of that report, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a refined and detailed proposal on the global
service delivery model to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session and to cover the requirements for
consultancy fees within the allocation for section 29, Management and support services, of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
XX
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and
other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council
Recalling section VI of its resolution 68/247 A, its resolutions 68/248 A and C of 27 December 2013,
section II of its resolution 68/247 B, its resolution 68/280 of 30 June 2014, section IV of its resolution 69/262 and
section II of its resolution 69/274 B of 25 June 2015,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General141 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee,142
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;141

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee,142
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Affirms its commitment to consider the review of the arrangement on the funding and backstopping of
the special political missions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee with a view to making a decision,
without prejudging the outcome, at the first resumed part of the seventieth session of the General Assembly;

_______________
141
142

A/70/348 and Add.1–7 and Add.7/Corr.1.
A/70/7/Add.10–17.

961

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Recognizes the importance of promoting cooperation among United Nations missions in order to
increase their effectiveness and efficiency, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard,
without prejudice to the unique mandate of and the approved budget for each mission;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to present future budget proposals for the special political missions no
later than the last week of October;
6. Encourages the Advisory Committee to consider the presentation of a single report, as appropriate, on
the estimates in respect of special political missions to facilitate easy reference by Member States;
7. Recalls paragraph 44 of the report of the Advisory Committee,143 and expresses its support for the
nationalization of positions in special political missions and the building of local capacity, where appropriate;
8. Underlines that the use of external consultants should be kept to a minimum and that the Organization
should build and use its in-house capacity to perform core activities or to fulfil functions that are recurrent over the
long term;
9.

Expresses concern about the growth in the number of senior-level positions in special political missions;

10. Recalls section II of its resolution 35/217 of 17 December 1980, and requests the Secretary-General to
observe the established procedures for the creation of extrabudgetary positions;
11. Also recalls paragraph 17 of section V of its resolution 67/254 A, and requests the Secretary-General, in
the context of the next budget submission, to provide further clarification on the criteria utilized for the use of
private armed security services, as well as details on the administrative and financial arrangements for such services;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take all appropriate measures to ensure that, when using
security and protection services from private security companies, the selected companies operate in accordance with
the national legislation of the host country and the Charter of the United Nations and fully abide by the relevant
principles and rules of international human rights law, international humanitarian law and international criminal law;
13. Expresses concern at the lack of coherent policy related to the holding of vehicles by the special political
missions at established United Nations duty stations, as well as the lack of criteria for the stocking and replacement
of spare parts, and requests the Secretary-General to develop such policy and submit it at the main part of the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly;
14. Notes the decision to locate the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria in
Geneva, and decides that related costs arising from this relocation shall be accommodated within the approved
resources of the Office;
15. Recalls paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee,144 expresses concern that the SecretaryGeneral recruited a Special Assistant (P-4) and signed a memorandum of understanding for the rental of an office in
Brussels prior to approval by the General Assembly, and decides that any costs related to these actions shall be
accommodated within the approved resources of the Office of the Special Envoy;
16. Takes note of paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory Committee,145 and decides to reclassify the
position of Principal Political Affairs Officer (D-1) in the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen as Director (D-2);
17. Recalls paragraph 12 of section IV of its resolution 69/262, notes the ongoing review of the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to consider
the grading of the Special Envoy and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the main part of the seventy-first
session;

_______________
143

A/70/7/Add.10.
A/70/7/Add.11.
145
A/70/7/Add.16.
144

962

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Takes note of paragraph 35 of the report of the Advisory Committee;144
19. Also takes note of paragraph 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee,144 and decides to establish a
position of Political Affairs/Liaison Officer (P-3), to be based in Kinshasa, for the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to notify Member States when opportunities arise for individuals to be
considered for inclusion on the rosters of the sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels authorized by the
General Assembly and/or Security Council, and that the recruitment process be conducted in accordance with
relevant rules and regulations of the United Nations;
21. Notes that, upon the day of implementation of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) of 20 July 2015,
the provisions of Council resolution 1929 (2010) of 9 June 2010, including with regard to the Panel of Experts on
the Islamic Republic of Iran, will be terminated and all related resources approved under that resolution for the
Panel will be adjusted accordingly;
22. Decides to reduce the allocations for computing devices for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa by 10 per cent;
23. Emphasizes that any request for staffing resources to enable the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia to carry out its mandate of providing administrative, technical and logistical support to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia should be included in the budget proposal for the Office and not that of the Mission;
24. Recalls paragraph 19 of the report of the Advisory Committee,146 and approves the 14 new positions in
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, which include two positions in the mission support
component (one Finance Assistant (Local level) in the Finance and Budget Unit and one Travel Assistant (Local
level) in the Human Resources Unit);
25. Decides to reduce the allocation for official travel for the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa by 5 per cent;
26. Also decides to establish the position of Senior Adviser at the Assistant Secretary-General level in the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya and to adjust the related non-post resources accordingly;
27. Recalls paragraph 6 of the report of the Advisory Committee,147 and welcomes the improved
performance information for 2015 set out in table 1 of the report of the Secretary-General relating to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan;148
28. Takes note of paragraph 30 of the report of the Advisory Committee;147
29. Recalls paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee,147 and decides to maintain the provision
for official travel at 1,780,800 dollars for 2016;
30. Also recalls paragraph 39 of the report of the Advisory Committee,147 and stresses that the cost-sharing
arrangement for the resident coordinator system is under review by the General Assembly;
31. Further recalls paragraph 18 of the report of the Advisory Committee,149 and decides to abolish six
Local level posts in the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq;
32. Takes note of paragraph 26 of the report of the Advisory Committee;149
33. Recalls paragraph 58 of the report of the Advisory Committee,143 notes with concern the lack of clarity
with regard to the roles of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq support offices in Kuwait and the Kuwait Joint Support Office, and requests the Secretary-General
_______________
146

A/70/7/Add.13.
A/70/7/Add.14.
148
A/70/348/Add.4.
149
A/70/7/Add.15.
147

963

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

to undertake a review of the structures, functions and capacity of the offices in order to ensure that they better serve
the functions of both missions and to report thereon in the context of the next budget submission;
34. Approves the budgets in the amount of 567,252,400 dollars for the 36 special political missions
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council;
35. Also approves a charge of 567,252,400 dollars against the provision for special political missions
proposed under section 3, Political affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017;
XXI
Gross jointly financed budget of the Joint Inspection Unit
Approves the gross budget for the Joint Inspection Unit for the biennium 2016–2017 in the amount of
13,000,200 dollars;
XXII
Gross jointly financed budget of the International
Civil Service Commission
Approves the gross budget for the International Civil Service Commission for the biennium 2016–2017 in the
amount of 18,225,600 dollars;
XXIII
Gross jointly financed budget of the United Nations System
Chief Executives Board for Coordination
Notes the gross budget for the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for the
biennium 2016–2017 in the amount of 6,183,800 dollars;
XXIV
Gross jointly financed budget of the
Department of Safety and Security
Approves the gross jointly financed budget of the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat for the
biennium 2016–2017 in the amount of 263,409,100 dollars, broken down as follows:
(a)

Field Security Operations: 237,454,000 dollars;

(b)

Security and Safety Services at the United Nations Office at Vienna: 25,955,100 dollars;
XXV
Effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the revised estimates resulting from changes in rates
of exchange and inflation150 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,151
Takes note of the revised estimates arising from recosting owing to changes in the rates of exchange and
inflation;
XXVI
Contingency fund
Notes that a balance of 24,007,067 dollars remains in the contingency fund.
_______________
150
151

964

A/70/603.
A/70/7/Add.35.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTIONS 70/249 A–C
A/RES/70/249A-C

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/648, para. 43)

70/249.

Programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017
A
BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE BIENNIUM 2016–2017

The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the biennium 2016–2017:
1. Appropriations totalling 5,401,794,400 United States dollars are hereby approved for the following
purposes:
Amount
(United States dollars)

Section

Part I. Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
1.

Overall policymaking, direction and coordination

117 428 000

2.

General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management

618 122 200

Subtotal, part I

735 550 200

Part II. Political affairs
3.

Political affairs

1 238 803 600

4.

Disarmament

24 950 700

5.

Peacekeeping operations

109 624 000

6.

Peaceful uses of outer space

7 162 300
Subtotal, part II

1 380 540 600

Part III. International justice and law
7.

International Court of Justice

45 975 700

8.

Legal affairs

48 845 900
Subtotal, part III

94 821 600

Part IV. International cooperation for development
9.

Economic and social affairs

157 717 800

10.

Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States

10 912 500

11.

United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development

16 798 300

12.

Trade and development

135 159 400

13.

International Trade Centre

35 697 300

14.

Environment

35 331 400

15.

Human settlements

20 806 800

16.

International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice

36 917 600

17.

UN-Women

15 256 400
Subtotal, part IV

464 597 500

965

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Amount
(United States dollars)

Section

Part V. Regional cooperation for development
18.

Economic and social development in Africa

153 650 300

19.

Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific

94 646 200

20.

Economic development in Europe

64 870 900

21.

Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean

105 299 700

22.

Economic and social development in Western Asia

69 369 400

23.

Regular programme of technical cooperation

54 763 400
Subtotal, part V

542 599 900

Part VI. Human rights and humanitarian affairs
24.

Human rights

191 574 900

25.

International protection, durable solutions and assistance to refugees

82 204 900

26.

Palestine refugees

55 592 900

27.

Humanitarian assistance

30 402 300
Subtotal, part VI

28.

Part VII. Public information
Public information

359 775 000
188 021 900

Subtotal, part VII

188 021 900

Part VIII. Common support services
29A.

Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management

22 677 000

29B.

Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts

35 043 500

29C.

Office of Human Resources Management

70 800 100

29D.

Office of Central Support Services

166 116 100

29E.

Office of Information and Communications Technology

98 461 800

29F.

Administration, Geneva

134 658 700

29G.

Administration, Vienna

33 204 200

29H.

Administration, Nairobi

28 157 300
Subtotal, part VIII

589 118 700

Part IX. Internal oversight
30.

Internal oversight

40 213 800
Subtotal, part IX

40 213 800

Part X. Jointly financed administrative activities and special expenses
31.

Jointly financed administrative activities

11 448 200

32.

Special expenses

153 244 800
Subtotal, part X

164 693 000

Part XI. Capital expenditures
33.

Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance

97 091 100
Subtotal, part XI

97 091 100

Part XII. Safety and security
34.

Safety and security

234 295 400
Subtotal, part XII

966

234 295 400

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Amount
(United States dollars)

Section

Part XIII. Development Account
35.

Development Account

28 398 800
Subtotal, part XIII

28 398 800

Part XIV. Staff assessment
36.

Staff assessment

482 076 900
Subtotal, part XIV

482 076 900

Total

5 401 794 400

2. The Secretary-General shall be authorized to transfer credits between sections of the budget, with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
3. In addition to the appropriations approved under paragraph 1 above, an amount of 75,000 dollars is
appropriated for each year of the biennium 2016–2017 from the accumulated income of the Library Endowment
Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps and library equipment and for such other expenses of the Library
at the Palais des Nations in Geneva as are in accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment.
B
INCOME ESTIMATES FOR THE BIENNIUM 2016–2017
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the biennium 2016–2017:
1. Estimates of income other than assessments on Member States totalling 531,347,800 United States
dollars are approved as follows:
Amount
(United States dollars)

Income section

1.

Income from staff assessment

486 414 800

2.

General income

41 226 700

3.

Services to the public

3 706 300
Total

531 347 800

2. The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
3. Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, the sale of statistical
products, catering operations and related services, garage operations, television services and the sale of publications
not provided for under the budget appropriations shall be charged against the income derived from those activities.
C
FINANCING OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE YEAR 2016
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the year 2016:
1. Budget appropriations consisting of 2,700,897,200 United States dollars, being half of the appropriation
of 5,401,794,400 dollars approved for the biennium 2016–2017 by the General Assembly in paragraph 1 of
resolution A above, plus 218,923,200 dollars, being the net increase in appropriations for the biennium
967

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2014–2015 approved by the Assembly in its resolutions 69/274 A of 2 April 2015, 69/274 B of 25 June 2015 and
70/240 A of 23 December 2015, shall be financed in accordance with regulations 3.1 and 3.2 of the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,152 as follows:
(a) 50,868,900 dollars, consisting of 22,466,500 dollars, being half of the estimated income other than staff
assessment income approved for the biennium 2016–2017 under resolution B above, plus 28,402,400 dollars, being
the increase in income other than staff assessment income for the biennium 2014–2015 approved by the Assembly
in its resolution 70/240 B of 23 December 2015;
(b) 13,911,000 dollars, being the difference between the amount appropriated and the amount assessed for
the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Ebola and the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response in its resolutions 69/263 A of 29 December 2014 and 69/274 B;
(c) 154,852,400 dollars, for the capital master plan project to be financed from the General Fund in
accordance with its resolution 69/274 A, of which 36,613,400 dollars shall be credited from the Special Account
established in accordance with its resolution 3049 A (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, 33,000,000 dollars credited
from the cancellation of prior-period obligations for the biennium 2012–2013, 40,239,000 dollars from the
unencumbered balance for the biennium 2012–2013 and 45,000,000 dollars, being the assessment on Member
States in accordance with its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012 on the scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations;
(d) 2,700,188,100 dollars, being the assessment on Member States in accordance with its resolution 70/245
of 23 December 2015 on the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations;
2. There shall be set off against the assessment on Member States, in accordance with the provisions of its
resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the total amount of
252,038,900 dollars, consisting of:
(a) 243,207,400 dollars, being half of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the biennium
2016–2017 in paragraph 1 of resolution B above;
(b) 8,755,900 dollars, being the increase in income from staff assessment for the biennium 2014–2015
approved by the Assembly in its resolution 69/274 B;
(c) 580,100 dollars, being the decrease in income from staff assessment for the biennium 2014–2015
approved by the Assembly in its resolution 70/240 B;
(d) 655,700 dollars, being an increase in income from staff assessment for the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Ebola and the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response pursuant to its
resolution 69/263 A.
RESOLUTION 70/250
A/RES/70/250

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/648, para. 43)

70/250.

Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium 2016–2017

The General Assembly
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and subject to the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations153 and the provisions of paragraph 3 below, to enter into commitments in the biennium 2016–2017 to meet

_______________
152
153

968

ST/SGB/2013/4.
ST/SGB/2013/4.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

unforeseen and extraordinary expenses arising either during or subsequent to the biennium, provided that the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee shall not be necessary for:
(a) Such commitments not exceeding a total of 8 million United States dollars in any one year of the
biennium 2016–2017 as the Secretary-General certifies relate to the maintenance of peace and security;
(b) Such commitments as the President of the International Court of Justice certifies relate to expenses
occasioned by:
(i) The designation of ad hoc judges (Statute of the International Court of Justice, Article 31), not exceeding
a total of 200,000 dollars;
(ii) The calling of witnesses and the appointment of experts (Statute, Article 50) and the appointment of
assessors (Statute, Article 30), not exceeding a total of 50,000 dollars;
(iii) The maintenance in office for the completion of cases of judges who have not been re-elected (Statute,
Article 13, paragraph 3), not exceeding a total of 40,000 dollars;
(iv) The payment of pensions and travel and removal expenses of retiring judges and travel and removal
expenses and installation grants of members of the Court (Statute, Article 32, paragraph 7), not exceeding a
total of 410,000 dollars;
(v) The work of the Court or its Chambers away from The Hague (Statute, Article 22), not exceeding a total
of 25,000 dollars;
(c) Such commitments not exceeding a total of 1 million dollars in the biennium 2016–2017 as the
Secretary-General certifies are required for security measures pursuant to section XI, paragraph 6, of General
Assembly resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004;
2. Resolves that the Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory Committee and to the General Assembly
at its seventy-first and seventy-second sessions all commitments made under the provisions of the present
resolution, together with the circumstances relating thereto, and shall submit supplementary estimates to the
Assembly in respect of such commitments;
3. Decides that, for the biennium 2016–2017, if a decision of the Security Council results in the need for
the Secretary-General to enter into commitments relating to the maintenance of peace and security in an amount
exceeding 10 million dollars in respect of the decision, that matter shall be brought to the General Assembly, or, if
the Assembly is suspended or not in session, a resumed or special session of the Assembly shall be convened by the
Secretary-General to consider the matter.
RESOLUTION 70/251
A/RES/70/251

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/648, para. 43)

70/251.

Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2016–2017

The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. The Working Capital Fund shall be established for the biennium 2016–2017 in the amount of
150 million United States dollars;
2. Member States shall make advances to the Working Capital Fund in accordance with the scale of
assessments adopted by the General Assembly for contributions of Member States to the budget for 2016;
3.

There shall be set off against this allocation of advances:

(a) Credits to Member States resulting from transfers made in 1959 and 1960 from the surplus account to
the Working Capital Fund in an adjusted amount of 1,025,092 dollars;
(b) Cash advances paid by Member States to the Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2014–2015 in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/250 of 27 December 2013;
969

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Should the credits and advances paid by any Member State to the Working Capital Fund for the
biennium 2014–2015 exceed the amount of that Member State’s advance under the provisions of paragraph 2
above, the excess shall be set off against the amount of the contributions payable by the Member State in respect of
the biennium 2016–2017;
5.

The Secretary-General is authorized to advance from the Working Capital Fund:

(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending the receipt of
contributions; sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts from contributions are available for that
purpose;
(b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments that may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, in particular its resolution 70/250 of 23 December
2015 relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium 2016–2017; the Secretary-General shall
make provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the Working Capital Fund;
(c) Such sums as may be necessary to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous self-liquidating
purchases and activities, which, together with net sums outstanding for the same purpose, do not exceed 200,000
dollars; advances in excess of 200,000 dollars may be made with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
(d) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee, such sums as may be required to finance
payments of advance insurance premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond the end of the biennium in
which payment is made; the Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget estimates of each biennium,
during the life of the related policies, to cover the charges applicable to each biennium;
(e) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending the accumulation of credits; such advances shall be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund;
6. Should the provision in paragraph 1 above prove inadequate to meet the purposes normally related to the
Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is authorized to utilize, in the biennium 2016–2017, cash from special
funds and accounts in his custody, under the conditions approved by the General Assembly in its resolution
1341 (XIII) of 13 December 1958, or the proceeds of loans authorized by the Assembly.

970

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

70/114.

Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission .............................................................. 972

70/115.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its forty-eighth session ........... 976

70/116.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation
of International Law.............................................................................................................................................. 980

70/117.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role
of the Organization ............................................................................................................................................... 983

70/118.

The rule of law at the national and international levels............................................................................................. 986

70/119.

The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction .......................................................................... 989

70/120.

Measures to eliminate international terrorism.......................................................................................................... 990

70/121.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country .................................................................................. 994

70/122.

Observer status for the International Civil Defence Organization in the General Assembly........................................ 996

70/123.

Observer status for the Indian Ocean Rim Association in the General Assembly....................................................... 996

70/124.

Observer status for the Union for the Mediterranean in the General Assembly .......................................................... 997

70/236.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session ............................................... 997

971

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 70/114
A/RE S/70 /114

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/506, para. 9)1

70/114.

Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/281 of 29 March 2005, in which it endorsed the recommendation of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations that the Secretary-General make available to the United Nations
membership a comprehensive report on the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations,2
Recalling also that the Secretary-General, on 24 March 2005, transmitted to the President of the General
Assembly a report of his Adviser concerning sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel,3
Recalling further its resolution 59/300 of 22 June 2005, in which it endorsed the recommendation of the
Special Committee that a group of legal experts be established to provide advice on the best way to proceed so as to
ensure that the original intent of the Charter of the United Nations can be achieved, namely, that United Nations staff
and experts on mission would never be effectively exempt from the consequences of criminal acts committed at
their duty station, nor unjustly penalized, without due process,4
Underlining the importance of a zero-tolerance policy for misconduct and the commission of crimes by
United Nations officials and experts on mission,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of United Nations officials and experts on mission towards the
fulfilment of the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Reaffirming the need to promote and ensure respect for the principles and rules of international law,
Reaffirming also that the present resolution is without prejudice to the privileges and immunities of United
Nations officials and experts on mission and the United Nations under international law,
Reaffirming further the obligation of United Nations officials and experts on mission to respect the national
laws of the host State, as well as the right of the host State to exercise, where applicable, its criminal jurisdiction, in
accordance with the relevant rules of international law and agreements governing operations of United Nations
missions,
Underlining the importance of appropriate training of United Nations officials and experts on mission to
prevent any criminal conduct,
Deeply concerned by reports of criminal conduct, and conscious that such conduct, if not investigated and, as
appropriate, prosecuted, would create the negative impression that United Nations officials and experts on mission
operate with impunity,
Reaffirming the need to ensure that all United Nations officials and experts on mission function in a manner
that preserves the image, credibility, impartiality and integrity of the United Nations,
Emphasizing that crimes committed by such persons are unacceptable and have a detrimental effect on the
fulfilment of the mandate of the United Nations, in particular with respect to the relations between the United
Nations and the local population in the host country,
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
Bureau.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No.19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part one, chap. III, sect. D, para. 56.
3
See A/59/710.
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part two, chap. II, sect. N,
para. 40 (a).

972

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Conscious of the importance of protecting the rights of victims of criminal conduct, as well as of ensuring
adequate protection for witnesses, and recalling the adoption of its resolution 62/214 of 21 December 2007 on the
United Nations Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by
United Nations Staff and Related Personnel,
Emphasizing that genuine accountability rests on the cooperation of the Member States,
Emphasizing also the need to enhance international cooperation to ensure the criminal accountability of
United Nations officials and experts on mission,
Taking note of the report of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations on uniting our strengths
for peace: politics, partnership and people,5 and of the subsequent report of the Secretary-General entitled “The
future of United Nations peace operations: implementation of the recommendations of the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations”,6
Recalling its resolution 61/29 of 4 December 2006, by which it established the Ad Hoc Committee on
criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission,
Having considered at its previous sessions the report of the Group of Legal Experts established by the
Secretary-General pursuant to its resolution 59/3007 and the reports of the Ad Hoc Committee,8 as well as the note
by the Secretariat9 and the reports of the Secretary-General10 on criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission,
Recalling its resolutions 62/63 of 6 December 2007, 63/119 of 11 December 2008, 64/110 of 16 December
2009, 65/20 of 6 December 2010, 66/93 of 9 December 2011, 67/88 of 14 December 2012, 68/105 of 16 December
2013 and 69/114 of 10 December 2014,
Recalling also its decision that, bearing in mind its resolutions 62/63 and 67/88, the consideration of the report
of the Group of Legal Experts, in particular its legal aspects, taking into account the views of Member States and
also noting the inputs by the Secretariat, would be continued during its seventieth session in the framework of a
working group of the Sixth Committee,
Convinced of the continuing need for the United Nations and its Member States to urgently take strong and
effective steps to ensure the criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission in the interest
of justice,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;11

2. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse,12 as well as the findings of the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat
in its evaluation report of 15 May 2015,13 including on the issue of underreporting;
3. Welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to refer credible allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse to the Member State of the United Nations officials or experts on mission for appropriate action;
4. Expresses its concern with respect to all alleged crimes on the part of United Nations officials and
experts on mission, including allegations of corruption and other financial crimes, and in that regard welcomes the
reaffirmation by the Secretary-General that there will be no tolerance for any corruption at the United Nations;
_______________
5

See A/70/95-S/2015/446.
A/70/357-S/2015/682.
7
A/60/980.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 54 (A/62/54); and ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 54 (A/63/54).
9
A/62/329.
10
A/63/260 and Add.1, A/64/183 and Add.1, A/65/185, A/66/174 and Add.1, A/67/213, A/68/173 and A/69/210.
11
A/70/208.
12
A/69/779.
13
“Evaluation of the enforcement and remedial assistance efforts for sexual exploitation and abuse by the United Nations and related
personnel in peacekeeping operations”, as reissued on 12 June 2015.
6

973

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

5. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that his zero-tolerance policy for criminal activities,
such as sexual exploitation and abuse and corruption, is made known to all United Nations officials and experts on
mission at all levels, especially those in managerial positions;
6. Strongly urges States to take all appropriate measures to ensure that crimes by United Nations officials
and experts on mission do not go unpunished and that the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice, without
prejudice to the privileges and immunities of such persons and the United Nations under international law, and in
accordance with international human rights standards, including due process;
7. Strongly urges all States to consider establishing, to the extent that they have not yet done so, jurisdiction
over crimes, particularly those of a serious nature, as known in their existing national criminal laws, committed by
their nationals while serving as United Nations officials or experts on mission, at least where the conduct as defined
in the law of the State establishing jurisdiction also constitutes a crime under the laws of the host State, and, further,
urges States and appropriate international organizations to provide technical and other appropriate assistance in
developing such legal measures to States requesting such support;
8. Encourages all States and the United Nations to cooperate with each other in the exchange of
information and in facilitating the conduct of investigations and, as appropriate, the prosecution of United Nations
officials and experts on mission who are alleged to have committed crimes of a serious nature, in accordance with
their national law and applicable United Nations rules and regulations, fully respecting due process rights, as well as
to consider strengthening the capacities of their national authorities to investigate and prosecute such crimes;
9.

Encourages all States:

(a) To afford each other assistance in connection with criminal investigations or criminal or extradition
proceedings in respect of crimes of a serious nature committed by United Nations officials and experts on mission,
including assistance in obtaining evidence at their disposal, in accordance with their national law or any treaties or
other arrangements on extradition and mutual legal assistance that may exist between them;
(b) In accordance with their national law, to explore ways and means of facilitating the possible use of
information and material obtained from the United Nations for purposes of criminal proceedings initiated in their
territory for the prosecution of crimes of a serious nature committed by United Nations officials and experts on
mission, bearing in mind due process considerations;
(c) In accordance with their national law, to provide effective protection for victims of, witnesses to and
others who provide information in relation to crimes of a serious nature alleged to have been committed by United
Nations officials and experts on mission and to facilitate access of victims to victim assistance programmes, without
prejudice to the rights of the alleged offender, including those relating to due process;
(d) In accordance with their national law, to explore ways and means of responding adequately to requests by
host States for support and assistance in order to enhance their capacity to conduct effective investigations in respect
of crimes of a serious nature alleged to have been committed by United Nations officials and experts on mission;
10. Requests the Secretariat to continue to ensure that requests to Member States seeking personnel to serve
as experts on mission make States aware of the expectation that persons who serve in that capacity should meet high
standards in their conduct and behaviour and be aware that certain conduct may amount to a crime for which they
may be held accountable, and also requests that the Secretariat take all appropriate measures to continue to ensure
that all such personnel, as well as United Nations officials, are properly vetted by the States contributing personnel
and by the Organization for any prior misconduct while serving with the United Nations;
11. Urges the Secretary-General to make Member States contributing personnel to serve as experts on
mission aware of the necessity of providing appropriate conduct-related training prior to deployment, and also urges
the Secretary-General to continue to take such practical measures as are within his authority to strengthen existing
training on United Nations standards of conduct, including through predeployment and in-mission induction
training for United Nations officials and experts on mission;
12. Reiterates its decision that, bearing in mind its resolutions 62/63 and 63/119, the consideration of the
report of the Group of Legal Experts,7 in particular its legal aspects, taking into account the views of Member States
and also noting the inputs by the Secretariat, shall be continued during its seventy-third session in the framework of
a working group of the Sixth Committee, and, for that purpose, invites further comments from Member States on
that report, including on the question of future action;
974

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

13. Takes note of the briefing by the Secretariat during the seventieth session, and decides to organize
another briefing at the seventy-first session with a view to furthering discussion on measures that could be taken to
help ensure the accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission and prevent future crimes;
14. Recognizes the efforts of Member States towards devising concrete proposals to ensure the
accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission, and encourages all Member States to redouble
their efforts informally during the intersessional period, with the support of the Secretariat, in particular through the
organization of informal briefings;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to bring credible allegations that reveal that a crime may have been
committed by United Nations officials or experts on mission to the attention of the States against whose nationals
such allegations are made and to request from those States updates, as set out in paragraph 16 below, on the status of
their efforts to investigate and, as appropriate, prosecute crimes of a serious nature, as well as the types of
appropriate assistance that States may wish to receive from the Secretariat for the purposes of such investigations
and prosecutions;
16. Urges States to provide to the Secretary-General periodic updates on their handling of the credible
allegations brought to their attention by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 15 above, in particular
informing the Secretary-General of whether any disciplinary or criminal proceedings have been brought and of the
outcome of any such proceedings or the reasons for not initiating them, provided that this would not be contrary to
national laws or prejudice national investigations or national proceedings;
17. Requests the United Nations, when its investigations into allegations suggest that crimes of a serious
nature may have been committed by United Nations officials or experts on mission, to consider any appropriate
measures that may facilitate the possible use of information and material for purposes of criminal proceedings
initiated by States, bearing in mind due process considerations;
18. Encourages the United Nations, when allegations against United Nations officials or experts on mission
are determined by a United Nations administrative investigation to be unfounded, to take appropriate measures, in
the interests of the Organization, to restore the credibility and the reputation of such officials and experts on mission;
19. Urges the United Nations to continue cooperating with States exercising jurisdiction in order to provide
them, within the framework of the relevant rules of international law and agreements governing activities of the
United Nations, with information and material for purposes of criminal proceedings initiated by States;
20. Underlines the importance of a culture in which individuals are encouraged and supported by the
Organization to report alleged crimes, emphasizes that the United Nations, in accordance with the applicable rules
of the Organization, should take no action that would retaliate against or intimidate United Nations officials and
experts on mission who report allegations concerning crimes of a serious nature committed by United Nations
officials and experts on mission, and stresses the need for appropriate safeguards against retaliation;
21. Takes note with appreciation of the information provided by Governments in response to its resolutions
62/63, 63/119, 64/110, 65/20, 66/93, 67/88, 68/105 and 69/114, and urges Governments to continue taking the
measures necessary for the implementation of those resolutions, including their provisions addressing the
establishment of jurisdiction over crimes, particularly those of a serious nature, as known in their existing national
criminal laws, committed by their nationals while serving as United Nations officials or experts on mission, as well
as cooperation among States, and to provide specific details thereon, in particular with respect to paragraph 7 above,
in the information provided to the Secretary-General;
22. Recalls its request in resolution 69/114 for Governments to provide specific details on the measures
taken, as necessary, for the implementation of its resolutions 62/63, 63/119, 64/110, 65/20, 66/93, 67/88 and 68/105,
and notes that, in response to those resolutions, 97 submissions were received from 55 Member States between
6 December 2007 and 19 October 2015;
23. Requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, to prepare a compilation, based on information which
should be received from all Member States, of national provisions regarding the establishment of jurisdiction over
their nationals, whenever they serve as United Nations officials or experts on mission, in relation to crimes as
known in their existing national criminal laws, particularly those of a serious nature;

975

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

24. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session on the implementation of the present resolution, in particular with respect to paragraphs 7, 9, 12, 15 and 16
above, as well as any practical problems in its implementation, on the basis of information received from
Governments and the Secretariat;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to improve reporting methods and expand the scope of reporting, by
providing information on instances where credible allegations have been referred pursuant to paragraph 15 above, as
well as information received pursuant to paragraph 16 on all referrals since 1 July 2007, which information would
be limited to the United Nations entity involved, the year of referral, information about the type of crime and
summary of allegations, status of investigations, prosecutorial and disciplinary actions taken, including with respect
to individuals concerned who have left the duty mission or the service of the United Nations, any requests for
waivers of immunity, as applicable, and information on jurisdictional, evidentiary or other obstacles to prosecution,
while protecting the privacy of the victims as well as respecting the rights of those subject to the allegations;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission”.
RESOLUTION 70/115
A/RE S/70 /115

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/507, para. 8)14

70/115.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its forty-eighth session

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of
the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of international trade law, in
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade, especially those affecting developing
countries, would contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of equality,
equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination of discrimination in international trade
and, thereby, to peace, stability and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission,15
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of international trade law without
adequate coordination with the Commission might lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in
keeping with the aim of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization of
international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of international trade law, to coordinate legal activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts,
including among organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency, consistency and
coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat,
to maintain close cooperation with other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
_______________
14

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
15
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/70/17).

976

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law;15
2. Notes with approval the view of the Commission that the repository of published information under the
Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration16 should be fully operational as soon as possible,
as the repository constituted a central feature both of the Rules on Transparency and of the United Nations
Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration (Mauritius Convention on Transparency)17
by providing a consolidated, transparent and easily accessible global case record database for all investor-State
arbitrations conducted pursuant to the Rules on Transparency and the Convention, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to establish and operate through the secretariat of the Commission the repository of published
information under the Rules on Transparency, in accordance with article 8 of the Rules, initially as a pilot project
until the end of 2016, to be funded entirely by voluntary contributions;
3. Takes note with interest of the decisions taken by the Commission as regards its future work and the
progress made by the Commission in its work in the areas of arbitration and conciliation, online dispute resolution,
electronic commerce, insolvency law, security interests and international trade law aimed at reducing the legal
obstacles faced by micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises throughout their life cycle, and encourages the
Commission to continue to move forward efficiently to achieve tangible work outcomes;
4. Notes with appreciation the projects of the Commission aimed at promoting the uniform and effective
application of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York
Convention), done at New York on 10 June 1958,18 including the preparation of a guide entitled “UNCITRAL
Secretariat Guide on the New York Convention”, in close cooperation with international experts;19
5. Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body within the United Nations
system in the field of international trade law, aimed at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities
of international and regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting the rule of
law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard appeals to relevant international and
regional organizations to coordinate their legal activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of
efforts and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of
international trade law;
6. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the work of the Commission
concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the field of international trade law reform and development,
and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through its secretariat, its technical
cooperation and assistance programme, and in that respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships
with State and non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and facilitate the effective
implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities and for providing assistance with legislative drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the
attention of the Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions enabled the technical cooperation
and assistance activities to take place, and appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where appropriate, for the financing of
special projects and otherwise to assist the secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and
assistance activities, in particular in developing countries;
_______________
16

Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
Resolution 69/116, annex.
18
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
19
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. III, sect. E; and ibid.,
Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17), para. 117.
17

977

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and other bodies responsible for
development assistance, such as the World Bank and regional development banks, as well as to Governments in
their bilateral aid programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the Commission
and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities with those of the Commission in the light of
the relevance and importance of the work and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law
at the national and international levels and for the implementation of the international development agenda,
including the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;20
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to Member States, upon their request, in
the domestic implementation of their respective international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and
capacity-building, welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure greater coordination and coherence
among United Nations entities and with donors and recipients, and takes note of the ongoing discussion in the
Commission of ways to strengthen support to Member States, upon their request, in the implementation of sound
commercial law reforms;
7. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and methods of work of the Commission,
including transparent and inclusive deliberations, taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in
annex III to the report on the work of its forty-third session,21 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings of
the Commission and of its working groups, a reminder of those rules of procedure and methods of work with a view
to ensuring the high quality of the work of the Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, and
in this regard recalls its previous resolutions related to this matter;
8. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Regional Centre
for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of Korea, towards reaching out and providing technical assistance with
international trade law reforms to developing countries in the region, notes with satisfaction expressions of interest
from other States in hosting regional centres of the Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the
General Assembly informed of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in particular their
funding and budgetary situation;22
9. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and
individuals to make voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund established to provide travel assistance to developing
countries that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, in
order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and to increase expert representation from developing
countries at sessions of the Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in
those countries to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment for business, trade and investment;
10. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the sessions of the Commission and
its working groups, to continue, in the competent Main Committee during the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, its consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are members of the
Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General;
11. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and effective use of modern private
law standards in international trade are essential for advancing good governance, sustained economic development
and the eradication of poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations should
be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the rule of law at the national and
international levels, including through the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of
Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
12. Notes the rule of law panel discussion held at the forty-eighth session of the Commission and the
comments transmitted by the Commission highlighting its role in promoting the rule of law, in particular the role of
the multilateral treaty processes of the Commission in promoting and advancing the rule of law in the field of
international trade law,23 pursuant to paragraph 17 of General Assembly resolution 69/123 of 10 December 2014;
_______________
20

Resolution 70/1.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
22
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. XIII.
23
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/70/17), chap. XV.
21

978

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

13. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of
24 September 2012, Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal frameworks for
generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development, economic growth and employment, generating
investment and facilitating entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the declaration, Member States
expressed their conviction that the rule of law and development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
14. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as
resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015, States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed at increasing coordination of
and cooperation on legal activities of international and regional organizations active in the field of international trade
law and at promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
15. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with resolutions of the General Assembly
on documentation-related matters,24 which, in particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate,
the length of documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the substance of the
documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the mandate and functions of the Commission in the
progressive development and codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect to
the documentation of the Commission;25
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission standards and the provision
of summary records of the meetings of the Commission, including committees of the whole established by the
Commission for the duration of its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts, and takes note of
the Commission’s decision to continue the trial use of digital recordings, in parallel with summary records where
applicable, with a view to assessing the experience of using digital recordings and, on the basis of that assessment,
taking a decision at a future session regarding the possible replacement of summary records by digital recordings;26
17. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011 regarding the rotation scheme of
meetings between Vienna and New York;
18. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the work of the Commission for
the global unification and harmonization of international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet
done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and encouraging the use of
other relevant texts;
19. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the collection and dissemination of
case law on Commission texts in the six official languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the
resource-intensive nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and expand it, and in
this regard welcomes efforts by the Secretariat towards building partnerships with interested institutions, and
appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and
individuals to assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the availability and usefulness of
the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles and in securing the funding required for the
coordination and expansion of the system and the establishment, within the secretariat of the Commission, of a pillar
focused on the promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a uniform manner;
20. Welcomes the continued work of the Secretariat on digests of case law related to Commission texts,
including their wide dissemination, as well as the continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through
the CLOUT system, in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools for the promotion
of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in particular by building local capacity of judges, arbitrators
_______________
24

Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
Resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
26
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17), para. 276.
25

979

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

and other legal practitioners to interpret those standards in the light of their international character and the need to
promote uniformity in their application and the observance of good faith in international trade;
21. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, user-friendly and cost-effective United
Nations websites and the need for their multilingual development, maintenance and enrichment,27 commends the
fact that the website of the Commission is published in the six official languages of the United Nations, and
welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and improve its website, including by developing
new social media features, in accordance with the applicable guidelines.28
RESOLUTION 70/116
A/RE S/70 /116

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/508, para. 8)29

70/116.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2099 (XX) of 20 December 1965, in which the General Assembly established the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law to contribute towards a better knowledge of international law as a means of strengthening
international peace and security and promoting friendly relations and cooperation among States,
Noting that this year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the Programme of Assistance, and emphasizing the
importance of ensuring the successful continuation of the Programme for the benefit of present and future
generations of lawyers,
Reaffirming that the Programme of Assistance is a core activity of the United Nations and that it has provided
the foundation for the efforts of the United Nations to promote a better knowledge of international law for half a
century,
Recognizing the major contribution of the Programme of Assistance to the teaching and dissemination of
international law for the benefit of lawyers in all countries, legal systems and regions of the world for half a century,
Emphasizing the important contribution of the Programme of Assistance, in particular the United Nations
Regional Courses in International Law and the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, to the
furtherance of United Nations rule of law programmes and activities,
Reaffirming that the increasing demand for international law training and dissemination activities creates new
challenges for the Programme of Assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the Programme of Assistance effectively reaching its beneficiaries, including
with regard to languages, while bearing in mind limitations on available resources,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme
of Assistance30 and the views of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in the report,
Noting with concern that the activities of the Programme of Assistance, in particular the organization of the
United Nations Regional Courses in International Law on a regular basis and the further development of the United
Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, cannot be sustained with the resources available under the current
_______________
27

Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B, sect. X; 58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76;
59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV, paras. 66–80; and 61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
28
Resolution 63/120, para. 20.
29
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Ghana on behalf of
the Bureau.
30
A/70/423.

980

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

programme budget, notwithstanding its resolutions 64/113 of 16 December 2009, 65/25 of 6 December 2010,
66/97 of 9 December 2011, 67/91 of 14 December 2012 and 68/110 of 16 December 2013,
Noting with regret that the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law for Asia-Pacific and for
Latin America and the Caribbean were not held in 2014 and in 2015 owing to insufficient funds and that no United
Nations Regional Course in International Law for Latin America and the Caribbean has been held in the past
decade,
Noting with regret also that the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea
was not awarded in 2014 owing to insufficient voluntary contributions, and noting with appreciation that this
fellowship was awarded in 2015,
Considering that international law should occupy an appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at all
universities,
Convinced that States, international and regional organizations, universities and institutions should be
encouraged to give further support to the Programme of Assistance and to increase their activities to promote the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those activities which are of
special benefit to persons from developing countries,
Reaffirming that in the conduct of the Programme of Assistance it would be desirable to use as far as possible
the resources and facilities made available by Member States, international and regional organizations, universities,
institutions and others,
Reaffirming also the hope that, in appointing highly qualified lecturers for the seminars to be held within the
framework of the fellowship programmes in international law, account would be taken of the need to secure the
representation of major legal systems and balance among various geographical regions,
1. Approves the guidelines and recommendations contained in section III of the report of the SecretaryGeneral,30 in particular those designed to strengthen and revitalize the United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law in response to the increasing
demand for international law training and dissemination activities;
2.

Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out the activities specified in his report in 2016 and in 2017;

3. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out the following activities, to be financed from
provisions in the regular budget31 pursuant to resolution 69/117 of 10 December 2014 as well as, when necessary,
from voluntary contributions:
(a) The International Law Fellowship Programme in 2016 and in 2017, with a minimum of 20 fellowships
financed from provisions in the regular budget as well as 1 additional self-funded participant;
(b) The United Nations Regional Courses in International Law for Africa, for Asia-Pacific and for Latin
America and the Caribbean in 2016 and in 2017, with a minimum of 20 fellowships for each course financed from
provisions in the regular budget as well as self-funded participants and additional fellowships financed from
voluntary contributions;
(c) The United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, with its continuation and further
development financed from provisions in the regular budget as well as, when necessary, from voluntary
contributions;
4. Further authorizes the Secretary-General to award a minimum of one scholarship in 2016 and one in
2017 under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea, taking note of
paragraph 8 of resolution 69/117;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the activities conducted under the Programme of
Assistance and, in particular, for the efforts to strengthen, expand and enhance the international law training and
dissemination activities within the framework of the Programme of Assistance in 2015;
_______________
31

See A/70/6 (Sect. 8) and Corr.1, para. 8.61.

981

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

6. Commends the Secretary-General for the continuation and further development of the United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law as a major contribution to the teaching and dissemination of international
law around the world;
7. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations legal publications prepared by the Office of Legal
Affairs of the Secretariat, and once again requests the Secretary-General to issue the publications referred to in his
report in various formats, including hard copy publications, which are essential for developing countries;
8. Appreciates the efforts that were undertaken by the Office of Legal Affairs to bring up to date the United
Nations legal publications, in particular by the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs for its desktop
publishing initiative from 2003 to 2013 which greatly enhanced the timely issuance of its legal publications and
made possible the preparation of legal training materials, regrets that none of the publications referred to in the
report of the Secretary-General have been issued since 2014, when desktop publishing was discontinued owing to
lack of resources, and recommends that the necessary resources be made available to resume this successful
initiative;
9. Requests the Office of Legal Affairs to continue to maintain and expand its websites listed in the annex
to the report of the Secretary-General as an invaluable tool for the dissemination of international law materials as
well as for advanced legal research;
10. Requests that interns and research assistants be enlisted for the preparation of materials for the United
Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law as well as a handbook on international law;
11. Commends the Codification Division for the cost-saving measures undertaken with regard to the
International Law Fellowship Programme to maintain the number of fellowships available for this comprehensive
international law training programme;
12. Expresses its appreciation to the Hague Academy of International Law for the valuable contribution it
continues to make to the Programme of Assistance, which has enabled candidates under the International Law
Fellowship Programme to attend and participate in the Fellowship Programme in conjunction with courses at the
Academy;
13. Notes with appreciation the contributions of the Hague Academy to the teaching, study, dissemination
and wider appreciation of international law, and calls upon Member States and interested organizations to give
favourable consideration to the appeal of the Academy for a continuation of support and a possible increase in their
financial contributions, to enable the Academy to carry out its activities, particularly those relating to the summer
courses, regional courses and programmes of the Centre for Studies and Research in International Law and
International Relations;
14. Welcomes the efforts of the Codification Division to revitalize and conduct United Nations Regional
Courses in International Law as an important training activity;
15. Expresses its appreciation to Ethiopia for hosting the United Nations Regional Course in International
Law for Africa in 2015, and to Ethiopia, Thailand and Uruguay for agreeing to host the United Nations Regional
Courses in International Law for Africa, for Asia-Pacific and, for the first time in over a decade, for Latin America
and the Caribbean in 2016 and in 2017, and also expresses its appreciation to Costa Rica for its willingness to host
this Regional Course;
16. Expresses its appreciation to the African Union for the valuable contribution it continues to make to the
United Nations Regional Course in International Law for Africa, which has enabled participants to attend and
participate in the Regional Course and the study visit to the African Union;
17. Expresses its appreciation to Egypt for hosting the United Nations International Law Seminar for Arab
States in 2015;
18. Once again encourages the Codification Division to cooperate with the African Institute of International
Law, dedicated to offering higher learning and research in international law needed for the development of Africa, in
the implementation of the relevant activities under the Programme of Assistance;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme of Assistance and periodically to
invite Member States, universities, philanthropic foundations and other interested national and international
982

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

institutions and organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the
Programme or otherwise to assist in its implementation and possible expansion;
20. Reiterates its request to Member States and interested organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions for the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law and for the United Nations
Regional Courses in International Law organized by the Codification Division as an important complement to the
International Law Fellowship Programme;
21. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made voluntary contributions to support the
Programme of Assistance;
22. Decides to appoint 25 Member States, 6 from African States, 5 from Asia-Pacific States, 3 from Eastern
European States, 5 from Latin American and Caribbean States and 6 from Western European and other States, as
members of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law for a period of four years beginning on
1 January 2016;32
23. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the
implementation of the Programme of Assistance in 2016 and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee
on the Programme of Assistance, to submit recommendations regarding the Programme in subsequent years;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law”.
RESOLUTION 70/117
A/RE S/70 /117

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/510, para. 9)33

70/117.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, by which it established the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, and its relevant
resolutions adopted at subsequent sessions,
Recalling also its resolution 47/233 of 17 August 1993 on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly,
Recalling further its resolution 47/62 of 11 December 1992 on the question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council,
Taking note of the report of the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security Council,34
Recalling the elements relevant to the work of the Special Committee contained in its resolution 47/120 B of
20 September 1993,
Recalling also its resolution 51/241 of 31 July 1997 on the strengthening of the United Nations system and its
resolution 51/242 of 15 September 1997, entitled “Supplement to an Agenda for Peace”, by which it adopted the texts
on coordination and the question of sanctions imposed by the United Nations, which are annexed to that resolution,
_______________
32

The following States have been appointed members of the Advisory Committee on the Programme of Assistance: Argentina, Canada,
Chile, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Italy, Kenya, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovakia, Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America and
Uruguay.
33
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Bureau.
34
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/63/47).

983

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Concerned about the special economic problems confronting certain States arising from the carrying-out of
preventive or enforcement measures taken by the Security Council against other States, and taking into account the
obligation of Members of the United Nations under Article 49 of the Charter to join in affording mutual assistance
in carrying out the measures decided upon by the Council,
Recalling the right of third States confronted with special economic problems of that nature to consult the
Security Council with regard to a solution of those problems, in accordance with Article 50 of the Charter,
Recalling also that the International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, and
reaffirming its authority and independence,
Mindful of the adoption of the revised working papers on the working methods of the Special Committee,35
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs
and Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council”,36
Recalling paragraphs 106 to 110, 176 and 177 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,37
Mindful of the decision of the Special Committee in which it expressed its readiness to engage, as appropriate,
in the implementation of any decisions that might be taken at the high-level plenary meeting of the sixtieth session
of the General Assembly in September 2005 that concerned the Charter and any amendments thereto,38
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 50/51 of 11 December 1995, 51/208 of 17 December 1996,
52/162 of 15 December 1997, 53/107 of 8 December 1998, 54/107 of 9 December 1999, 55/157 of 12 December
2000, 56/87 of 12 December 2001, 57/25 of 19 November 2002, 58/80 of 9 December 2003 and 59/45 of
2 December 2004,
Recalling also its resolution 64/115 of 16 December 2009 and the document entitled “Introduction and
implementation of sanctions imposed by the United Nations” annexed thereto,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the work of its session held in 2015,39
Noting with appreciation the work done by the Special Committee to encourage States to focus on the need to
prevent and to settle peacefully their disputes which are likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;39
2.

Decides that the Special Committee shall hold its next session from 16 to 24 February 2016;

3. Requests the Special Committee, at its session in 2016, in accordance with paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 50/52 of 11 December 1995:
(a) To continue its consideration of all proposals concerning the question of the maintenance of international
peace and security in all its aspects in order to strengthen the role of the United Nations and, in this context, to
consider other proposals relating to the maintenance of international peace and security already submitted or which
may be submitted to the Special Committee at its session in 2016, including strengthening the relationship and
cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations or arrangements in the peaceful settlement of
disputes;

_______________
35

Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/61/33), para. 72.
A/70/295.
37
Resolution 60/1.
38
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/60/33), para. 77.
39
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/70/33).
36

984

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(b) To continue to consider, in an appropriate, substantive manner and framework, including the frequency
of its consideration, the question of the implementation of the provisions of the Charter related to assistance to third
States affected by the application of sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter based on all of the related reports of
the Secretary-General40 and the proposals submitted on the question;
(c)

To keep on its agenda the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States;

(d) To consider, as appropriate, any proposal referred to it by the General Assembly in the implementation
of the decisions of the high-level plenary meeting of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly in September
2005 that concern the Charter and any amendments thereto;
(e) To continue to consider, on a priority basis, ways and means of improving its working methods and
enhancing its efficiency and utilization of resources with a view to identifying widely acceptable measures for future
implementation;
4. Invites the Special Committee, at its session in 2016, to continue to identify new subjects for
consideration in its future work with a view to contributing to the revitalization of the work of the United Nations;
5. Recalls the consideration by the Special Committee of the proposal to commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations, and welcomes the activities performed in this regard;
6. Notes the readiness of the Special Committee to provide, within its mandate, such assistance as may be
sought at the request of other subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly in relation to any issues before them;
7. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its seventyfirst session;
8. Recognizes the important role of the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, in adjudicating disputes among States and the value of its work, as well as the importance of having
recourse to the Court in the peaceful settlement of disputes, notes that, consistent with Article 96 of the Charter, the
Court’s advisory jurisdiction may be requested by the General Assembly, the Security Council or other authorized
organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, and requests the Secretary-General to distribute, in due
course, the advisory opinions requested by the principal organs of the United Nations as official documents of the
United Nations;
9. Commends the Secretary-General for the progress made in the preparation of studies for the Repertory of
Practice of United Nations Organs, including the increased use of the internship programme of the United Nations
and further expanded cooperation with academic institutions for this purpose, as well as the progress made towards
updating the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council;
10. Notes with appreciation the contributions made by Member States to the trust fund for the elimination of
the backlog in the Repertory, as well as the trust fund for the updating of the Repertoire;
11. Reiterates its call for voluntary contributions to the trust fund for the elimination of the backlog in the
Repertory so as to further support the Secretariat in carrying out the effective elimination of that backlog; voluntary
contributions to the trust fund for the updating of the Repertoire; and the sponsoring, on a voluntary basis and with
no cost to the United Nations, of associate experts to assist in the updating of the two publications;
12. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue his efforts towards updating the two publications and
making them available electronically in all their respective language versions;
13. Notes with concern that the backlog in the preparation of volume III of the Repertory, although slightly
reduced, has not been eliminated, and calls upon the Secretary-General to address that issue effectively and on a
priority basis, while commending the Secretary-General for progress made in reducing the backlog;

_______________
40

A/48/573-S/26705, A/49/356, A/50/60-S/1995/1, A/50/361, A/50/423, A/51/317, A/52/308, A/53/312, A/54/383 and Add.1, A/55/295
and Add.1, A/56/303, A/57/165 and Add.1, A/58/346, A/59/334, A/60/320, A/61/304, A/62/206 and Corr.1, A/63/224, A/64/225, A/65/217,
A/66/213, A/67/190, A/68/226, A/69/119 and A/70/119.

985

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

14. Reiterates the responsibility of the Secretary-General for the quality of the Repertory and the Repertoire,
and with regard to the Repertoire calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to follow the modalities outlined in
paragraphs 102 to 106 of his report dated 18 September 1952;41
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report on
both the Repertory and the Repertoire;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to brief the Special Committee at its next session on the information
referred to in paragraph 12 of his report on the implementation of the provisions of the Charter related to assistance
to third States affected by the application of sanctions;42
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session,
under the item entitled “Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”, a report on the implementation of the provisions of the Charter
related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”.
RESOLUTION 70/118
A/RE S/70 /118

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/511, para. 8)43

70/118.

The rule of law at the national and international levels

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/123 of 10 December 2014,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, which are indispensable foundations of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, and reiterating
its determination to foster strict respect for them and to establish a just and lasting peace all over the world,
Reaffirming that human rights, the rule of law and democracy are interlinked and mutually reinforcing and that
they belong to the universal and indivisible core values and principles of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the need for universal adherence to and implementation of the rule of law at both the national
and international levels and its solemn commitment to an international order based on the rule of law and
international law, which, together with the principles of justice, is essential for peaceful coexistence and cooperation
among States,
Bearing in mind that the activities of the United Nations carried out in support of efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate the rule of law are undertaken in accordance with the Charter, and stressing the need to
strengthen support to Member States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective
international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity-building,
Convinced that the advancement of the rule of law at the national and international levels is essential for the
realization of sustained economic growth, sustainable development, the eradication of poverty and hunger and the
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and acknowledging that collective security depends on
effective cooperation, in accordance with the Charter and international law, against transnational threats,
Reaffirming the duty of all States to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force in any
manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations and to settle their international disputes
_______________
41

A/2170.
A/70/119.
43
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Mexico on behalf of
the Bureau.
42

986

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered, in
accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter, and calling upon States that have not yet done so to consider accepting
the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in accordance with its Statute,
Convinced that the promotion of and respect for the rule of law at the national and international levels, as well
as justice and good governance, should guide the activities of the United Nations and its Member States,
Recalling paragraph 134 (e) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,44
1. Recalls the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, held during the high-level segment of its sixty-seventh session, and the declaration adopted at
that meeting,45 takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 41 of the
declaration,46 and requests the Sixth Committee to continue its consideration of ways and means of further
developing the linkages between the rule of law and the three pillars of the United Nations;
2. Acknowledges the efforts to strengthen the rule of law through voluntary pledges, encourages all States
to consider making pledges, individually or jointly, based on their national priorities, and also encourages those
States that have made pledges to continue to exchange information, knowledge and best practices in this regard;
3. Takes note of the annual report of the Secretary-General on strengthening and coordinating United
Nations rule of law activities;47
4. Encourages the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to accord high priority to rule of law
activities;
5. Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in encouraging the progressive development of international
law and its codification, and further reaffirms that States shall abide by all of their obligations under
international law;
6. Also reaffirms the imperative of upholding and promoting the rule of law at the international level in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
7.

Welcomes the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;48

8. Recognizes the role of multilateral treaty processes in advancing the rule of law, recalls the constructive
debate held on this subtopic in the Sixth Committee during its seventieth session, and in this regard:
(a) Reaffirms its support for the annual treaty event organized by the Secretary-General, which provides an
opportunity for States to increase their participation in the multilateral treaty framework;
(b) Recognizes the importance of the registration and publication of treaties in accordance with Article 102
of the Charter, and invites the Secretary-General to review the regulations giving effect to that article,49 taking into
account recent developments, and to submit the result of that review to the Sixth Committee for consideration at the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly;
(c) Welcomes the efforts made to develop and enhance the United Nations electronic treaty database,
providing online access to comprehensive information on the depositary functions of the Secretary-General and the
registration and publication of treaties under Article 102 of the Charter, and encourages the continuation of such
efforts in the future, while bearing in mind that many developing countries lack affordable access to information and
communication technologies;
_______________
44

Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 67/1.
46
A/68/213/Add.1.
47
A/70/206.
48
Resolution 70/1.
49
Resolutions 97 (1) of 14 December 1946, 364 B (IV) of 1 December 1949, 482 (V) of 12 December 1950, 33/141 A of 19 December
1978 and 52/153 of 15 December 1997.
45

987

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(d) Recognizes the importance of the legal publications prepared by the Treaty Section of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat, emphasizes the need for those publications, particularly the Summary of Practice of
the Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral Treaties, to be updated, taking into account new developments
and practices, and invites the Secretary-General to include, as appropriate, brief information on such developments
and practices in the next annual report;
(e) Welcomes the organization of workshops on treaty law and practice by the Treaty Section, both at the
regional level and at United Nations Headquarters, as an important capacity-building initiative, and invites States to
continue to support this activity;
9. Welcomes the dialogue initiated by the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group and the Rule of
Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General with Member States on the topic “Promoting the rule of
law at the international level”, and calls for the continuation of this dialogue with a view to fostering the rule of law
at the international level;
10. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law to the furtherance of United Nations rule of law
programmes and activities, emphasizes that further technical assistance and capacity-building initiatives, focused on
increasing and improving the participation of Member States in the multilateral treaty process, should be examined,
and invites States to support these activities;
11. Stresses the importance of adherence to the rule of law at the national level and the need to strengthen
support to Member States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective international
obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity-building in order to develop, reinforce and maintain
domestic institutions active in the promotion of rule of law at the national and international levels, subject to national
ownership, strategies and priorities;
12. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure greater coordination and coherence among the
United Nations entities and with donors and recipients, and reiterates its call for greater evaluation of the
effectiveness of such activities, including possible measures to improve the effectiveness of those capacity-building
activities;
13. Calls, in this context, for dialogue to be enhanced among all stakeholders, with a view to placing
national perspectives at the centre of rule of law assistance in order to strengthen national ownership, while
recognizing that rule of law activities must be anchored in a national context and that States have different national
experiences in the development of their systems of the rule of law, taking into account their legal, political,
socioeconomic, cultural, religious and other local specificities, while also recognizing that there are common
features founded on international norms and standards;
14. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to systematically address, as
appropriate, aspects of the rule of law in relevant activities, including the participation of women in rule of lawrelated activities, recognizing the importance of the rule of law to virtually all areas of United Nations engagement;
15. Expresses full support for the overall coordination and coherence role of the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group within the United Nations system, within existing mandates, supported by the Rule of Law
Unit and under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in a timely manner, his next annual report on United Nations
rule of law activities, in accordance with paragraph 5 of its resolution 63/128 of 11 December 2008, addressing, in a
balanced manner, the national and international dimensions of the rule of law;
17. Recognizes the importance of restoring confidence in the rule of law as a key element of transitional
justice;
18. Recalls the commitment of Member States to take all necessary steps to provide fair, transparent,
effective, non-discriminatory and accountable services that promote access to justice for all, including legal aid,
encourages further dialogue and the sharing of national practices in strengthening the rule of law through access to
justice, including with regard to birth registration and legal aid, where appropriate, in both criminal and civil
proceedings, and in this regard stresses the need to intensify the assistance extended to Governments upon their
request;
988

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

19. Stresses the importance of promoting the sharing of national practices and of inclusive dialogue,
welcomes the proposals made by the Secretary-General, inviting Member States to voluntarily exchange national
best practices on the rule of law in informal meetings and on an electronic depository of best practices on the United
Nations rule of law website, and invites Member States to do so;
20. Invites the International Court of Justice, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
and the International Law Commission to continue to comment, in their respective reports to the General Assembly,
on their current roles in promoting the rule of law;
21. Invites the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group and the Rule of Law Unit to continue their
dialogue with all Member States by interacting with them in a regular, transparent and inclusive manner, in
particular in informal briefings, and welcomes the informal briefings held during the sixty-ninth session;
22. Stresses the need for the Rule of Law Unit to carry out its tasks in an effective and sustainable manner
and the need to provide it with reasonable means required to that effect;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “The rule of law
at the national and international levels”, and invites Member States to focus their comments during the upcoming
Sixth Committee debate on the subtopics “Sharing national practices of States in the implementation of multilateral
treaties” and “Practical measures to facilitate access to justice for all, including for the poorest and most vulnerable”.
RESOLUTION 70/119
A/RE S/70 /119

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/512, para. 9)50

70/119.

The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, to
international law and to an international order based on the rule of law, which is essential for peaceful coexistence
and cooperation among States,
Recalling its resolutions 64/117 of 16 December 2009, 65/33 of 6 December 2010, 66/103 of 9 December
2011, 67/98 of 14 December 2012, 68/117 of 16 December 2013 and 69/124 of 10 December 2014,
Taking into account the comments and observations of Governments and observers and the discussions held in
the Sixth Committee at the sixty-fourth to seventieth sessions of the General Assembly on the scope and application
of universal jurisdiction,51
Recognizing the diversity of views expressed by States and the need for further consideration towards a better
understanding of the scope and application of universal jurisdiction,
Reiterating its commitment to fighting impunity, and noting the views expressed by States that the legitimacy
and credibility of the use of universal jurisdiction are best ensured by its responsible and judicious application
consistent with international law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General prepared on the basis of comments
and observations of Governments and relevant observers;52
2. Decides that the Sixth Committee shall continue its consideration of the scope and application of
universal jurisdiction, without prejudice to the consideration of this topic and related issues in other forums of the
_______________
50

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Kenya on behalf of the
Bureau.
51
See A/C.6/64/SR.12, 13 and 25 and A/C.6/64/SR.1–28/Corrigendum; A/C.6/65/SR.10–12, 27 and 28; A/C.6/66/SR.12, 13, 17 and 29;
A/C.6/67/SR.12, 13, 24 and 25; A/C.6/68/SR.12–14 and 23; A/C.6/69/SR.11, 12 and 28; and A/C.6/70/SR.12 and 13.
52
A/70/125; see also A/69/174, A/68/113, A/67/116, A/66/93 and Add.1 and A/65/181.

989

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

United Nations, and for this purpose decides to establish, at its seventy-first session, a working group of the Sixth
Committee to continue to undertake a thorough discussion of the scope and application of universal jurisdiction;
3. Invites Member States and relevant observers, as appropriate, to submit, before 29 April 2016,
information and observations on the scope and application of universal jurisdiction, including, where appropriate,
information on the relevant applicable international treaties and their national legal rules and judicial practice, and
requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session a report
based on such information and observations;
4. Decides that the working group shall be open to all Member States and that relevant observers to the
General Assembly will be invited to participate in the work of the working group;
5. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “The scope
and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction”.
RESOLUTION 70/120
A/RE S/70 /120

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/513, para. 10)53

70/120.

Measures to eliminate international terrorism

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming, in all its aspects, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted on 8 September
2006,54 which enhances the overall framework for the efforts of the international community to effectively counter
the scourge of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and recalling the first, second, third and fourth biennial
reviews of the Strategy, on 4 and 5 September 2008, 8 September 2010, 28 and 29 June 2012 and 12 and 13 June
2014, respectively, and the debates that were held on those occasions,55
Recalling its resolutions 62/272 of 5 September 2008, 64/297 of 8 September 2010, 66/282 of 29 June 2012
and 68/276 of 13 June 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 66/10 of 18 November 2011,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations,56
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,57
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome,58 and reaffirming, in particular, the section on terrorism,
Recalling further the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994, and the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration
on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to Assembly resolution 51/210 of
17 December 1996,
Recalling all General Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate international terrorism and Security
Council resolutions on threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts,
Convinced of the importance of the consideration of measures to eliminate international terrorism by the
General Assembly as the universal organ having competence to do so,
_______________
53

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Bureau.
54
Resolution 60/288.
55
See A/62/PV.117–120, A/64/PV.116 and 117, A/66/PV.118–120 and A/68/PV.94–97.
56
Resolution 50/6.
57
Resolution 55/2.
58
Resolution 60/1.

990

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Deeply disturbed by the persistence of terrorist acts, which have been carried out worldwide,
Reaffirming its strong condemnation of the heinous acts of terrorism that have caused enormous loss of human
life, destruction and damage, including those which prompted the adoption of General Assembly resolution 56/1 of
12 September 2001, as well as Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) of 12 September 2001, 1373 (2001) of
28 September 2001 and 1377 (2001) of 12 November 2001, and those that have occurred since,
Reaffirming also its strong condemnation of the atrocious and deliberate attacks that have occurred against
United Nations offices in various parts of the world,
Affirming that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with all their
obligations under international law and must adopt such measures in accordance with international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Stressing the need to strengthen further international cooperation among States and among international
organizations and agencies, regional and subregional organizations and arrangements and the United Nations in
order to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, in accordance with the principles of the Charter, international law and the relevant international
conventions,
Noting the role of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism in monitoring the implementation of that resolution, including the taking of the necessary
financial, legal and technical measures by States and the ratification or acceptance of the relevant international
conventions and protocols,
Mindful of the need to enhance the role of the United Nations and the relevant specialized agencies in
combating international terrorism and of the proposals of the Secretary-General to enhance the role of the
Organization in this respect,
Mindful also of the essential need to strengthen international, regional and subregional cooperation aimed at
enhancing the national capacity of States to prevent and effectively suppress international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations,
Reiterating its call upon States to review urgently the scope of the existing international legal provisions on the
prevention, repression and elimination of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, with the aim of ensuring that
there is a comprehensive legal framework covering all aspects of the matter,
Emphasizing that tolerance and dialogue among civilizations and the enhancement of interfaith and
intercultural understanding are among the most important elements in promoting cooperation and success in
combating terrorism, and welcoming the various initiatives to this end,
Reaffirming that no terrorist act can be justified in any circumstances,
Recalling Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005, and bearing in mind that States
must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Noting recent developments and initiatives at the international, regional and subregional levels to prevent and
suppress international terrorism,
Noting also regional and subregional efforts to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed, including through the elaboration of and adherence to
regional conventions,
Recalling its decision in resolutions 54/110 of 9 December 1999, 55/158 of 12 December 2000, 56/88 of
12 December 2001, 57/27 of 19 November 2002, 58/81 of 9 December 2003, 59/46 of 2 December 2004, 60/43 of
8 December 2005, 61/40 of 4 December 2006, 62/71 of 6 December 2007, 63/129 of 11 December 2008, 64/118 of
16 December 2009, 65/34 of 6 December 2010, 66/105 of 9 December 2011 and 67/99 of 14 December 2012 that
the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 should address,
and keep on its agenda, the question of convening a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations
to formulate a joint organized response of the international community to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations,
991

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling also that, in the Final Document of the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, adopted in Tehran on 31 August 2012,59 the Heads of State or Government reiterated the
collective position of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on terrorism and reaffirmed its previous initiative
calling for an international summit conference under the auspices of the United Nations to formulate a joint
organized response of the international community to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,60 as well as other
relevant initiatives,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002, 58/187 of 22 December 2003, 59/191 of
20 December 2004, 60/158 of 16 December 2005, 61/171 of 19 December 2006, 62/159 of 18 December 2007,
63/185 of 18 December 2008, 64/168 of 18 December 2009, 65/221 of 21 December 2010, 66/171 of 19 December
2011 and 68/178 of 18 December 2013,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General61 and the oral report of the Chair of the Working Group
of the Sixth Committee on its work during the seventieth session,62
1. Strongly condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations as
criminal and unjustifiable, wherever and by whomsoever committed;
2. Calls upon all Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate international, regional and
subregional organizations to implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,54 as well as the
resolutions relating to the first, second, third and fourth biennial reviews of the Strategy,63 in all its aspects at the
international, regional, subregional and national levels without delay, including by mobilizing resources and expertise;
3. Recalls the pivotal role of the General Assembly in following up the implementation and the updating of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, looks forward to the fifth biennial review, in 2016, and in this
regard recalls its invitation to the Secretary-General to contribute to the future deliberations of the Assembly, and
requests the Secretary-General when doing so to provide information on relevant activities within the Secretariat to
ensure overall coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system;
4. Reiterates that criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror in the general public, a
group of persons or particular persons for political purposes are in any circumstances unjustifiable, whatever the
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or other nature that may be invoked
to justify them;
5. Reiterates its call upon all States to adopt further measures in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant provisions of international law, including international standards of human rights, to
prevent terrorism and to strengthen international cooperation in combating terrorism and, to that end, to consider, in
particular, the implementation of the measures set out in paragraphs 3 (a) to (f) of General Assembly
resolution 51/210;
6. Also reiterates its call upon all States, with the aim of enhancing the efficient implementation of relevant
legal instruments, to intensify, as and where appropriate, the exchange of information on facts related to terrorism
and, in so doing, to avoid the dissemination of inaccurate or unverified information;
7. Reiterates its call upon States to refrain from financing, encouraging, providing training for or otherwise
supporting terrorist activities;
8. Expresses concern at the increase in incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking with demands for
ransom and/or political concessions by terrorist groups, and expresses the need to address this issue;
9. Expresses grave concern over the acute and growing threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, namely,
individuals who travel to a State other than their States of residence or nationality for the purpose of the perpetration,
planning or preparation of, or participation in, terrorist acts or providing or receiving terrorist training, including in
_______________
59

A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I, paras. 225 and 226.
A/53/667-S/1998/1071, annex I, para. 161.
61
A/70/211.
62
See A/C.6/70/SR.27.
63
Resolutions 62/272, 64/297, 66/282 and 68/276.
60

992

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

connection with armed conflict, emphasizes the need for States to address this issue, including through the
implementation of their international obligations, and underlines the importance of United Nations capacitybuilding and facilitation of capacity-building in accordance with existing mandates to assist States, including those
in the most affected regions, upon their request;
10. Emphasizes the need for States to cooperate resolutely against international terrorism by taking speedy and
effective measures to eliminate this scourge, and in this regard calls upon all States, in accordance with their obligations
under applicable international law and the Charter, to deny safe haven and bring to justice or, where appropriate,
extradite, on the basis of the principle of extradite or prosecute, the perpetrators of terrorist acts or any person who
supports, facilitates or participates or attempts to participate in the financing, planning or preparation of terrorist acts;
11. Urges States to ensure that their nationals or other persons and entities within their territory that wilfully
provide or collect funds for the benefit of persons or entities who commit, or attempt to commit, facilitate or
participate in the commission of terrorist acts are punished by penalties consistent with the grave nature of such acts;
12. Reminds States of their obligations under relevant international conventions and protocols, and Security
Council resolutions, including Council resolution 1373 (2001), to ensure that perpetrators of terrorist acts are
brought to justice, and recalls the General Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate international terrorism;
13. Reaffirms that international cooperation as well as actions by States to combat terrorism should be
conducted in conformity with the principles of the Charter, international law and relevant international conventions;
14. Recalls the adoption of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,64
the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material,65 the Protocol of 2005 to the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation66 and the Protocol of
2005 to the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the
Continental Shelf,67 and urges all States to consider, as a matter of priority, becoming parties to these instruments;
15. Urges all States that have not yet done so to consider, as a matter of priority and in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and Council resolution 1566 (2004) of 8 October 2004, becoming parties
to the relevant conventions and protocols as referred to in paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 51/210, as
well as the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings,68 the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism,69 the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism and the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and calls
upon all States to enact, as appropriate, the national legislation necessary to implement the provisions of those
conventions and protocols, to ensure that the jurisdiction of their courts enables them to bring to trial the perpetrators
of terrorist acts and to cooperate with and provide support and assistance to other States and relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations to that end;
16. Urges States to cooperate with the Secretary-General and with one another, as well as with interested
intergovernmental organizations, with a view to ensuring, where appropriate within existing mandates, that technical
and other expert advice is provided to those States requiring and requesting assistance in becoming parties to and
implementing the conventions and protocols referred to in paragraph 15 above;
17. Notes with appreciation and satisfaction that, consistent with the call contained in paragraphs 14 and 15
of General Assembly resolution 69/127 of 10 December 2014, a number of States became parties to the relevant
conventions and protocols referred to therein, thereby realizing the objective of wider acceptance and implementation
of those conventions;
_______________
64

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2445, No. 44004.
Adopted on 8 July 2005 by the Conference to Consider and Adopt Proposed Amendments to the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material (International Atomic Energy Agency, document GOV/INF/2005/10-GC(49)/INF/6, attachment).
66
Adopted on 14 October 2005 by the Diplomatic Conference on the Revision of the SUA Treaties (International Maritime Organization,
document LEG/CONF.15/21).
67
Adopted on 14 October 2005 by the Diplomatic Conference on the Revision of the SUA Treaties (International Maritime Organization,
document LEG/CONF.15/22).
68
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2149, No. 37517.
69
Ibid., vol. 2178, No. 38349.
65

993

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

18. Reaffirms the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 49/60, and the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to
Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to Assembly resolution 51/210, and calls upon all States to
implement them;
19. Calls upon all States to cooperate to prevent and suppress terrorist acts;
20. Urges all States and the Secretary-General, in their efforts to prevent international terrorism, to make the
best use of the existing institutions of the United Nations;
21. Notes that the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is performing its duties within the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force in New York and that the Centre is supporting the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and encourages all Member States to collaborate with the
Centre and to contribute to the implementation of its activities within the Task Force;
22. Requests the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna
to continue its efforts to enhance, through its mandate, the capabilities of the United Nations in the prevention of
terrorism, and recognizes, in the context of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), its role in assisting States in becoming parties to and implementing the relevant
international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism, including the most recent among them, and in
strengthening international cooperation mechanisms in criminal matters related to terrorism, including through
national capacity-building;
23. Invites regional intergovernmental organizations to submit to the Secretary-General information on the
measures they have adopted at the regional level to eliminate international terrorism, as well as on intergovernmental
meetings held by those organizations;
24. Decides to recommend that the Sixth Committee, at the seventy-first session of the General Assembly,
establish a working group with a view to finalizing the process on the draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism as well as discussions on the item included in its agenda by Assembly resolution 54/110
concerning the question of convening a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations;
25. Recognizes the efforts of Member States towards resolving any outstanding issues, and encourages all
Member States to redouble their efforts during the intersessional period;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Measures to
eliminate international terrorism”.
RESOLUTION 70/121
A/RE S/70 /121

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/515, para. 8)70

70/121.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,71
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations,72 the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations73 and the responsibilities of the host country,

_______________
70

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire
and Cyprus.
71
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/70/26).
72
Resolution 22 A (I).
73
See resolution 169 (II).

994

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of
15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and advise the host country on, issues arising in connection
with the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host
country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
contained in paragraph 28 of its report;71
2. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations and the
missions accredited to the United Nations and the observance of their privileges and immunities, which is an issue
of great importance, are in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, requests the host country to
continue to solve, through negotiations, problems that might arise and to take all measures necessary to prevent any
interference with the functioning of missions, and urges the host country to continue to take appropriate action, such
as training of police, security, customs and border control officers, with a view to maintaining respect for diplomatic
privileges and immunities and if violations occur to ensure that such cases are properly investigated and remedied,
in accordance with applicable law;
3. Notes the problems experienced by some Permanent Missions to the United Nations in connection with
the implementation of the Parking Programme for Diplomatic Vehicles,74 and notes that the Committee shall remain
seized of the matter, with a view to continuing to maintain the proper implementation of the Parking Programme in
a manner that is fair, non-discriminatory, effective and therefore consistent with international law;
4. Requests the host country to consider removing the remaining travel restrictions imposed by it on staff of
certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities, and in this regard notes the longstanding positions of affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
5. Recalls article IV of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,73 and notes the concerns expressed by some delegations
concerning the denial and delay of entry visas to representatives of Member States;
6. Notes that the Committee anticipates that the host country will continue to enhance its efforts to ensure
the issuance of entry visas to representatives of Member States pursuant to article IV, section 11, of the Headquarters
Agreement and in a timely manner, to enable travel to New York on United Nations business and that the
Committee anticipates that the host country will continue to enhance efforts, including visa issuance, to facilitate the
participation of representatives of Member States in other United Nations meetings, as appropriate;
7. Also notes that a number of delegations have requested shortening the time frame applied by the host
country for issuance of entry visas to representatives of Member States since the time frame poses difficulties for the
full-fledged participation of Member States in United Nations meetings, and invites the host country to inform the
Committee, as appropriate, of efforts to address such difficulties;
8. Notes with concern the difficulties experienced by some Permanent Missions to the United Nations in
obtaining suitable banking services, and welcomes the continued efforts of the host country to facilitate the opening
of bank accounts for those Permanent Missions;
9. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and expects that the issues raised at
the meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with
international law, including the Headquarters Agreement;
10. Affirms the importance of the Committee being in a position to fulfil its mandate and meet on short
notice to deal with urgent and important matters concerning the relations between the United Nations and the host
country, and in that connection requests the Secretariat and the Committee on Conferences to accord priority to

_______________
74

A/AC.154/355, annex.

995

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

requests from the Committee on Relations with the Host Country for conference-servicing facilities for meetings of
that Committee that must be held while the General Assembly and its Main Committees are meeting, without
prejudice to the requirements of those bodies and on an “as available” basis;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United
Nations with the host country, and recalls that the Secretary-General may bring to the attention of the Committee
issues of mutual concern relating to the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement and the Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;72
12. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution
2819 (XXVI) and, in this framework, to continue to consider additional appropriate measures to enhance the work
of the Committee and its effectiveness;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session the item entitled “Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
RESOLUTION 70/122
A/RE S/70 /122

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/533, para. 7)75

70/122.

Observer status for the International Civil Defence Organization in the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the International Civil Defence Organization,
1. Decides to invite the International Civil Defence Organization to participate in the sessions and the work
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2.

Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/123

A/RE S/70 /123

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/534, para. 7)76

70/123.

Observer status for the Indian Ocean Rim Association in the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the Indian Ocean Rim Association,
1. Decides to invite the Indian Ocean Rim Association to participate in the sessions and the work of the
General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2.

Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution.

_______________
75

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Armenia, Belarus, China, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic and Zimbabwe.
76
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Kenya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritius, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Seychelles, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.

996

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 70/124
A/RE S/70 /124

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 14 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/536, para. 7)77

70/124.

Observer status for the Union for the Mediterranean in the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the Union for the Mediterranean,
1. Decides to invite the Union for the Mediterranean to participate in the sessions and the work of the
General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2.

Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 70/236

A/RE S/70 /236

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2015, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/70/509, para. 10)78

70/236.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session,79
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development and codification of international law
as a means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,80
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
that might be submitted to the International Law Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth
Committee and the Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development and
codification of international law,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which, given their new or renewed
interest for the international community, may be suitable for the progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Recalling also the role of Member States in submitting proposals for new topics for the consideration of the
International Law Commission, and noting in this regard the recommendation of the Commission that such
proposals be accompanied by a statement of reasons,
Reaffirming the importance for the successful work of the International Law Commission of the information
provided by Member States concerning their views and practice,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the special rapporteurs of the International Law Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with appreciation the voluntary
contributions made to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar,
_______________
77

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Austria, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, Estonia,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritania, Monaco, Morocco,
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Tunisia and Turkey.
78
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Bureau.
79
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/70/10).
80
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

997

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Acknowledging the importance of facilitating the timely publication of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission and of eliminating the backlog,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that conditions are provided for concentrated attention to
each of the main topics dealt with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,
Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on the report of the International
Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the
Commission as a body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between the two bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and question time in the Sixth Committee,
as envisaged in General Assembly resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the
work of the Assembly,
1.

Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session;79

2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the work accomplished at its sixtyseventh session;
3. Takes note of the final report on the topic “The Most-Favoured-Nation clause” contained in the annex to
the report of the International Law Commission, and encourages its widest possible dissemination;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission continue its work on the topics in its current
programme, taking into account the comments and observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or
expressed orally in debates in the Sixth Committee;
5. Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of having
their views by 31 January 2016 on the various aspects of the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular
on all the specific issues identified in chapter III of its report, regarding:
(a)

Protection of the atmosphere;

(b)

Identification of customary international law;

(c)

Crimes against humanity;

(d)

Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in relation to the interpretation of treaties;

(e)

Protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts;

(f)

Immunity of State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction;

(g)

Provisional application of treaties;

(h)

Jus cogens;

6. Also draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of
having their comments and observations by 1 January 2016 on the draft articles on the topic “Protection of persons
in the event of disasters”, adopted on first reading by the Commission at its sixty-sixth session;81
7. Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to include the topic “Jus cogens” in its
programme of work,82 and encourages the Commission to continue the examination of the topics that are in its longterm programme of work;
8.

Recalls that the seat of the International Law Commission is at the United Nations Office at Geneva;

9. Notes that the International Law Commission, in view of General Assembly resolution 69/118 of
10 December 2014, considered the feasibility of holding part of its sixty-eighth session in New York on the basis of
information provided by the Secretariat regarding estimated costs and relevant administrative, organizational and
_______________
81
82

998

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/69/10), para. 53.
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/70/10), para. 268.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

other factors, including its anticipated workload in the final year of the present quinquennium and, having regard to
all the factors at its disposal, concluded that it would not be feasible for it to hold part of its sixty-eighth session in
New York without causing undue disruptions;
10. Also notes that the International Law Commission nevertheless affirmed its wish that consideration be
given to the possibility of holding one half session in the next quinquennium in New York and indicated that, taking
into account the estimated costs and relevant administrative, organizational and other factors, such a possibility
could be anticipated during the first segment of a session in either the first year (2017) or the second year (2018) of
the next quinquennium;
11. Takes note of the recommendation made by the International Law Commission in paragraph 298 of its
report that preparatory work and estimates proceed on the assumption that the first segment of its seventieth session
(2018) would be convened at United Nations Headquarters in New York, and takes note also of the request of the
Commission that the Secretariat proceed to make the necessary arrangements for that purpose so as to facilitate the
taking of the appropriate decision by the Commission at its sixty-eighth session, in 2016;
12. Decides, without prejudice to the output of those deliberations, to revert to the consideration of any
recommendation by the International Law Commission in this regard during the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly;
13. Takes note of paragraph 299 of the report of the International Law Commission, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify concrete options for support for the work of special rapporteurs,
additional to those provided under General Assembly resolution 56/272 of 27 March 2002;
14. Welcomes the efforts of the International Law Commission to improve its methods of work,83 and
encourages the Commission to continue this practice;
15. Invites the International Law Commission to continue to take measures to enhance its efficiency and
productivity and to consider making proposals to Member States to that end;
16. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to take cost-saving measures at its future
sessions, without prejudice to the efficiency and effectiveness of its work;
17. Takes note of paragraph 309 of the report of the International Law Commission, and decides that the
next session of the Commission shall be held at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 2 May to 10 June and
from 4 July to 12 August 2016;
18. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the International Law Commission
and the Sixth Committee at the seventy-first session of the General Assembly, and in this context encourages, inter
alia, the continued practice of informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members of the Sixth
Committee and the members of the Commission attending the seventy-first session of the Assembly;
19. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the International Law Commission, to
continue to adhere as far as possible to the structured work programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to
consider presenting concise and focused statements;
20. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of legal adviser during the first
week in which the report of the International Law Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International
Law Week) to enable high-level discussions on issues of international law;
21. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special attention to indicating in its
annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth
Committee or in written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the Commission in
its further work;
22. Takes note of paragraphs 311 to 317 of the report of the International Law Commission with regard to
cooperation and interaction with other bodies, and encourages the Commission to continue the implementation of
_______________
83

Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/66/10), paras. 370–388.

999

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

articles 16 (e), 25 and 26 of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission and other
bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of such cooperation;
23. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts concerned with international
law may assist Governments in considering whether to make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the
International Law Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
24. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the Codification Division of the
Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing assistance to the International Law Commission, including in
the preparation of memorandums and studies on topics on the agenda of the Commission;
25. Also reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the documentation and summary records of the
International Law Commission;84
26. Welcomes the institutionalization of the practice of the Secretariat to include the provisional summary
records on the website relating to the work of the International Law Commission;
27. Takes note of paragraph 300 of the report of the International Law Commission, underlines the
importance of the publications of the Codification Division to the work of the Commission, and reiterates its request
that the Secretary-General continue to publish the Work of the International Law Commission in all six official
languages at the beginning of each quinquennium, the Reports of International Arbitral Awards in English or French
and the Summaries of the Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders of the International Court of Justice in all six
official languages every five years;
28. Stresses the need to expedite the preparation of the summary records of the International Law
Commission, and welcomes the continuation of the experimental measures taken to streamline the processing of
summary records during the sixty-fifth session of the Commission,85 which have led to a more rational use of
resources, and expresses its satisfaction that the summary records of the Commission, constituting travaux
préparatoires in the progressive development and codification of international law, will not be subject to arbitrary
length restrictions;
29. Takes note of paragraph 304 of the report of the International Law Commission, stresses the unique
value of the Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure its timely
publication in all official languages;
30. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that have made voluntary contributions to the trust fund on
the backlog relating to the Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and encourages further contributions to
the trust fund;
31. Takes note of paragraph 305 of the report of the International Law Commission, expresses its
satisfaction with the remarkable progress achieved in the past few years in reducing the backlog of the Yearbook of
the International Law Commission in all six languages, and welcomes the efforts made by the Division of
Conference Management of the United Nations Office at Geneva, especially its Editing Section, in effectively
implementing relevant resolutions of the General Assembly calling for the reduction of the backlog;
32. Encourages the Division of Conference Management to provide continuous necessary support to the
Editing Section in advancing the Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and requests that updates on
progress made in this respect be provided to the Commission on a regular basis;
33. Welcomes the continuous efforts of the Codification Division to maintain and improve the website
relating to the work of the International Law Commission, expresses its appreciation to the Division for the
establishment of a new website for the Commission, and encourages it to continue updating and managing the
website;
_______________
84

See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the annual reports of the International Law
Commission to the General Assembly.
85
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10), para. 183.

1000

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

34. Expresses its satisfaction to the Codification Division for the successful completion of the digitization
and posting on the website of the entire collection of the documents of the Commission in Russian, and encourages
the Division to continue to pursue its efforts with respect to documents in the remaining official languages;
35. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to be held in connection with the
sessions of the International Law Commission and that an increasing number of participants representing the
principal legal systems of the world, including in particular those from developing countries, will be given the
opportunity to attend the Seminar, as well as delegates to the Sixth Committee, and appeals to States to continue to
make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar with adequate services,
including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to continue to consider ways to improve the structure and
content of the Seminar;
37. Underlines the importance of the records and topical summary of the debate in the Sixth Committee for
the deliberations of the International Law Commission, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to forward
to the Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the Commission at the seventieth
session of the General Assembly, together with such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction
with their oral statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following established
practice;
38. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after the conclusion of the session of
the International Law Commission, chapter II of its report containing a summary of the work of that session,
chapter III containing the specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the
Commission and the draft articles adopted on either first or second reading by the Commission;
39. Also requests the Secretariat to make the complete report of the International Law Commission available
as soon as possible after the conclusion of the session of the Commission for the consideration of Member States
with due anticipation and no later than the prescribed time limit for reports in the General Assembly;
40. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to consider ways in which specific issues on
which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the Commission could be framed so as to help
Governments to have a better appreciation of the issues on which responses are required;
41. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law Commission at the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly commence on 24 October 2016.

1001

Annex I
Allocation of agenda itemsa
Plenary meetings
a

A.

1.

Opening of the session by the President of the General Assembly.

2.

Minute of silent prayer or meditation.

3.

Credentials of representatives to the seventieth session of the General Assembly:
(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

4.

Election of the President of the General Assembly.

6.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly.

7.

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and allocation of items: reports of the General Committee.

8.

General debate.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
9.

Report of the Economic and Social Council.

10. Return or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin.
11.

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations
on HIV/AIDS.

12. Sport for development and peace: building a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal.
13. Improving global road safety.
14. 2001–2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa.
15. Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields.
16. Culture of peace.
17. Information and communications technologies for development.
23. Groups of countries in special situations:
(a)

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.

28. Social development:
(a)

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twentyfourth special session of the General Assembly;

(b)

Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth,
ageing, disabled persons and the family.

_______________
a

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.

1003

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

B.

Maintenance of international peace and security
30. Report of the Security Council.
31. Report of the Peacebuilding Commission.
32. Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new
or restored democracies.
33. The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
34. Prevention of armed conflict:
(a)

Prevention of armed conflict;

(b)

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution.

35. Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security
and development.
36. Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic.
37. The situation in the Middle East.
38. Question of Palestine.
39. The situation in Afghanistan.
40. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
41. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte.
42. Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba.
43. The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development.
44. Question of Cyprus.
45. Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
46. Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
47. The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti.
48. Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons and international peace and security.
49. Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and aggression against Kuwait.
C.

Development of Africa
66. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support:

D.

(a)

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support;

(b)

Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

Promotion of human rights
67. Report of the Human Rights Council.
70. Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.

1004

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

E.

Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts
73. Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance:
(a)

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;

(b)

Assistance to the Palestinian people;

(c)

Special economic assistance to individual countries or regions;

(d)

Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.

74. Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of
sexual violence.
F.

Promotion of justice and international law
75. Report of the International Court of Justice.
76. Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
77. Report of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
78. Report of the International Criminal Court.
79. Oceans and the law of the sea:

G.

(a)

Oceans and the law of the sea;

(b)

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments.

Disarmament
87. Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

H.

Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations
107. International drug control.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
109. Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization.
110. Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund.
111. Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations.
112. Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs:
(a)

Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council;

(b)

Election of eighteen members of the Economic and Social Council.

1005

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

113. Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections:
(a)

Election of seven members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination;

(b)

Election of thirty members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;

(c)

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme;

(d)

Election of two members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission;

(e)

Election of eighteen members of the Human Rights Council;

(f)

Election of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

114. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(e)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences;

(f)

Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit;

(g)

Appointment of the judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal;

(h)

Appointment of the judges of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal;

(i)

Appointment of the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services.

115. Admission of new Members to the United Nations.
116. Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit.
117. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
118. Follow-up to the commemoration of the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic
slave trade.
119. Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations.
120. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
121. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council.
122. Strengthening of the United Nations system.
123. United Nations reform: measures and proposals.
124. Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
125. Global health and foreign policy.
126. International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
127. International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
128. International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
129. Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him.
130. Global awareness of the tragedies of irregular migrants in the Mediterranean basin with specific emphasis
on Syrian asylum seekers.
135. Programme planning.
1006

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

First Committee
5.
G.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Disarmament
88. Reduction of military budgets:
(a)

Reduction of military budgets;

(b)

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures.

89. Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace.
90. African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty.
91. Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security.
92. Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security.
93. Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East.
94. Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
95. Prevention of an arms race in outer space:
(a)

Prevention of an arms race in outer space;

(b)

No first placement of weapons in outer space.

96. Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament.
97. General and complete disarmament:
(a)

Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices;

(b)

Nuclear disarmament;

(c)

Notification of nuclear tests;

(d)

Relationship between disarmament and development;

(e)

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes;

(f)

Regional disarmament;

(g)

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels;

(h)

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;

(i)

Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas;

(j)

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements
on disarmament and arms control;

(k)

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat
or use of nuclear weapons;

(l)

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction;

(m) Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction;
(n)

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting
them;

(o)

Reducing nuclear danger;
1007

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

(p)

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects;

(q)

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament
commitments;

(r)

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation;

(s)

National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and technology;

(t)

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction;

(u)

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;

(v)

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus;

(w) Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities;
(x)

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;

(y)

The Arms Trade Treaty;

(z)

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty);

(aa) United action towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons;
(bb) Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations;
(cc) Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament;
(dd) Joint ad hoc meeting of the First and Fourth Committees on possible challenges to space security
and sustainability.
98. Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General
Assembly:
(a)

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons;

(b)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa;

(c)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean;

(d)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in in Asia and the Pacific;

(e)

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa;

(f)

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament.

99. Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly
at its tenth special session:
(a)

Report of the Conference on Disarmament;

(b)

Report of the Disarmament Commission.

100. The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East.
101. Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
102. Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region.
103. Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
104. Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction.
105. Revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward multilateral disarmament
negotiations.
1008

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
120. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.

Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)
5.
B.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Maintenance of international peace and security
50. University for Peace.
51. Assistance in mine action.
52. Effects of atomic radiation.
53. International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.
54. United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
55. Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories.
56. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.
57. Comprehensive review of special political missions.
58. Questions relating to information.
59. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations.
60. Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
61. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations.
62. Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
63. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
120. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.

Second Committee
5.
A.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
17. Information and communications technologies for development.
18. Macroeconomic policy questions:
(a)

International trade and development;

(b)

International financial system and development;
1009

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

(c)

External debt sustainability and development;

(d)

Commodities.

19. Follow-up to and implementation of the outcomes of the International Conference on Financing
for Development.
20. Sustainable development:
(a)

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development;

(b)

Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;

(c)

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction;

(d)

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind;

(e)

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa;

(f)

Convention on Biological Diversity;

(g)

Harmony with Nature;

(h)

United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development.

21. Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)
and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).
22. Globalization and interdependence:
(a)

Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization
and interdependence;

(b)

Science and technology for development;

(c)

Culture and sustainable development;

(d)

Development cooperation with middle-income countries.

23. Groups of countries in special situations:
(a)

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries;

(b)

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries.

24. Eradication of poverty and other development issues:
(a)

Implementation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017);

(b)

Women in development;

(c)

Human resources development.

25. Operational activities for development:
(a)

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system;

(b)

South-South cooperation for development.

26. Agriculture development, food security and nutrition.
27. Towards global partnerships.
1010

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

B.

Maintenance of international peace and security
64. Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
120. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.

Third Committee
5.
A.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
28. Social development:
(a)

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twentyfourth special session of the General Assembly;

(b)

Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth,
ageing, disabled persons and the family;

(c)

Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing.

29. Advancement of women:

B.

(a)

Advancement of women;

(b)

Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women and of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly.

Maintenance of international peace and security
65. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions.

D.

Promotion of human rights
67. Report of the Human Rights Council.
68. Promotion and protection of the rights of children:
(a)

Promotion and protection of the rights of children;

(b)

Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children.

69. Rights of indigenous peoples:
(a)

Rights of indigenous peoples;

(b)

Follow-up to the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples.

70. Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance:
(a)

Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;

(b)

Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action.

71. Right of peoples to self-determination.
1011

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

72. Promotion and protection of human rights:

H.

(a)

Implementation of human rights instruments;

(b)

Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms;

(c)

Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives;

(d)

Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action.

Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations
106. Crime prevention and criminal justice.
107. International drug control.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
120. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.

Fifth Committee
5.
I.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
114. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a)

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;

(b)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions;

(c)

Confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee;

(d)

Appointment of a member of the Board of Auditors.

120. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
131. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors:

1012

(a)

United Nations;

(b)

United Nations peacekeeping operations;

(c)

International Trade Centre;

(d)

United Nations University;

(e)

Capital master plan;

(f)

United Nations Development Programme;

(g)

United Nations Capital Development Fund;

(h)

United Nations Children’s Fund;

(i)

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East;

(j)

United Nations Institute for Training and Research;

(k)

Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;

(l)

Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme;

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

(m) United Nations Population Fund;
(n)

United Nations Human Settlements Programme;

(o)

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;

(p)

United Nations Office for Project Services;

(q)

United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women);

(r)

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994;

(s)

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991;

(t)

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

132. Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
133. Programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015.
134. Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017.
135. Programme planning.
136. Improving the financial situation of the United Nations.
137. Pattern of conferences.
138. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations.
139. Human resources management.
140. Joint Inspection Unit.
141. United Nations common system.
142. Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
143. Administration of justice at the United Nations.
144. Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
145. Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
146. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
147. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
148. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
149. Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.
150. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.
151. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.
152. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
153. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
1013

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

154. Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
155. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor.
156. Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
157. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
158. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
159. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
160. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
161. Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East:
(a)

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force;

(b)

United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

162. Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
163. Financing of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
164. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.
165. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
166. Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009).

Sixth Committee
5.
F.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of justice and international law
80. Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission.
81. Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its forty-eighth
session.
82. United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation
of International Law.
83. Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-seventh session.
84. Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization.
85. The rule of law at the national and international levels.
86. The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction.

H.

Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations
108. Measures to eliminate international terrorism.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
120. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
135. Programme planning.
143. Administration of justice at the United Nations.

1014

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

167. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country.
168. Observer status for the Cooperation Council of Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly.
169. Observer status for the Eurasian Economic Union in the General Assembly.
170. Observer status for the Community of Democracies in the General Assembly.
171. Observer status for the International Civil Defence Organization in the General Assembly.
172. Observer status for the Indian Ocean Rim Association in the General Assembly.
173. Observer status for the International Conference of Asian Political Parties in the General Assembly.
174. Observer status for the Union for the Mediterranean in the General Assembly.

1015

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

15 and 116

4th

25 September 2015

3

70/1.

Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development

70/2.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations: requests under Article 19 of the Charter

138

29th

12 October 2015

888

70/3.

Declaration on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations

122

38th

23 October 2015

28

70/4.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal

12

39th

26 October 2015

29

70/5.

Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America against
Cuba

42

40th

27 October 2015

32

70/6.

Strengthening of the United Nations system

122

45th

3 November 2015

33

70/7.

Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade

118

46th

4 November 2015

34

70/8.

Programme planning

135

52nd

13 November 2015

888

70/9.

Pattern of conferences

137

52nd

13 November 2015

889

70/10.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency

87

56th

17 November 2015

35

70/11.

Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting
in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members
of the party accompanying him

129

58th

19 November 2015

37

70/12.

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People

38

64th

24 November 2015

38

70/13.

Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat

38

64th

24 November 2015

40

70/14.

Special information programme on the question of Palestine
of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat

38

64th

24 November 2015

41

70/15.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine

38

64th

24 November 2015

43

70/16.

Jerusalem

37

64th

24 November 2015

50

70/17.

The Syrian Golan

37

64th

24 November 2015

51

70/18.

Credentials of representatives to the seventieth session
of the General Assembly

3 (b)

66th

3 December 2015

53

70/19.

Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace

16

66th

3 December 2015

53

70/20.

Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace

16

66th

3 December 2015

56

70/21.

Objective information on military matters, including
transparency of military expenditures

88 (b)

67th

7 December 2015

205

70/22.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a Zone of Peace

89

67th

7 December 2015

207

1017

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/23.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty

90

67th

7 December 2015

209

70/24.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region
of the Middle East

93

67th

7 December 2015

210

70/25.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons

94

67th

7 December 2015

212

70/26.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space

95 (a)

67th

7 December 2015

214

70/27.

No first placement of weapons in outer space

95 (b)

67th

7 December 2015

216

70/28.

2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and its
Preparatory Committee

97

67th

7 December 2015

218

70/29.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons and collecting them

97 (n)

67th

7 December 2015

219

70/30.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting
and implementation of agreements on disarmament
and arms control

97 (j)

67th

7 December 2015

221

70/31.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament
and non-proliferation

97 (r)

67th

7 December 2015

222

70/32.

Relationship between disarmament and development

97 (d)

67th

7 December 2015

225

70/33.

Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations

97 (bb)

67th

7 December 2015

226

70/34.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on nuclear disarmament

97 (cc)

67th

7 December 2015

228

70/35.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus

97 (v)

67th

7 December 2015

231

70/36.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction

97 (t)

67th

7 December 2015

233

70/37.

Reducing nuclear danger

97 (o)

67th

7 December 2015

235

70/38.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at
the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

97 (x)

67th

7 December 2015

236

70/39.

Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices

97 (a)

67th

7 December 2015

238

70/40.

United action with renewed determination towards the total
elimination of nuclear weapons

97 (aa)

67th

7 December 2015

240

70/41.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction

97 (l)

67th

7 December 2015

244

70/42.

Confidence-building measures in the regional
and subregional context

97 (u)

67th

7 December 2015

247

70/43.

Regional disarmament

97 (f)

67th

7 December 2015

248

1018

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/44.

Conventional arms control at the regional
and subregional levels

97 (g)

67th

7 December 2015

249

70/45.

Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas

97 (i)

67th

7 December 2015

251

70/46.

Countering the threat posed by improvised explosive devices

97

67th

7 December 2015

253

70/47.

Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons

97 (b)

67th

7 December 2015

256

70/48.

Humanitarian pledge for the prohibition and elimination
of nuclear weapons

97 (b)

67th

7 December 2015

258

70/49.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects

97 (p)

67th

7 December 2015

260

70/50.

Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world

97

67th

7 December 2015

263

70/51.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments

97 (q)

67th

7 December 2015

266

70/52.

Nuclear disarmament

97 (b)

67th

7 December 2015

270

70/53.

Transparency and confidence-building measures
in outer space activities

97 (w)

67th

7 December 2015

276

70/54.

Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions

97

67th

7 December 2015

278

70/55.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction

97 (m)

67th

7 December 2015

279

70/56.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons

97 (k)

67th

7 December 2015

281

70/57.

Universal Declaration on the Achievement
of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World

97 (b)

67th

7 December 2015

284

70/58.

The Arms Trade Treaty

97 (y)

67th

7 December 2015

287

70/59.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes

97 (e)

67th

7 December 2015

289

70/60.

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(Bangkok Treaty)

97 (z)

67th

7 December 2015

290

70/61.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament

98 (f)

67th

7 December 2015

292

70/62.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons

98 (a)

67th

7 December 2015

293

70/63.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean

98 (c)

67th

7 December 2015

294

70/64.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa

98 (e)

67th

7 December 2015

296

70/65.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Asia and the Pacific

98 (d)

67th

7 December 2015

300

70/66.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Africa

98 (b)

67th

7 December 2015

302

70/67.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament

99 (a)

67th

7 December 2015

304

70/68.

Report of the Disarmament Commission

99 (b)

67th

7 December 2015

305
1019

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/69.

Thirty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research

99

67th

7 December 2015

307

70/70.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East

100

67th

7 December 2015

309

70/71.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

101

67th

7 December 2015

311

70/72.

Strengthening of security and cooperation in the
Mediterranean region

102

67th

7 December 2015

313

70/73.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

103

67th

7 December 2015

315

70/74.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction

104

67th

7 December 2015

317

70/75.

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement
for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling
Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and
related instruments

79 (b)

69th

8 December 2015

59

70/76.

Return or restitution of cultural property to the countries
of origin

10

70th

9 December 2015

84

70/77.

The situation in Afghanistan

39

70th

9 December 2015

90

70/78.

Extension of the preparatory period preceding the graduation
of the Republic of Vanuatu from the least developed
country category

9

70th

9 December 2015

107

70/79.

University for Peace

50

70th

9 December 2015

325

70/80.

Assistance in mine action

51

70th

9 December 2015

326

70/81.

Effects of atomic radiation

52

70th

9 December 2015

330

70/82.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

53

70th

9 December 2015

332

70/83.

Assistance to Palestine refugees

54

70th

9 December 2015

337

70/84.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent
hostilities

54

70th

9 December 2015

339

70/85.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

54

70th

9 December 2015

340

70/86.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues

54

70th

9 December 2015

346

70/87.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and
Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories

55

70th

9 December 2015

348

70/88.

Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab territories

55

70th

9 December 2015

351

1020

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/89.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan

55

70th

9 December 2015

353

70/90.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian
people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem

55

70th

9 December 2015

356

70/91.

The occupied Syrian Golan

55

70th

9 December 2015

362

70/92.

Comprehensive review of special political missions

57

70th

9 December 2015

363

70/93.

Questions relating to information
A. Information in the service of humanity

58

70th

9 December 2015

365

B. United Nations public information policies and activities

58

70th

9 December 2015

366

70/94.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

59

70th

9 December 2015

378

70/95.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests
of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories

60

70th

9 December 2015

380

70/96.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations

61

70th

9 December 2015

382

70/97.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities
for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories

62

70th

9 December 2015

386

70/98.

Question of Western Sahara

63

70th

9 December 2015

386

70/99.

Question of New Caledonia

63

70th

9 December 2015

388

70/100.

Question of French Polynesia

63

70th

9 December 2015

391

70/101.

Question of Tokelau

63

70th

9 December 2015

393

70/102.

Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda,
the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands,
Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks
and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands
A. General

63

70th

9 December 2015

395

B. Individual Territories

63

70th

9 December 2015

399

70/103.

Dissemination of information on decolonization

63

70th

9 December 2015

409

70/104.

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of United Nations personnel

73

72nd

10 December 2015

107

70/105.

Participation of volunteers, “White Helmets”, in the activities
of the United Nations in the field of humanitarian relief,
rehabilitation and technical cooperation for development

73

72nd

10 December 2015

115

70/106.

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations

73 (a)

72nd

10 December 2015

117

70/107.

International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the
field of natural disasters, from relief to development

73 (a)

72nd

10 December 2015

126

1021

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/108.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

73 (b)

72nd

10 December 2015

134

70/109.

A world against violence and violent extremism

16

72nd

10 December 2015

138

70/110.

The impacts of the 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon

15

82nd

23 December 2015

141

70/111.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services

132 and
142

75th

14 December 2015

899

70/112.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

143

75th

14 December 2015

901

70/113.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali

160

75th

14 December 2015

906

70/114.

Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission

80

75th

14 December 2015

972

70/115.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-eighth session

81

75th

14 December 2015

976

70/116.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law

82

75th

14 December 2015

980

70/117.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter
of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization

84

75th

14 December 2015

983

70/118.

The rule of law at the national and international levels

85

75th

14 December 2015

986

70/119.

The scope and application of the principle of universal
jurisdiction

86

75th

14 December 2015

989

70/120.

Measures to eliminate international terrorism

108

75th

14 December 2015

990

70/121.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country

167

75th

14 December 2015

994

70/122.

Observer status for the International Civil Defence
Organization in the General Assembly

171

75th

14 December 2015

996

70/123.

Observer status for the Indian Ocean Rim Association
in the General Assembly

172

75th

14 December 2015

996

70/124.

Observer status for the Union for the Mediterranean
in the General Assembly

174

75th

14 December 2015

997

70/125.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the overall review of the implementation of the
outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

17

79th

16 December 2015

142

70/126.

Promoting social integration through social inclusion

28 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

593

70/127.

Policies and programmes involving youth

28 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

596

70/128.

Cooperatives in social development

28 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

600

70/129.

Integrating volunteering into peace and development: the plan
of action for the next decade and beyond

28

80th

17 December 2015

602

70/130.

Violence against women migrant workers

29 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

604

70/131.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women

29 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

612

1022

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/132.

Improvement of the situation of women and girls in rural areas

29 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

613

70/133.

Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly

29 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

617

70/134.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
in Africa

65

80th

17 December 2015

624

70/135.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

65

80th

17 December 2015

629

70/136.

Report of the Human Rights Council

67

80th

17 December 2015

634

70/137.

Rights of the child

68 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

635

70/138.

The girl child

68 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

647

70/139.

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other
practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance

70 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

655

70/140.

A global call for concrete action for the total elimination
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation
of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action

70 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

661

70/141.

The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination

71

80th

17 December 2015

666

70/142.

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination

71

80th

17 December 2015

667

70/143.

Universal realization of the right of peoples
to self-determination

71

80th

17 December 2015

671

70/144.

International Covenants on Human Rights

72 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

672

70/145.

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and the Optional Protocol thereto

72 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

673

70/146.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment

72 (a)

80th

17 December 2015

675

70/147.

Protection of migrants

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

681

70/148.

Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

688

70/149.

Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

695

70/150.

Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human
rights through the promotion of international cooperation and
the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

700

70/151.

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

701

70/152.

Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in the
membership of the human rights treaty bodies

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

706

1023

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/153.

Enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

708

70/154.

The right to food

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

711

70/155.

The right to development

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

717

70/156.

Human rights and cultural diversity

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

725

70/157.

Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization,
discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against
persons, based on religion or belief

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

729

70/158.

Freedom of religion or belief

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

733

70/159.

Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment
of all human rights

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

738

70/160.

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

742

70/161.

Human rights defenders in the context of the Declaration on the
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of
Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

744

70/162.

The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

750

70/163.

National institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

753

70/164.

Measures to enhance the promotion and protection
of the human rights and dignity of older persons

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

757

70/165.

Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

760

70/166.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights
of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious
and Linguistic Minorities

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

767

70/167.

Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
in Central Africa

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

772

70/168.

Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing
periodic and genuine elections and the promotion
of democratization

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

774

70/169.

The human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

778

70/170.

Towards the full realization of an inclusive and accessible
United Nations for persons with disabilities

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

782

70/171.

United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation
Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region

72 (b)

80th

17 December 2015

784

70/172.

Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea

72 (c)

80th

17 December 2015

785

70/173.

Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran

72 (c)

80th

17 December 2015

791

70/174.

Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice

106

80th

17 December 2015

795

1024

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/175.

United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules)

106

80th

17 December 2015

806

70/176.

Taking action against gender-related killing of women and girls

106

80th

17 December 2015

832

70/177.

Technical assistance for implementing the international
conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism

106

80th

17 December 2015

835

70/178.

Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and
criminal justice programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity

106

80th

17 December 2015

839

70/179.

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking
in persons

106

80th

17 December 2015

850

70/180.

United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders

106

80th

17 December 2015

855

70/181.

Special session of the General Assembly on the world drug
problem to be held in 2016

107

80th

17 December 2015

858

70/182.

International cooperation against the world drug problem

107

80th

17 December 2015

860

70/183.

Global health and foreign policy: strengthening the
management of international health crises

125

80th

17 December 2015

152

70/184.

Information and communications technologies
for development

17

81st

22 December 2015

417

70/185.

Unilateral economic measures as a means of political
and economic coercion against developing countries

18 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

420

70/186.

Consumer protection

18 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

421

70/187.

International trade and development

18 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

434

70/188.

International financial system and development

18 (b)

81st

22 December 2015

435

70/189.

Financial inclusion for sustainable development

18 (b)

81st

22 December 2015

442

70/190.

External debt sustainability and development

18 (c)

81st

22 December 2015

443

70/191.

Commodities

18 (d)

81st

22 December 2015

444

70/192.

Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing
for Development

19

81st

22 December 2015

450

70/193.

International Year of Sustainable Tourism
for Development, 2017

20

81st

22 December 2015

452

70/194.

Oil slick on Lebanese shores

20

81st

22 December 2015

454

70/195.

Combating sand and dust storms

20

81st

22 December 2015

456

70/196.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development
in Central America

20

81st

22 December 2015

458

70/197.

Towards comprehensive cooperation among all modes
of transport for promoting sustainable multimodal
transit corridors

20

81st

22 December 2015

461

70/198.

Agricultural technology for sustainable development

20

81st

22 December 2015

464

70/199.

United Nations forest instrument

20

81st

22 December 2015

468
1025

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/200.

Global Code of Ethics for Tourism

20

81st

22 December 2015

469

70/201.

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development

20 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

471

70/202.

Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States

20 (b)

81st

22 December 2015

475

70/203.

World Tsunami Awareness Day

20 (c)

81st

22 December 2015

479

70/204.

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction

20 (c)

81st

22 December 2015

480

70/205.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations
of humankind

20 (d)

81st

22 December 2015

484

70/206.

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa

20 (e)

81st

22 December 2015

487

70/207.

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity
and its contribution to sustainable development

20 (f)

81st

22 December 2015

490

70/208.

Harmony with Nature

20 (g)

81st

22 December 2015

494

70/209.

United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable
Development (2005–2014)

20 (h)

81st

22 December 2015

497

70/210.

Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)
and strengthening of the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)

21

81st

22 December 2015

500

70/211.

Role of the United Nations in promoting development
in the context of globalization and interdependence

22 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

517

70/212.

International Day of Women and Girls in Science

22 (b)

81st

22 December 2015

518

70/213.

Science, technology and innovation for development

22 (b)

81st

22 December 2015

519

70/214.

Culture and sustainable development

22 (c)

81st

22 December 2015

523

70/215.

Development cooperation with middle-income countries

22 (d)

81st

22 December 2015

527

70/216.

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries

23 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

531

70/217.

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference
on Landlocked Developing Countries

23 (b)

81st

22 December 2015

534

70/218.

Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication
of Poverty (2008–2017)

24 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

539

70/219.

Women in development

24 (b)

81st

22 December 2015

547

70/220.

Human resources development

24 (c)

81st

22 December 2015

558

1026

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/221.

Operational activities for development of the United
Nations system

25 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

562

70/222.

South-South cooperation

25 (b)

81st

22 December 2015

570

70/223.

Agriculture development, food security and nutrition

26

81st

22 December 2015

574

70/224.

Towards global partnerships: a principle-based approach
to enhanced cooperation between the United Nations
and all relevant partners

27

81st

22 December 2015

580

70/225.

Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan
over their natural resources

64

81st

22 December 2015

585

70/226.

United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development

20 and
79 (a)

81st

22 December 2015

588

70/227.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994

126, 127
and 128

82nd

23 December 2015

158

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
70/228.

Organization of the 2016 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS

11

82nd

23 December 2015

161

70/229.

Persons with albinism

28

82nd

23 December 2015

872

70/230.

Matters relating to activities under the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications in 2016

53

82nd

23 December 2015

411

70/231.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

63

82nd

23 December 2015

411

70/232.

Rights of indigenous peoples

69 (a)

82nd

23 December 2015

873

70/233.

Situation of human rights in Myanmar

72 (c)

82nd

23 December 2015

877

70/234.

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

72 (c)

82nd

23 December 2015

880

70/235.

Oceans and the law of the sea

79 (a)

82nd

23 December 2015

163

70/236.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its sixty-seventh session

83

82nd

23 December 2015

997

70/237.

Developments in the field of information
and telecommunications in the context
of international security

92

82nd

23 December 2015

319

1027

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

70/238.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors

131

82nd

23 December 2015

907

70/239.

Capital master plan

133

82nd

23 December 2015

909

70/240.

Programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
A. Final budget appropriations for the biennium 2014–2015

133

82nd

23 December 2015

911

B. Final income estimates for the biennium 2014–2015

133

82nd

23 December 2015

913

70/241.

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994

144

82nd

23 December 2015

914

70/242.

Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991

145

82nd

23 December 2015

916

70/243.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals

146

82nd

23 December 2015

918

70/244.

United Nations common system: report of the International
Civil Service Commission

141

82nd

23 December 2015

921

70/245.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations

138

82nd

23 December 2015

926

70/246.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of United Nations peacekeeping operations

147

82nd

23 December 2015

931

70/247.

Questions relating to the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2016–2017

134

82nd

23 December 2015

933

70/248.

Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2016–2017

134

82nd

23 December 2015

944

70/249.

Programme budget for the biennium 2016–2017
A. Budget appropriations for the biennium 2016–2017

134

82nd

23 December 2015

965

B. Income estimates for the biennium 2016–2017

134

82nd

23 December 2015

967

C. Financing of appropriations for the year 2016

134

82nd

23 December 2015

967

70/250.

Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the
biennium 2016–2017

134

82nd

23 December 2015

968

70/251.

Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2016–2017

134

82nd

23 December 2015

969

1028
