Reaolud- adopted -

the reporla of the Foartla Committee

tion of Human Rights, the advisory opinions of the
International Court of Justice, and the resolutions of
the General Assembly,
Hrruing received from the Committee on South West
Africa the sixth report• submitted in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 749 A (VIII) of
28 November 1953,
Noting further the conclusion of the Committee that
it is essential to the welfare and security of the peoples
of South West Africa that the administration of the
Territory be altered without undue delay, 10
Having also heard the statements of petitioners which
further corroborate the conclusions and opinions formed
by the Committee on South West Africa concerning
political, social, economic and educational conditions
prevailing in the Territory,
Considef"ing further that, while the former Mandated
Territories placed under the International Trusteeship
System have.rapidly progressed towards independence,
the conditions in the Territory of South West Africa
present a totally different picture,
1. Notes the statement made by the representative
of the Union of South Africa at the 924th meeting of
the Fourth Committee on 26 October 1959 expressing,
inter alia, the Union's readiness to enter into discussions
with the United Nations ;
2. Invites the Government of the Union of South
Africa to enter into negotiations with the United Nations
through the Committee on South West Africa, which
is authorized under its terms of reference to continue
negotiations with the Union, or through any other
committee which the General Assembly may appoint,
with a view to placing the Mandated Territory under
the International Trusteeship System ;
3. Requests the Government of the Union of South
Africa to formulate for the consideration of the General
Assembly, at its fifteenth session, proposals which will
enable the Mandated Territory of South West Africa
to be administered in accordance with the principles
and purposes of the Mandate, the supervisory functions
being exercised by the United Nations according to the
terms and intent of the Charter ;
4. Approves the report of the Committee on South
West Africa and commends it to the urgent attention
of the Government of the Union of South Africa;
5. Requests the Committee on South West Africa,
or any other committee which may be appointed in
pursuance of paragraph 2 above, to submit to the
General Assembly, at its fifteenth session, a report on
the negotiations with the Union Government in addition
to the annual report on conditions in the Territory of
South West Africa.
838th plenary meeting,
17 November 1959.

1361 (XIV). Legal action to eneure the fulfilment
of the obligations a11&umed by the Union of
South Africa in reepect of the Territory of
South Weel Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 11 July 1950 concerning the international status of South West Africa, 2
8 Ibid., Supplement

10 Ibid.,

No. 12 (A/4191).
Supplement No. 12 (A/4191), para. 233.

19

Recalling that, by its resolution 449 A (V) of 13 December 1950, it accepted the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice,
Recalling further that, by its resolution 1142 A (XII)
of 25 October 1957, it commended the special report
of the Committee on South West Africa11 on legal
action which might be taken for that purpose, and in
particular drew the attention of Member States to the
legal action provided for in article 7 of the Mandate
read with Article 37 of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice,
Draws the attention of Member States to the conclusions of the special report of the Committee on South
West Africa covering the legal action open to Member
States to refer any dispute with the Union of South
Africa concerning the mterpretation or application of
the Mandate for South West Africa to the International
Court of Justice for adjudication in accordance with
article 7 of the Mandate read in conjunction with
Article 37 of the Statute of the Court.
838th plenary meeting,
17 November 1959.

1362 (XIV). Report of the Good Officee Committee
on South Wcat Africa
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Good Offices
Committee on South West Africa,12 prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1243 (XIII) of
30 October 1958,
1. Takes note of the report of the Good Offices
Committee on South West Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
Committee for their efforts.
838th plenary meeting,
17 November 1959.

1409 (XIV). Report of the Trusteeehip Council
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 2 August 1958 to
6 August 1959, 18
1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Recommends that th~ Trusteeship Council, in its
future deliberations, should take into account the comments and suggestions made during the discussion of
its report at the fourteenth session of the General
Assembly.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1410 (XIV). Diaeemination of information on the
United Nation• and on the International
Trueteeehip System in Tru■t Territoriee
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1276 (XIII) of 5 December
1958, whereby the General Assembly, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General to prepare, for the
twenty-fourth session of the Trusteeship Council, a
11 Ibid.,

Twelfth Session, Supplement No. lZA (A/3625).
Fourleenth Susion, Annexes, agenda item 38,
document A/4224.
lS !bid., Fourteenth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/4100).
12 /bid.,

30

General ~Foarteenth 8-ioa

report on the early establishment of United Nations
information centres in or near the Trust Territories,
Noting from the report 14 submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to the Trusteeship Council pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 1276 (XIII) that information
centres may be established only after the State concerned has requested or agreed to the establishment of
these centres and after the Assembly has provided the
necessary funds, and that thus far no requests have
been received by the Secretary-General from the Administering Authorities for the establishment of information centres in any of the Trust Territories,
Homing perused the report 15 submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Trusteeship Council at its
twenty-fourth ses~i0n under Council resolution 36 (Ill)
of 8 July 1948 and observing therefrom that the dissemination of information on the United Nations among
the peoples of the Trust Territories is still far from
satisfactory,
Keeping in view the special status of Trust Territories and their inhabitants and also the General Assembly's own special responsibilities under Chapters XII
and XIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating that it is essential, in the General Assembly's view, that the peoples of Trust Territories
should receive adequate information concerning the
purposes and operation of the United Nacions and ot
the International Trusteeship System,
Noting the recommendation of the Committee of
Experts on United Nations Public Information that
United Nations information centres constitute the most
important means of disseminating information about
the T.Jnited Nations, 16
l. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate discussions with the Administering Authorities concerned with
a view to establishing, during 1960, in at least some
of the larger Trust Territories, such as Tanganyika,
Ruanda-Urundi and New Guinea, United Nations
information centres in which the responsible positions
would be occupied preferably by indigenous inhabitants
of the Trust Territories concerned;
2. Also requests the Administering Authorities to extend their co-operation and assistance to the SecretaryGeneral in implementing the recommendations made in
paragraph 1 above;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for the fifteenth session of the General Assembly,
a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.
14ll (XIV). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Trust Territories

The General, Assembly,
Bearing in mind that most of the Trust Territories
do not have sufficient facilities for higher education
which would ensure the education of highly qualified
indigenous cadres,
H Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document T/1467.
Ill Ibid., document T /1463.
18 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 55, document A/39'18, para.
'227 (e).

C<msidering the urgent need in the Trust Territories
for indigenous personnel who could take over the functions held by those non-indigenous persons who up to
now have occupied the most important positions in
the administration of these Territories,
Expressing regret that the greater part of the scholarships offered by Member States remain unutilized,
Expressing regret also that some Administering Authorities do not provide all students who have been
accorded scholarships with facilities to leave the Trust
Territories in order to take advantage of such scholarships, as attested by the periodic report of the SecretaryGeneral on the progress of the scholarship programme,11
Recoiling its resolution 557 (VI) of 18 January
1952, inviting the Member States to make scholarships
available to qualified students from the Trust Territories,
l. Takes note of part I, chapter VII, section D, of
the report of the Trusteeship Council, 18 as well as of
the periodic report of the Secretary-General on the
progress of the scholarship programme ;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1277 (XIII) of 5 December 1958 and once again invites the Administering
Authorities to take all necessary measures consistent
with the interests and needs of the Trust Territories
and their peoples to ensure that scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States may be utilized
by inhabitants of these Territories, and to render every
assistance to those persons who have applied for br
have been granted scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
3. Requests all Administering Authorities which
have not done so to give the fullest publicity in the
Trust Territories under their administration to all offers
of study and training facilities made by Member States;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give such
assistance as is possible and as may be sought by the
Member States concerned and by the applicants;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for
the fifteenth session of the General Assembly, a report
concerning the actual use of scholarships and training
facilities offered by Member States to students from the
Trust Territories;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to resume, at
its sessions to be held in 1960, the consideration of this
question and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its fifteenth session ;
7. Decides to place this question as a separate item
on the provisional agenda of its fifteenth session.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.
1412 (XIV). Preparation and training of indigenous civil cadres in the Trust Terri•
tories

The Genera/, Assembly,
Noting from chapters on individual Trust Territories
in part II of the report of the Trusteeship Council1 8
that there are serious shortages of qualified civilian and
technical personnel in all these Territories,
Considering that appropriately trained indigenous
civil and technical cadres are essential to the functioning
11 Official Records of the Tnutttslup CDMcil, Twenty-fo11,-tlt
Session, Anneses, agenda item 14, document T/1462.
