v.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

40/169. Economic development projects in the occupied Palestinian territories
The General Assembly,
A ware of the Israeli restrictions imposed on the foreign
trade of the occupied Palestinian territories,
A ware also of the imposed domination of the Palestinian
market by Israel,
Taking into account the need to give Palestinian_ firms
and products direct access to external markets Without
Israeli interference,
Noting with regret the lack of progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 39/223 of 18
December 1984, as reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on economic development projects in the occupied Palestinian territories,2
I. Calls for the urgent lifting of the Israeli restrictions
imposed on the economy of the occupied Palestinian territories;
2. Recognizes the Palestinian interest in establishing a
seaport in the occupied Gaza Strip to give Palestinian
firms and products direct access to external markets;
3. Calls upon all concerned to facilitate the establishment of a seaport in the occupied Gaza Strip;
4. Also calls upon all concerned to facilitate the establishment of a cement plant in the occupied West Bank and
a citrus plant in the occupied Gaza Strip;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to facilitate the establishment of the above-mentioned projects and to report to the General_ Assembly _at
its forty-first session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on the progress made in the implementation of
the present resolution.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/170.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/224 of 18 December 1984,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/57 of 25 July 1985,
Recalling further the Programme of Action for the
Achievement of Palestinian Rights, adopted by the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, 3
Noting the need to provide economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the Palestinian people; 4
2. Notes the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people that was held at Geneva on 5 and 8 July 1985 in
response to General Assembly resolution 39/224;
3. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
convening the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people;
4. Regards such a meeting as a valuable opportunity to
assess progress in economic and social assistance to the
Palestinian people and to explore ways and means of
enhancing such assistance;
5. Draws the attention of the international community,
the United Nations system and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to the need to disburse
2 A/40!367-E/1985, I 16
3 Report of the lnternatwnal Conference on 1he Question of Palestine,

Geneva. 29 August-7 September /983 (United Nations publicat1on, Sales No.
E.83.1.21 ). chap. I, sect. B.
4 A/40/353-E/l 985/I 15 and Corr. I and Add. l and Add. I/Corr. I.

135

their aid to the occupied Palestinian territories only for the
benefit of the Palestinian people;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To review the progress made in the implem~n~tion of the proposed activities and projects descnbed m his
report on assistance to the Palestinian people;
(b) To take all necessary steps to finalize the p~ogramme of economic and social assistance to the P~estmian people requested in General Assembly resolution 38/
145 of 19 December 1983;
(c) To convene in 1986 a meeting of the relevant programmes, organizations, agencies, funds and ~rgans of t~e
United Nations system to consider economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people;
(d) To provide for the participation in the meeting of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Arab host
countries and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
7. Requests the relevant program_mes, o~nizations,
agencies, funds and organs of the U~uted _Natmns sys~m
to intensify their efforts, in co-operation With ~he Palest1~e
Liberation Organization, to provide economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people;
8. Also requests that United Nations assistance to the
Palestinians in the Arab host countries should be rendered
in co-operation with the Palestine Liberation Organization
and with the consent of the Arab host Government concerned;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
I 19th plenary meeting
17 December I 985

40/171. International Drinking Water Supply and
Sanitation Decade
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ I 58 of 19 December 1977, in
which it approved the Mar del Plata Action Plan adopted
by the United Nations Water Conference, 5
Recalling also its resolution 35/18 of 10 November
I 980, by which it proclaimed the period 1981-1990 as the
International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/57 of 28 July 1983, in which the Council urged
Governments of developing countries to adopt national
targets for drinking water supply an~ sa~!tation servi~s,
commensurate with resource avadabihty, absorptive
capacity and ability, and to formulate action plans and
programmes for reaching the targets set,
Mindful of the fact that significant progress towards
meeting the objectives of the Decade by 1990 will require
a much greater sense of urgency and priority on the part of
Governments and the continued support of the international community,
I. Welcomes the recommendations and conclusions
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on progress in the attainment of the goals of the International
Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade; 6
5 See Repon ofthe United Na11ons Watel' Cvnference, Mar de/ Plata, 14-25
March 1977 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 77.IIA 12), chap. I.

6 A/40/I0S-FJ1985/49.

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

136

2. Encourages Governments to seek to implement the
recommendations for action contained in the report, in
particular:
(a) To strengthen national capabilities for policy formulation and for the preparation, implementation and monitoring of water supply and sanitation programmes and
projects;
(b) To prepare and implement national strategies to
meet and develop both present and longer-term needs for
skilled human resources;
(c) To intensify efforts to improve the mobilization
and utilization of national financial resources;
(d) To increase the attention devoted to health education and community participation and to the need for
close operational linkages between health and water supply
agencies;
(e) To formulate and implement strategies that will
enhance the participation of women in the planning, operation and assessment of water and sanitation programmes
and projects;
3. Calls upon organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, as well as other multilateral, bilateral and non-governmental organizations, to continue and,
where possible, increase their assistance to Governments
in support of national plans and programmes for the Decade as well as in support of efforts to implement the abovementioned recommendations for action;
4. Urges the international community to take note of
the need to enhance co-ordination of technical co-operation activities at the global and national levels and, in this
regard, supports the role of the resident representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme as focal
points for the Decade at the country level;
5. Takes note of the need to focus efforts and resources
on the least developed countries where requirements for
drinking water and sanitation are the greatest, and of the
need to give special consideration to the countries of subSaharan Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, at the end of the
Decade, in 1990, to prepare a report on the progress
achieved during the Decade, providing a detailed comparative analysis based as much as possible on quantitative data, as well as recommendations for future and
follow-up action that may be required, for submission to
the General Assembly at its forty-fifth session.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/172. World Tourism Organization
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/156 and 32/157 of 19
December 1977, 33/122 of 19 December 1978, 34/134 of
14 December 1979, 36/41 of 19 November 1981 and 38/
146 of 19 December 1983,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General of
the World Tourism Organization7 on the progress made in
implementing the Manila Declaration 8 and the Acapulco
Document9 on World Tourism, and recognizes that the
new approach of the World Tourism Organization, in
which tourism is seen in the wider context of travel, can
make a positive contribution to economic development;
2. Invites States to take that approach into account
when formulating their travel policies and strategies, in
accordance with their development plans;
7 A/40/363-E/ 1985/97.
8 A/36/236. annex, appendix L

3. Requests the United Nations Development Programme and other bodies of the United Nations system
with an interest in this area to co-operate with the World
Tourism Organization in accordance with the Manila Declaration and the Acapulco Document on World Tourism;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the World
Tourism Organization to submit to the General Assembly
at its forty-second session, through the Economic and
Social Council, a report on the progress made in implementing the present resolution and the relevant resolutions
of the World Tourism Organization, particularly on the
contribution of world tourism to regional development
and the preservation of and respect for the cultural heritage of developing countries.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/173. International economic security
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 320 I (S-VI)
and 3202 (S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic cooperation, and 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to
which contains the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling also the purposes and principles set forth in
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular that of
achieving international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and the inadmissibility of the threat or
use of force in international relations,
Referring to Economic and Social Council resolution
1911 (LVII) of 2 August 1974,
Considering that ever-increasing interdependence
between States and regions is an inevitable condition of
world economic development, which determines the
mutuality of interest of all countries in promoting development in a secure world environment,
Convinced that all countries would benefit from a more
stable economic, trade, monetary and financial situation
and from equitable solutions of the existing problems in
these areas,
Further convinced that alleviation of the urgent economic problems of developing countries and elimination of
the gap in the levels of economic development are major
factors of international economic stability and a better
political climate,
Recognizing the need to promote international economic security aimed at the economic and social development and progress of each country, in particular developing countries, through international economic cooperation and utilizing the potential of multilateral and
regional organizations,
I. Considers that a common endeavour to promote
just and mutually beneficial international economic relations would contribute to the economic well-being of each
State and to the establishment of a new international economic order;
9 A/38/182-E'Jl983/6o, annex, appendix
