S/PV.8068

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8068th meeting

Thursday, 12 October 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre/Mrs. Gueguen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2017/840)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-32162 (E)
*1732162*

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2017/840)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Haiti, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré Braithwaite, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/840, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré Braithwaite.
Ms. Honoré Braithwaite (spoke in French): I would
like to thank France for convening today’s meeting on
the situation in Haiti in its capacity as President of the
Security Council,
I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence in the Council of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Haiti.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank all Council members for their
unwavering support to Haiti’s stabilization process and
the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
2/30

12/10/2017

Haiti (MINUSTAH) since the Mission’s establishment
by resolution 1542 (2004), adopted in April 2004.
When MINUSTAH was established, Haiti was in
a profound state of instability and widespread political
violence, and a climate of lawlessness and impunity had
affected the everyday life of millions of Haitians. State
authority was weak and limited to parts of the capital,
Port-au-Prince, with the three branches of power either
non-functional or non-existent and a national police
that was overwhelmed by the multiple threats to public
order and the rule of law.
Today, 13 and a half years later, on the eve of
MINUSTAH’s closure and transition to a smaller
peacekeeping Mission, the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), on
15 October, Haiti has a very different outlook,
despite the many challenges still facing the country.
The Haitian people enjoy a considerable degree of
security and greater stability; political violence has
diminished considerably; and armed gangs no longer
hold the population hostage, also thanks to the work
of the National Police, now 14,000 strong, which has
grown significantly in numbers and capacity. All three
branches of power are in place, with the executive and
legislative branches restored to full functioning, while
the Superior Council of the Judiciary, created for the
first time in 2012, remains in need of long-term fixes
to allow it to fully play its role as the guardian of an
independent and impartial judicial system.
These democratic institutions are complemented
by the directly elected officials now in place at all
levels of governance, for the first time in 10 years,
denoting real progress in the implementation of the
constitutional governance system. At the heart of these
achievements stood the creation of stable political
conditions, without which none of the aforementioned
would have been possible.
There is no doubt that those achievements, and many
others that I have not mentioned, while significant, are
only initial steps. Tireless efforts will be required not
only by the Haitian authorities but by all Haitian actors
to consolidate these gains, ensure continued political
stability, sustain and reinforce the functioning of the
democratic institutions and further improve their
delivery in the interest of the Haitian people, with
the continued support of Haiti’s international friends
and partners.
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

It is against this background that I am encouraged
by the overall direction that the current Administration
has adopted. President Jovenel Moise has reiterated his
determination to transform and modernize the State to
better serve the people and has taken initial steps to
translate this overarching objective into deliverables,
especially through the launch and expansion of the
Government’s flagship development programme, the
Caravan of Change, which aims to enhance State delivery
and revitalize the economy by increasing agricultural
production and improving living conditions, especially
in rural areas. In the same spirit, since his inauguration,
the President has initiated steps towards financial
austerity, spoken out against corruption and presented
the contours of an institutional reform agenda aimed at
enhancing political stability, while outlining ideas for a
nationwide dialogue on Haiti’s future.
Immediate improvements, however, have yet to be
felt by the vast majority of the population, particularly
in poor urban areas, and the political situation
remains fragile. A little more than eight months into
the presidential term, the widely contested 2017/2018
budget, stalled indirect elections and disagreements
over the re-establishment of the armed forces, coupled
with the known weaknesses in State institutions, as
well as the absence of significant improvement in the
difficult living conditions of much of the population,
have reopened some divisions between the executive
and some segments of the political opposition.
The reform agenda presented by the Government
and its continued collaborative relations with the
Legislature, which are necessary for the adoption of
a package of key legislation, are promising signs for
further progress. However, amid a climate of widespread
economic grievances and strained relations between
the executive branch and the political opposition, the
maintenance of stability in the longer run may depend
on the ability and commitment of the Administration
to move more swiftly in undertaking concrete action
and implementing the promised reforms on the basis of
dialogue with different sectors of society and under a
unified national vision.
In this context, and with a view to consolidating
political stability, a steady pace of concrete steps
towards a broad institutional reform process is key.
Such a reform process has to aim at the strengthening
of the country’s democratic structures and should
be based on a dialogue that adds the voices of other
national sectors, including political parties, both pro-

S/PV. 8068

Government and opposition. But these voices also need
to be open to political consensus, which is vital for any
reform process.
I am convinced that the country can still make full
use of the current window of opportunity created by
the stabilization efforts of the past decade, including
with the support provided through MINUSTAH and
the near-completion of the 2015-2017 electoral process.
It is, however, of utmost importance that the divisions
that have re-emerged be addressed so as to prevent
any relapse into political instability. The most urgent
task confronting Haiti today consists of ensuring the
conditions for continued stability, thereby enabling
long-term socioeconomic development. It would be
difficult to meet these conditions without the rule of
law and human rights for all Haitian citizens; without
a fully functioning and independent judiciary and a
non-politicized Haitian National Police; and without
the independent management of other governance
institutions provided for by the Constitution, including a
Constitutional Council, a Permanent Electoral Council
and councils established through indirect elections,
from which all Haitians can benefit.
MINUJUSTH becomes operational four days
from now and stands ready to play an effective
role, alongside the United Nations country team, in
supporting the consolidation of the country’s stability,
including through support for the implementation
of institutional reforms to bolster the rule of law and
human rights and enhance governance. I trust that,
as was the case for MINUSTAH, the Haitian people
and Government will extend their cooperation and
partnership to MINUJUSTH in the next two years.
The timely adoption of a legal framework regulating
MINUJUSTH’s status will be an important step in
that regard. The coordinated support that the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes can provide,
alongside the Special Envoy for Haiti, appointed by the
Secretary-General on 20 June to assist Haiti in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, including in the
area of health, as well as in water and sanitation, to
eliminate the transmission of cholera, will also be key in
supporting the country on its path towards sustainable
development. The United Nations will continue to make
every effort to assist the Government in alleviating the
suffering caused by the cholera epidemic.
This being my last meeting as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH,
please allow me to thank the Secretary-General for the

17-321623/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

trust that he placed in me, and the Security Council
and all Member States and international partners,
including police- and troop-contributing countries,
the Group of Friends, and the diplomatic corps and the
Core Group on Haiti, for the guidance and support that
they have provided throughout my tenure and that of
my predecessors.
The achievements of the United Nations in Haiti
would not have been possible without my colleagues in
MINUSTAH and in the United Nations country team.
I am deeply indebted to them and thank them for their
dedication to the work in Haiti, their robust counsel and
genuine commitment. It has been an honour to serve
under the flag of the United Nations and to support Haiti
and the Haitian people in the creation of conditions
that have ultimately allowed the Council to decide on
the closure on 15 October of MINUSTAH and on the
transition to MINUJUSTH.
(spoke in French)
My most heartfelt thanks go to the Haitian people
and Government for their continued cooperation and
confidence. It has been an honour to support this
beautiful country and its entire population in the fully
Haitian process of consolidating peace and democracy.
(spoke in English)
Looking ahead, I have no doubt that, under the
leadership of the Haitian authorities and guided by the
aspirations of the Haitian people for political stability,
the rule of law and prosperity, the continued partnership
between Haiti, the international community and the
United Nations will contribute to the sustainability of
the progress achieved during the past 13 years in Haiti’s
stabilization and democratization process.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Sandra
Honoré Braithwaite for her briefing and would like to
take this opportunity to express our gratitude for her
exemplary commitment and the quality of her work
and that of her entire team in the service of peace and
stability in Haiti.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Ambassador Régis and Special
Representative Honoré to the Council today.
Back in April, the Security Council voted
unanimously to withdraw the military component
4/30

12/10/2017

of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The Mission had been deployed since
2004, and the vote reflected our recognition of the
progress Haiti had made towards stabilization and a
return to democratic order. This week marks a turning
point. MINUSTAH is winding down. In just a few days
a new Mission, the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), will launch, devoting
its efforts where they are most needed — supporting the
rule of law, contributing to the continuing development
of the Haitian National Police and protecting
human rights.
We believe the transition sets a strong example of
how United Nations peacekeeping missions can and
should change as a political situation evolves. The
new Mission embodies the core principles of success
that we have developed as part of our peacekeeping
review, including making sure that the Mission’s
mandated tasks and overall concept are consistent with
the political realities on the ground. We believe that
MINUJUSTH’s staffing, including formed police units,
individual police officers and corrections officers,
as well as civilian experts in the rule of law, human
rights, political affairs, gender, conduct and discipline
and other key areas, will contribute significantly
to the justice-sector priorities that the international
community and the Government of Haiti have
identified. The mentoring and advising by the United
Nations of the Haitian National Police will continue to
be a key factor in the Haitian National Police’s ability to
ensure public order and provide security for the Haitian
people. MINUJUSTH’s focus on addressing pretrial
detention and other corrections-related issues will also
be important.
When peacekeeping works well we see countries
develop their own capacities to protect their citizens
and we see countries re-establish domestic political
processes. MINUSTAH has contributed to both those
goals in Haiti, and for that we salute the leadership
of Special Representative Honoré, who has served in
Port-au-Prince since 2013. We know that the SecretaryGeneral’s next Special Representative will be just as
committed to working closely with the Government of
Haiti and the Haitian people to achieve the important
mandate of the MINUJUSTH successor Mission. I
would also like to take a moment to recognize the troopand police-contributing countries and the thousands of
men and women who have served in MINUSTAH over
the years for their commitment to the Mission.
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

Finally, the support of MINUSTAH to the
Government and the people of Haiti has resulted in
the strengthening of State institutions — and their
establishment, in some cases — that are key to ensuring
the conduct of Haiti’s constitutional and political
processes. Haiti’s security, political and development
agenda can be shaped only by Haitians themselves.
It will therefore be critical to ensure that Haiti takes
this window of opportunity to advance dialogue
on the additional measures and reforms required to
consolidate the security and stabilization gains of the
past few years in order to strengthen its institutions so
that they can continue to meet the people’s needs.
Together with the international community, the
United States looks forward to maintaining its close
partnership with the Haitian Government and people
in order to ensure the country’s continued stability,
democratic development and future prosperity.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ms. Sandra Honoré for her briefing and for
her commitment all these years as Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
That has been one of the keys to the Mission’s success,
and we should acknowledge it. I would also like to
welcome the Permanent Representative of Haiti to the
United Nations.
Italy associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
The Security Council took the decision to initiate
a transition from MINUSTAH to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
which is focused on Haiti’s current needs — strengthening
the Haitian National Police, justice and the rule of
law, and promoting and defending human rights. The
Council’s decision reflects the historical changes that
have occurred in Haiti with the re-establishment of
constitutional order, the revitalization of the National
Assembly and the Council’s confidence in the new
Government’s programme. This progress paves the way
for the consolidation of a stable democracy that can
meet the major challenges that the country is facing.
We urge Haiti not to lose this window of opportunity
to launch the reforms it will need to take its future into
its own hands.
What needs to be done now is to establish a vision
for a shared effort and put it into action, a vision based
on accessible, fair justice for everyone, a functional

S/PV. 8068

electoral system and a firmly established rule of law
that ensures that all can enjoy their fundamental
rights and have equitable access to development. We
urge the authorities to engage in an inclusive national
dialogue with all sectors of Haitian society with a view
to restoring their full trust in the country’s institutions
and engaging them in the reform process. In that regard,
women’s participation in the country’s political, social
and economic life must be assured. We encourage the
Government to take specific measures to develop and
increase their role.
The maintenance of security is a fundamental
precondition for the implementation of this process.
The enormous progress made by the Haitian National
Police, with MINUSTAH’s help, represents an
essential starting point, but its strengthening and
professionalization, and the resources that entails,
must now be a top priority. These are objectives that
are at the core of MINUJUSTH’s assistance mandate,
but the primary responsibility for them rests with the
Haitian authorities. In that regard, Haiti is on the way to
becoming a model for future action by the Council on
issues of transition and stabilization by strengthening
the elements of peacekeeping missions related to
training and organizing police forces, with the goal
of building and consolidating national capacities for
maintaining peace and preventing conflict.
We believe that national ownership is essential to
every peace and stabilization effort, and Haiti is no
exception. We believe firmly that with the tools made
available to it by the Council, Haiti will be able to move
gradually towards a full transfer of powers to the Haitian
authorities. There will also have to be an open dialogue
and close cooperation with MINUJUSTH, and we urge
MINUJUSTH, when it is implementing its mandate,
to use its political influence and good offices to the
maximum as it implements its mandate. In that regard,
we look forward to seeing a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of Mission appointed
as soon as possible.
Since it is very important to ensure a responsible
transition, we would like to emphasize the role that the
United Nations will continue to play in assisting the
country. We reiterate our thanks to MINUSTAH for its
vital contribution to maintaining law and order and for
intervening at critical and urgent times in the country
over the years.

17-321625/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

We appreciate the integrated planning efforts of the
Mission and the country team and encourage them to
continue to implement those plans so that MINUJUSTH
can be operational from the beginning of its mandate.
The United Nations on the ground must continue to
act in a coordinated, cohesive manner with the goal
of transitioning from emergency assistance to the
long-term development of the country. In conclusion,
I would like to reiterate Italy’s commitment to Haiti,
which we have affirmed through our support to the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund and to Special Envoy Josette Sheeran, who
has been appointed to implement the new strategy for
eradicating the epidemic.
Mr. Zambrana (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honoré, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her informative briefing on the
latest developments in the Republic of Haiti and the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and to take this opportunity
to express our gratitude to her and her whole team for
her work as Head of the Mission. We would also like
to thank the representative of Haiti for his presence
here today.
I would first like to congratulate MINUSTAH on
its work throughout the 13 years of its deployment. We
appreciate its efforts to lay the groundwork for lasting
stability and a better future for Haiti, and for establishing
priorities aimed at ensuring a successful transition and
an assessment of its work so that its progress to date can
be reviewed, as the Secretary-General’s latest report
clearly reflects (S/2017/840). We also congratulate
MINUSTAH’s troops on their performance. I should
note that Bolivia took part in this Mission and did so
with professionalism, dedication and the gratitude of
the Haitian people, which we are proud of.
Bolivia reaffirms its commitment to the present
and future of the Republic of Haiti. We believe that the
international community should be united in working
together to support the country’s economic and social
development, bearing in mind the new challenges that
the new United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will encounter in the security
and rule-of-law sectors. That support must be given
in consultation and coordination with the Haitian
Government. In that regard, Bolivia supports Haiti’s
wish to switch the basis of the new Mission’s mandate
to Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
6/30

12/10/2017

rather than Chapter VII, as it is currently. The mandate
should also be reviewed in the light of the results and
information that the Council obtained during its most
recent visit to Haiti, which should serve as input for the
new Mission so that when its mandate is renewed, it
will be easier to understand, clearer and more specific.
It should particularly be borne in mind that the Mission
will be expected to accomplish a number of tasks and
strategic goals over a period of two years.
However, the transition should not be a reason to
disregard some fundamental and as yet unresolved
issues such as those of sexual exploitation and abuse,
and cholera. In that regard, we believe that the United
Nations bears some responsibility towards the cholera
victims in Haiti, as we have reiterated at every Council
meeting on the subject of the Council and as the
Special Representative mentions in paragraph 52 of the
latest report. We welcome the commitment to dealing
with this crisis through the Secretary-General’s new
approach to the fight against cholera. The victims of
cholera, which has led to the deaths of some 9,600
people since 2010, should be compensated. During the
Council’s visit to Haiti, the people we spoke to saw this
as a key topic, given the damage that the cholera crisis
did to the reputation of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Haiti. It is clear that a failure on the part
of the international community to meet its obligations
under the new approach will significantly affect the
new Mission’s credibility and effectiveness. It will be
important for MINUJUSTH to work on a new plan of
action in that regard.
We would also like to reiterate that it is also the
obligation of the international community to support
the Republic of Haiti in building robust water-supply,
sanitation and health-care systems in order to end the
cholera crisis. We call on the Members of the United
Nations as a whole to support the Secretary-General’s
new approach and General Assembly resolution
71/161B, adopted on 13 July, which established a trust
fund for that purpose, and encourage Security Council
members and all States Members of the United Nations
to consolidate the fund.
With regard to sexual abuse and exploitation, we
take note of the Special Representative’s commitment
to supporting the victims through a trust fund and to
appoint a special defender in such cases. We believe
those efforts should continue on the principle of zero
tolerance and that those responsible for sexual abuse
and exploitation should be punished. We should not
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

omit to express our concern about the problem of
children who are fatherless as a result of sexual abuse.
Concerning the Government of Haiti’s progress
on the political front, we commend the designation
of members for 140 municipal assemblies. We urge it
to appoint a replacement for the Ombudsman and to
continue to strengthen Haitian institutions in order
to ensure the rule of law and firm up the foundations
that will enable it to achieve greater political and
social cohesion and to tackle the country’s current
socioeconomic and development challenges. We also
welcome the Government’s work in establishing a
permanent Electoral Council, calling on candidates
for the Superior Council of the Judiciary, inviting the
opposition parties to dialogue in order to discuss ways
of improving the functioning of political parties and
working on a road map for the security, justice, energy,
education, health and farming sectors. Those advances
clearly demonstrates the Government’s commitment to
democracy and stability, as does the progress on the
Caravan of Change and the joint legislative agenda. We
also commend the progress that has been made in the
security sector, particularly the growing capacity of
the Haitian National Police and its infrastructure. We
will continue to encourage efforts in that area with a
view to achieving the goals of its 2017-2021 strategic
development plan
In conclusion, Bolivia recognizes the national
ownership and primary responsibility of the Government
and the people of Haiti for all aspects of their country’s
development, and encourages MINUJUSTH to
coordinate with the Government in providing it with
logistical and technical experience while respecting its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative Honoré for her briefing.
As the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) draws to a close after 13 years in Haiti,
I would like to join others in thanking her for her
dedicated service. I also want to pay tribute to all who
have been involved with the Mission and its work — the
civilian staff, troops and police who have served in it
and in particular the 186 men and women who have
died in MINUSTAH’s service.
When we compare Haiti today to the Haiti of
2004, MINUSTAH’s legacy is clear. There is less
violence, the security environment is more stable, the
Haitian National Police is more effective and a more

S/PV. 8068

democratic political culture has emerged, accompanied
by transitions of power. Of course, we cannot be
complacent. The gains made must be protected. The
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) represents a transitional stage for
future United Nations support for Haiti. The Haiti of
today still needs help to ensure that its police will soon
be able stand alone, that justice institutions will soon
function effectively and that human rights are afforded
the protection and priority they require.
While we note that a status of forces agreement has
not yet been signed and urge the Government to do so
as soon as possible, we are nevertheless pleased that the
transition to MINUJUSTH is on track. We must ensure
that the Mission has access to the most appropriate
personnel and equipment and that this is underpinned
by high-quality training, skilled, robust leadership
and clear accountability for underperformance
and misconduct. If the United Nations is to maximize
the impact of its support to Haiti, MINUJUSTH must
work closely with the United Nations country team,
which has a critical role to play in sustaining peace. For
example, through its support for the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the United Nations country
team will be able to bring a long-term developmental
focus to the major challenges that Haiti faces today.
Joint planning, analysis and capacity-mapping exercises
will be needed from day one so that responsibilities are
handed over sequentially well ahead of MINUJUSTH’s
closure. Indeed, Haiti does not need an indefinite
peacekeeping operation. The planned exit strategy to
guide a two-year transition from MINUJUSTH to the
United Nations country team and also, critically, Haiti’s
own national institutions marks an opportunity for the
United Nations to set precedents for peacekeeping
missions around the world.
We regret that the good work of MINUSTAH was
tainted by the spectre of cholera and sexual exploitation
and abuse. Here, too, there are lessons to be learned.
The new approach to cholera has helped to put Haiti on
a path towards eradication, but this came too long after
the damage had been done. As for sexual exploitation
at the hands of peacekeepers, Haiti’s tragic experience
demonstrates why we cannot tolerate any backsliding
on the commitments made through resolution 2272
(2016).
There is much that the United Nations can do better.
But the single most important guarantor of the progress
achieved in Haiti lies with its own leadership. The gap

17-321627/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

left by MINUSTAH is not primarily for MINUJUSTH
to plug but for Haiti’s Government, politicians and
institutions to begin to fill. For example, security
cannot be achieved unless the Government protects
the independence of Haiti’s police and gives them the
resources they need rather than diverting money towards
the creation of new armed forces. Justice cannot be
delivered until parliamentarians pass legislation critical
to empowering the judiciary. Human rights cannot be
protected without proper institutionalization within the
State, and pronouncements of progress will continue to
ring hollow until we see more women empowered as
political leaders and fewer becoming victims of sexual
and gender-based violence.
In conclusion, today we are all witnessing Haiti
turn a corner. Days of violence and instability have
begun to fade. The ultimate thanks go to the people of
Haiti. Without question, they have displayed remarkable
resilience. But the courageous efforts of MINUSTAH
have also played their part. We salute their successes
and look forward to continued assistance by the United
Nations to the Haitian people.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report of
5 October on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2017/840) and the Special
Representative, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing.
Uruguay associates itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Peru on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti.
As we are only three days away from the closure
of MINUSTAH, I would like to thank all those who
in one way or other have participated in the Mission.
Men and women of various nationalities, military and
police officers as well as civilians have since 2004 all
been serving the same cause: that of bringing peace
and stability to the people of Haiti. Many of them have
done this at the risk of their own lives. We remember
all of them without exception and pay them heartfelt
tribute. We regularly refer to them — from Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Representative
Hédi Annabi to Principal Deputy Representative Luiz
Carlos da Costa and the dozens of other members of the
Mission — but very rarely give their names.
Today I would like to mention by name the eight
Uruguayans who lost their lives serving in Haiti:
Corporal Leandro Acosta, Air Force Captain José
Ignacio Larrosa, First Lieutenant Santiago Hernández,
8/30

12/10/2017

aviation engineers José Pastor, Enrique Montiel, Néstor
Morales and Gigi Medina, and Lieutenant Colonel
Gonzalo Martinere.
I would also like to express my most sincere thanks
to Ms. Honoré for her leadership as Head of MINUSTAH
and for her outstanding and tireless efforts to bring
about stability in Haiti, thanks that I wish to extend to
all those who preceded her in that post.
The closure of MINUSTAH provides us with the
opportunity to reflect on the manner in which it was
managed. As with all human endeavours, there have
been positives and negatives. In the 13 years since
2004, MINUSTAH helped to ensure the conditions
necessary to enable Haiti to return to democracy;
addressed the difficult humanitarian situations brought
on by natural disasters; worked with the Government
to strengthen its institutions; and helped to strengthen
and professionalize the Haitian National Police and
to restore and maintain the rule of law, including
through the promotion and protection of human rights.
Uruguay participated in these efforts from the outset,
in 2004, up until 15 April, the date on which its troops
ceased operations.
Today we can see the results of this joint effort, as
MINUSTAH is leaving the country in a much better
condition than it was when the Mission arrived. We can
say, therefore, that the balance sheet is a positive one
and that the people and the Government of Haiti have
benefited from the presence of MINUSTAH over these
13 years.
However, we would have liked the current situation
in the country to be more encouraging. Despite the
efforts made by the Haitian authorities to consolidate
democracy and stability in the country; despite the
commitment of President Jovenel Moise to making
progress in priority areas, as reflected in his Caravan
of Change initiative; and notwithstanding the progress
made in increasing the capacity and enhancing the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police, a
number of areas of concern remain.
The socioeconomic situation in the country
continues to be fragile, and the population remains
vulnerable. Progress in the areas of the rule of law
and human rights is very slow. In the judicial field,
progress has been limited. We continue to see long-term
preventive detentions, and the prisons are overcrowded.
The level of the protection and promotion of the human
rights of women is far from satisfactory. Transparency
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

International’s 2016 Corruption Perceptions Index
places Haiti 159th of the 176 countries on the list.
Despite the progress that has been made in fighting
the cholera epidemic, cholera-related deaths continue,
and the percentage of the population with access to
drinking water and sanitation systems remains very low.
We share the concern of various sectors of Haitian
society — parliamentarians, leaders of political parties,
defenders of human rights and security experts — about
the process of remobilizing the armed forces. We
believe that Haiti should concentrate all of its efforts
and resources on areas of priority development and on
those initiatives that will generate direct benefits for
the Haitian population and strengthen the institutional
structure of the country.
We cannot overlook the expenses involved in the
return of the armed forces in terms of investment and
operational costs, at a time when the country has so
many pressing needs and the risk of external aggression
seems low.
We believe that efforts should be focused on
continuing to strengthen and train the Haitian National
Police, so that it is able to fully meet its commitment
to ensure national security. National and international
efforts have so far been geared to this end, and this is
how we should continue in future, so as not to jeopardize
the achievements made in the area of security in the
13 years of MINUSTAH’s presence.
We are pleased that, with the help of MINUSTAH,
the Haitian National Police has continued to build its
capacity to ensure public order and provide security
to the population and that the security situation in the
country is relatively stable and has not been affected by
the withdrawal of MINUSTAH.
We believe that Haiti still needs the support and
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community. However, we also believe that those efforts
should focus on areas that are key to strengthening the
country’s institutions, so that Haiti can make progress
on the road to development and prosperity and leave
behind its need for constant assistance, which tends to
perpetuate itself. In that regard, we believe that the role
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will be essential. With the joint
transition plan of MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team, MINUJUSTH should be able to help
the Government strengthen its rule-of-law institutions

S/PV. 8068

while continuing to provide support to the Haitian
National Police and promote the development of law
enforcement. It should also participate in monitoring,
reporting on and analysing the human rights situation,
in accordance with its mandate. For that it will need to
count on firm political will and a commitment to action
on the part of the Haitian authorities. We hope that will
be the case to the benefit of the people of Haiti, who
deserve that commitment from their leadership.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré for
her briefing. I would also like to express our deep
gratitude to her and her team and, through her, to all the
personnel of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose mandate is ending in a
few days. I especially thank the United Nations troops
who have made great sacrifices to achieve security and
stability in Haiti.
Egypt welcomes the progress that Haiti has made in
the past year on both the political and security fronts,
and the relative stability that has been achieved despite
all Haiti’s challenges. International support, provided
mainly by the United Nations, has played a vital role
in achieving stability in Haiti, and it is therefore
incumbent on us to continue to provide support in
the next phase so as to build and sustain peace, as the
representative of the United Kingdom has said. Since
the new United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will start its work in the next few
days, I would like to stress the following points.
First, MINUJUSTH should focus on building
national institutions, especially rule-of-law institutions
and the national police, in accordance with the country’s
needs and requirements. It should not use its resources
for non-traditional or controversial tasks. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the work that has
been done to develop the National Police, as well as
President Moise’s efforts to build a national army.
Secondly, we call for enhanced coordination between
MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country team,
which will help to ensure that United Nations resources
are used as efficiently as possible. It will be important
to develop the country team’s collective capabilities so
that it will be able to meet the requirements of the next
phase, including realizing national development plans
in the areas of infrastructure, health and education
and providing related training, as well as improving
legislation with a view to attracting domestic and

17-321629/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

foreign private-sector investment, especially in the
areas of agriculture and tourism. In that regard, we
would like to propose that the Government of Haiti
consider forming a partnership with the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission with
the aim of facilitating comprehensive and integrated
support to Haiti on the political, development and
social fronts while ensuring national ownership. We
should build an international forum that enables Haiti
to engage with its international partners and follow up
on progress at the international level on building and
sustaining peace.
Thirdly, the United Nations has a moral and a legal
responsibility to support the efforts of the Haitian
authorities to combat the cholera epidemic. Both
MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country team
must therefore have the necessary capacity to support
the fight against the cholera epidemic. My delegation
welcomes and supports the three-dimensional strategy
developed by United Nations Special Envoy Josette
Sheeran and discussed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/840). We also welcome the efforts
to combat sexual exploitation and abuse, which have
resulted in a decrease in such crimes, as well as the
Secretary-General’s efforts to apply a zero-tolerance
policy to such crimes at every level of the United
Nations. We also call for continued investigation of
crimes committed in the past in Haiti, with a view to
fighting impunity.
Fourthly, on 29 August, during Egypt’s presidency,
the Security Council held an open debate (see
S/PV.8033) that addressed the importance of reviewing
peacekeeping operations and enhancing peacekeeping
missions’ performance. To that end, I urge the Council
to identify the lessons learned from MINUSTAH and
determine the factors that ensured the Mission’s success.
It will also be important to monitor the transition from
MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH. That will enable the
Council to refer to lessons learned in similar cases
when missions’ mandates are about to end.
The peacekeeping phase in Haiti is nearing its
end. The efforts of the international community and
the United Nations should now focus on building and
sustaining peace during Haiti’s next phase, especially
since the country has a clear national vision of priorities
that requires support and coordination among the
various components of those efforts.
10/30

12/10/2017

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honoré, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her comprehensive briefing.
As the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) approaches its end,
we salute her invaluable role in bringing stability
to Haiti and acknowledge our deep appreciation
to her, the entire MINUSTAH team and the troopand police-contributing countries for successfully
completing such a long and challenging mission.
Kazakhstan recognizes the significant contributions
that MINUSTAH and other United Nations institutions
have made in Haiti in the past several years to the
effort to achieve stabilization, promote the rule of
law, ensure good governance and support the local
judiciary and law enforcement. MINUSTAH has been
particularly instrumental in creating a secure and stable
environment, participating in the reconstruction efforts
after the 2010 earthquake and supporting Haitian
authorities with reforms and institutional development.
We welcome the positive steps taken by the
Haitian Government towards restoring democratic
institutions and establishing economic recovery, which
has focused on agriculture, infrastructure and human
capital. Kazakhstan believes that President Moise and
his Government will be able to overcome their current
challenges and ensure stability and constitutional
order, as well as complying with Haiti’s international
obligations. We fully agree with the observation in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2017/840) that it is
critical to ensure that Haiti makes full use of the window
of opportunity created by the current relative stability
to advance dialogue, with a view to consolidating the
security and stabilization gains that have been made
over the past few years, making for greater social and
political cohesion and reinforcing State institutions
so that they can meet the needs of the Haitian people.
As Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kazakhstan, outlined during the Council’s
meeting on peacekeeping reforms on 20 September
(see S/PV.8051), our country fully supports the shift
from conflict resolution to prevention and sustaining
peace, together with structural changes and the new
configuration of United Nations entities.
The United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is supposed to be a role model
for future missions, with a particular focus on the
nexus of security and development. With a view to
consolidating security and stability, MINUJUSTH
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

should focus on building the capacities of the Haitian
National Police, making serious efforts to combat
impunity, ensuring the independence of the judiciary
and establishing a transparent and efficient prison
system. We urge the Government of Haiti to make sure
that the Haitian National Police’s strategic development
plan is implemented rapidly and effectively, with help
provided as required by the international community in
order to ensure professional training and experience.
The human rights situation should be closely
monitored. Given the unfortunate experience of
misconduct in MINUSTAH, MINUJUSTH must be
held accountable to the highest standards of integrity
and discipline. The zero-tolerance policy on sexual
abuse must be strictly enforced. It is also essential for
MINUJUSTH that the United Nations country team
work in a coordinated manner with the entire United
Nations system, breaking down silos in order to achieve
optimal results for sustainable development in Haiti. It
also means that the Mission must collaborate closely
with neighbouring countries and regional partners,
which have made commendable contributions to
investment in Haiti. There must be coordination between
the various actors and international organizations, the
private sector and civil society, and women and young
people should be fully engaged.
Kazakhstan has already been an integral part of the
international support to Haiti, making contributions
to humanitarian efforts to support emergency relief
and development activities following the devastating
earthquake in 2010. In 2016, Kazakhstan supported
the World’s Innovation Pole of the Greater North of
Haiti, which is aimed at establishing the infrastructure
for a knowledge-based economy in Haiti. As the only
Central Asian country accredited by the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), we have supported two
regional CARICOM projects, aimed respectively at
developing water resource management in the region
and institutional support for the Ministries of Foreign
Affairs of CARICOM member States, including Haiti.
The issue of cholera in Haiti should remain a
priority for the entire United Nations community in
the coming months. Kazakhstan joins the SecretaryGeneral’s call to the international community and
donors for voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, as
envisioned in General Assembly resolution 71/161.

S/PV. 8068

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s
firm commitment to supporting Haiti’s efforts to
achieve peace, progress and prosperity.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing. The United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
will officially conclude its mission and be superseded
by the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), thereby ushering in a new era
in Haiti.
Since 2004, MINUSTAH, in the face of an
earthquake, hurricanes and other hardships, has
played an important role in promoting the stability and
development of Haiti. More than 100 United Nations
peacekeepers, including eight from China, have made
the ultimate sacrifice in Haiti, and China commends
and pays tribute to MINUSTAH, Special Representative
Honoré and all the former Heads of the Mission for
their invaluable contributions. MINUSTAH’s orderly
withdrawal has helped maintain a stable situation in
Haiti, creating conditions conducive to MINUJUSTH’s
smooth deployment. China looks to MINUJUSTH,
the United Nations country team and other entities
to strengthen their coordination and consolidate the
progress achieved by MINUSTAH, thereby making
an even greater contribution to Haiti’s overall stability
and development.
MINUJUSTH cannot stay in Haiti indefinitely.
The final solution to the question of Haiti will hinge
on the efforts of the Haitian Government. Along with
other relevant parties, the Government should work
diligently to take on the responsibility of maintaining
the country’s stability and development of the country.
This will entail enhancing its self-development
capacities, reinforcing the rule of law, conducting
constructive national dialogue, implementing the
strategic development plan of the National Police for
2017-2021, ensuring stable funding and working to
ensure security in the country as a whole as quickly
as possible.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti remains grim.
China hopes that the international community will
increase its assistance so as to help Haiti eliminate
cholera, improve its capabilities in food security and
disaster reduction and prevention, and help provide
more support to Haiti in implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

17-3216211/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

12/10/2017

Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her comprehensive wrap-up
briefing on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose mandate will successfully
conclude next Sunday. Japan welcomes the outline
of MINUSTAH’s achievements in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2017/840) and pays tribute to
Special Representative Honoré, her predecessors, their
teams, the Secretariat and, particularly, the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their tireless support
to Haiti over the past 13 years.

However, as was evident during the Council’s visit
in June, enormous peacebuilding and development
needs remain. As the Secretary-General stressed in
his report, there are ongoing challenges in the areas
of governance, human rights, gender equality, judicial
reform and institution-building. We must support Haiti
now so as to ensure its self-reliance in future. The role
of the international community and the United Nations
country team will be crucial. With the ownership of the
Haitian authorities, Japan will continue to support the
development and improvement of basic social services,
as well as post-disaster reconstruction.

Japan’s participation in MINUSTAH was also an
important step in its history of contributing to United
Nations peacekeeping.

We have focused a great deal on alleviating the
suffering caused by the devastating cholera outbreak.
Japan has provided more than $9 million through
UNICEF and other international organizations since
2010, with a focus on the construction and improvement
of water-, sanitation- and hygiene-related facilities.
We will continue our support, especially through
preventive social, economic and public-health measures
and poverty reduction, as well as resilient and highquality infrastructure.

We deployed approximately 2,200 Self-Defence
Forces personnel to the Mission beginning in 2010
to support reconstruction following the earthquake.
Those efforts included training Haitians in the use
of heavy machinery, as well as technology transfer. I
was particularly encouraged by a report that I received
from a staff member who joined the Mission and
provided training to young Haitians in the operation
of the heavy machinery. In it, he wrote that the most
memorable moment for him was when the young
Haitian trainees expressed their joy with every part of
their body on the day they passed the qualifying exams
for their operating licenses. We have been encouraged
by the Haitian display of ownership in rebuilding their
country based on that report. Japan is proud of its SelfDefence Forces’ success in helping lay the groundwork
for stability, and we have built on those experiences
during subsequent deployments.
Japan welcomes the continued implementation of
the joint MINUSTAH-United Nations country team
transition plan, as well as the progress in efforts to
ensure that the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will be operational
on the first day. We join the Secretary-General in
calling on the Government to sign the status-of-forces
agreement by 16 October. We look forward to working
with MINUJUSTH and the Government to strengthen
the rule of law and institutions, and further advance the
development and professionalization of Haiti’s police
in line with the 2017-2021 strategic development plan.
Haiti is on the path towards further consolidating its
democracy, national unity and stability. We commend
the efforts of the Government and the people of Haiti to
that end, and those efforts must continue.
12/30

Haiti has made commendable progress under
challenging conditions, but continued United Nations
efforts and the attention of the Security Council
continue to be necessary. Japan looks forward to
working with the international community to ensure
that recent improvements lead to lasting progress in the
lives of the Haitian people.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti Sandra Honoré
for her presentation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/840), as well as her assessment of the
situation in the country on the eve of the transition to
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).
We agree that since the adoption of resolution 2350
(2017) in April, there have been positive developments
in the country, made possible thanks to the efforts of
the Government and the President, with the support of
the international community.
We are pleased to note that the Secretary-General’s
report indicates that the withdrawal of the military
component and the reduction of United Nations police
personnel have not negatively affected the security
situation. Nevertheless, the statistics provided by the
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

report pertaining to crime on the island continue to be
a cause for serious concern. Despite the improvements
in certain indicators, the Haitian National Police,
supported by Blue Helmets, should continue to consider
that to be a matter of the highest priority as one of
the key components for ultimately normalizing life
in the country. We hope that the timely and coherent
implementation of the 2017-2021 strategic development
plan for the national police will contribute to that.
We have carefully reviewed the information in the
report concerning the progress made in transitioning
from the Stabilization Mission to the Mission for Justice
Support, which will begin operating on 16 October. With
respect to delegating responsibilities to the Mission and
the country team, we believe that, while supporting the
Government of Haiti in the various areas of governance,
the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator should be
guided by the main provisions of the mandate that had
been given to the Stabilization Mission, as well as by
the primary principle of national ownership. That also
applies to the new Mission. Its conscientious support
is extremely important for the Government, which
should become increasingly independent every day, in
terms of both defining its priorities and implementing
peacebuilding tasks in Haiti.
In that regard, we fully agree with the conclusion of
the report that programmes in the areas of security, policy
and development must be framed by the Government
and be based on the views of the population. Moreover,
of no less importance, all national stakeholders should
have a sense of shared responsibility for sustaining
peace. The top priority of national ownership, with
the support of the international community where
absolutely necessary, is confirmed not only in the part
of the report concerning the legacy of the Stabilization
Mission but also by experience, and one of the most
striking examples of that is in the neighbouring country
of Colombia.
In conclusion, we would like once again to express
our support for the Government and the people of Haiti,
which is on the path to stability and prosperity while
overcoming not only internal disagreements but also
the devastating consequences of the natural disasters
of September, namely, Hurricanes Irma and Maria. The
Caribbean region has historically been vulnerable to
a complex natural environment. In order to overcome
the environmental risks more expeditiously, a strong
Government and a cohesive society are necessary,

S/PV. 8068

which through joint efforts will allow for restoring,
building and strengthening Haiti’s potential.
We would also like to express our gratitude to
Ms. Sandra Honoré and all the previous Heads of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for their
contribution to the progress achieved by the host country
with the support of the international community.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to join others in thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sandra Honoré for her
comprehensive briefing and in welcoming the presence
of His Excellency the Ambassador of the Republic
of Haiti.
In a few days, on 15 October, we will mark the
official closing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the opening of the
new United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), pursuant to resolution 2350 (2017), of
13 April 2017.
Clearly this new chapter in the United Nations
presence in Haiti, which is about to begin, is a great
illustration of the significant progress achieved by the
Government and the people of Haiti with the support of
the international community and, above all, the United
Nations, which made possible the election of President
Jovenel Moise, the return to constitutional order, the
improved security situation and the resumption of a
normal political life, which we nevertheless hope will
further be improved through an enhanced political
dialogue, which is necessary for the strengthening of
democratic institutions.
It is important to note that since then, in order
to improve the living conditions of the Haitian
people — particularly those in rural areas — and also
to build the country’s resilience to frequent natural
disasters and lay the groundwork for sustainable
development, the new authorities have been actively
implementing reforms in all areas, including
socioeconomic development, through the launch
of the flagship Caravan of Change programme,
which has intensified and expanded to several of the
country’s regions.
We believe that upon review, MINUSTAH can
be proud of the work it has accomplished, despite the
difficulties posed by cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse and the outbreak of the cholera epidemic. The
Mission was deployed in 2004 in a politically very

17-3216213/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

unstable environment with widespread violence, yet
13 years later it has been able, alongside the Haitian
Government and people, to help lay the foundations
of lasting stability, better security and a future that
Haitians can glimpse with a sense of optimism.
My delegation would therefore like to once again
pay well-deserved tribute to Ms. Honoré, Head of
MINUSTAH, as well as to all the Mission’s personnel
and the troop- and police-contributing countries,
for helping the Haitian people. Nevertheless, we all
recognize that many challenges will still need to be
addressed in order to enable Haiti to consolidate the
progress made, which remains fragile. In that regard and
in terms of security, we are hopeful that MINUJUSТН
will help to put greater emphasis on building the
capacity of and training the Haitian National Police
so that it can improve its professionalization and
achieve the objectives set out in its 2017-2021 strategic
development plan, following the significant progress
already made.
Similarly, we are confident that with the support of
the new Mission, control and accountability mechanisms
will be strengthened, the process of legislative reform
will be completed, and the entities that promote and
support human rights will be strengthened so as to
allow them to conduct their work effectively. Given
its ambitious mission, MINUJUSTH deserves the full
support of the Security Council, hence the support and
confidence that my delegation wishes to express to the
women and men who will have the inspiring task of
fulfilling its mandate.
At the same time, my delegation calls on the
international community to remain mobilized to
confront the cholera epidemic that continues to plague
Haiti. That can be done by supporting the 10-year
Government plan to eliminate cholera in Haiti, as well
as through the new United Nations approach to cholera
in Haiti (resolution 71/161), which has just been adopted
by the General Assembly.
Senegal urges the States Members of the United
Nations to work collectively, in close collaboration with
the Haitian authorities and especially with the victims,
to effectively implement that new approach. My
country welcomes the three-pronged strategy outlined
by Mrs. Josette Sheeran, the new Special Envoy for
Haiti, which aims to continue to contain the epidemic,
mobilize additional resources and, above all, learn from
14/30

12/10/2017

this painful experience so as to improve United Nations
interventions around the world.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Today marks the end of an
important chapter with the completion of the mandate
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the beginning of another significant
chapter, with the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
We thank Special Representative Sandra Honoré for her
briefing on the latest situation in Haiti and for the steps
taken to implement the withdrawal of MINUSTAH and
ensure a smooth transition to the new Mission.
Over the past 13 years, MINUSTAH has played
an important role in ensuring security and stability,
restoring the rule of law and promoting national
dialogue and institution-building in Haiti. It also
supported recovery efforts after the 2010 earthquake
and the devastating impact of six major hurricanes,
although its image was tarnished by its handling of the
cholera outbreak. We realize that there is now a new
approach to deal with the issue and address the suffering
of the victims. It is important that the international
community support the Haitian Government in its
efforts to eliminate the disease.
We welcome the continued progress made in
Haiti in consolidating its democracy and institutional
stability, as indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/840). We also take note of the progress
made in the overall security situation in the country,
which remains relatively stable. As we mark the end of
MINUSTAH’s mandate, we recognize its contribution
in that regard.
Nevertheless, Haiti continues to face enormous
challenges and vulnerabilities. There is therefore a
need to take decisive steps towards creating greater
social and political cohesion and reinforcing State
institutions so as to sustain the gains made in recent
years. The conduct of a successful national dialogue
to address socioeconomic grievances and to bridge
communication between the Government and other
stakeholders in the country would be very significant in
forging a common vision and ensuring greater stability
and development.
The sustained and coordinated engagement of all
bilateral and international partners is critical to securing
sufficient and timely assistance for the sustainable
development of Haiti in a manner that respects its
sovereignty. We hope that Ms. Josette Sheeran will
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

S/PV. 8068

build the necessary partnership with a wide range of
stakeholders to support the work of the United Nations
in Haiti.

none. In that light, Ukraine pays special tribute to all
of the brave men and women who have served in the
Mission over the past 13 years.

The establishment of MINUJUSTH is indeed very
important to consolidate peace by strengthening the
institutions of justice and the rule of law, as well as
supporting the institutional and operational capacity
of the Haitian National Police. We appreciate the work
that has been done to ensure a smooth transition to
MINUJUSTH, in line with resolution 2350 (2017). We
also recognize regional and subregional organizations,
in particular the Organization of American States, the
Union of South American Nations and the Caribbean
Community for their important roles in the process of
the stabilization and reconstruction of Haiti.

We are pleased that the country has overcome
numerous challenges and difficulties and returned to a
constitutional order based on the will of the voters. At
the same time, as the Secretary-General rightly stated
in his recent report (S/2017/840), the country should
waste no time in making full use of the current window
of opportunity. It is critical to advance dialogue among
all political stakeholders so as to ensure stability and
security, along with further democratic consolidation.

Finally, I would like to express our appreciation
to Ms. Sandra Honoré for her dedicated service
and to all departing MINUSTAH civilian staff and
uniformed personnel for their steadfast commitment
and contribution in carrying out the Mission’s
mandate. Ethiopia is pleased to have made a very
modest contribution through the deployment of police
personnel. I wish to conclude by once again reiterating
our solidarity with the brotherly people and Government
of Haiti as they continue to strive to consolidate the
progress made in recent years and address the multiple
challenges that their nation is facing.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honoré,
for her briefing and for her dedicated service. In just a
few days’ time, the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will take over from
MINUSTAH. That will testify to both the successful
completion of MINUSTAH’s mandate and our readiness
to move towards a new form of the United Nations
presence in the country, one that is better adapted to
the requirements and conditions on the ground.
We would like to commend in particular the
important role that MINUSTAH has played in ensuring
stability and security during particularly difficult
times for Haiti, such as the aftermath of the devastating
earthquake in 2010. The Mission was also there assisting
Haitians in arranging the latest elections and providing
urgent aid after Hurricane Matthew. Its contribution
to strengthening the capacity of State institutions, in
particular the Haitian National Police, is second to

We fully support the Government’s calls for
broader unity as a prerequisite for moving forward with
the reform process, ensuring respect for human rights,
combating criminality and sexual and gender-based
violence, putting an end to impunity and providing
for accountability. In that regard, MINUSTAH should
provide the crucial support needed to advance those
important transformations and consolidate the progress
achieved. We have full confidence that MINUJUSTH
will also deliver effectively on the mandated tasks,
such as strengthening the rule of law, further
supporting the development of the Haitian National
Police and engaging in human rights monitoring and
reporting. However, in order to ensure the success of
the mission, the commitment of the Haitian authorities
will be essential.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
highlighted the gains made over the years in developing
the capacity of the Haitian National Police. We welcome
the adoption of the new strategic development plan of
the National Police covering the period up until 2021.
At the same time, further prioritization of the Haitian
National Police’s build-up is essential, both for the
Government and for MINUJUSTH. Taking note of
the Government’s decision to re-establish the armed
forces, we share the idea that such an initiative should
not affect the work being done on the development of
the Haitian National Police.
However, the police is only one of the components
of the justice sector that require further reform. The
Haitian authorities need to carefully balance capacity
development with enhanced civilian oversight. Equally
important are the continued efforts of the international
community, multilateral agencies, Haiti’s regional
partners and individual States in supporting long-term
security and development in the country.

17-3216215/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

We recognize that considerable national, regional
and international efforts have been made to combat
cholera. On 13 July the General Assembly adopted
resolution 71/161, on the new United Nations approach
to cholera in Haiti. Ukraine has responded to the
Secretary-General’s appeal and has contributed to the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund.
We share the concerns about sexual exploitation
and abuse related to the United Nations presence in
Haiti that were raised during the Council’s visit to the
country in June. Having signed last month with the
Secretary-General the Voluntary Compact regarding
that problem, Ukraine is strongly committed to a policy
of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse for
all peacekeepers and United Nations staff, uniformed
or civilian.
To conclude, no progress could have been achieved
without strong will on the part of the Haitian people.
While facing many political, economic and social
challenges, as well as creeping natural disasters, they
have demonstrated remarkable resilience in rebuilding
the country, despite all odds. We express our sincere
congratulations to them. Ukraine remains a committed
partner for Haiti in its endeavour to move forward on
the path to sustainable peace and development and to
build “one Haiti for all Haitians”, as President Moise
said in his inauguration speech.

12/10/2017

The conclusion of the mandate of MINUSTAH on
15 October and the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
mark an important milestone for Haiti. During the 13
years of MINUSTAH’s mandate, the Haitian people
have made significant progress in the consolidation
of democracy, as well as security and stability. We
commend Haiti for that progress, which has opened
a window of opportunity for Haiti’s future. However,
challenges remain. President Moise and his Government
have set out some important priorities, namely, to
improve economic development, infrastructure,
resilience, security, the rule of law, respect for human
rights and national dialogue. The Government must now
spare no effort in delivering on those commitments.
The rule of law should continue to be a top priority
for the Government. The strengthening of the Haitian
National Police and a continued focus on judicial reform,
including fighting corruption, will also be absolutely
crucial for inclusive socioeconomic development and the
creation of better conditions for private investment. It is
important that all actors, including national authorities,
political parties, civil society and the private sector,
work together towards that end. Previous experience
has shown the important role that policing plays in
providing a bridge between security and development
in transition processes. Sweden currently contributes
10 police officers to MINUSTAH and will contribute
the same number to MINUJUSTH.

Let me begin by joining others in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
final report to the Council and for the diligence and
professionalism that she and all the staff of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
have shown as they carried out their mission to support
the people of Haiti. We really appreciate their work.

As Haiti moves forward to address its challenges,
the partnership between Haiti, bilateral donors and the
United Nations needs to evolve so as to provide the most
appropriate model of support in the spirit of sustaining
peace and supporting inclusive socioeconomic
development. As more and more tasks are transitioned
from the United Nations Mission to the United Nations
country team, the international community must also
step up and ensure that the United Nations agencies
have adequate resources to effectively carry out their
important roles.

I would also take the opportunity to pay tribute
once again to the many United Nations staff members
who lost their lives serving with MINUSTAH,
including my very close friend Kai Buchholz, who died
in the tragic earthquake of 2010. Kai was a fun, caring
and clever friend and an exceptionally dedicated and
professional United Nations colleague, and I miss him
very much indeed.

No society can reach its full potential without the
full, equal and effective participation of women. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2017/840),
more efforts are needed to protect and promote women’s
rights in Haiti. The important work undertaken by
MINUSTAH on gender mainstreaming and against
sexual and gender-based violence must not be lost. It
is important that MINUJUSTH continue to integrate

Mr. Skau (Sweden): I associate myself with the
statement that will be made by the observer of the
European Union later this morning.

16/30

17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

gender throughout its policies and maintain a strategic
focus, coordination and budget for gender issues.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment
that it is important that the Haitian authorities put
in place binding measures for the application of the
constitutional minimum quota of 30 per cent women
in public office. The election of more than 30 per cent
women at the municipal and local levels is promising
and will hopefully act as a springboard for the increased
participation of women at the national level as well
in future.
We were happy to co-sponsor resolution 71/161,
in support of the Secretary-General’s new approach to
eradicate cholera and build resilience in Haiti. Sweden
is currently exploring how to best support the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund and we encourage others to consider contributing
to the Trust Fund as well, so as to collectively bring to
an end cholera in Haiti.
The people of Haiti have made huge progress in
rebuilding their country over the past 14 years, not
least by overcoming the devastation caused by the
earthquake in 2010. We must continue to stand with
them. Sweden will remain a committed partner for
Haiti as the country begins a newchapter.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
France associates itself with the statements to be
made later by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Peru, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
With just a few days remaining until the closure
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), France commends the work done over
the past 13 years by the United Nations, and especially
the tireless efforts of the Special Representatives and
their teams. We also acknowledge the extraordinary
commitment of the troop-contributing countries.
Our thoughts go to the men and women who lost
their lives while serving in MINUSTAH, especially
during the earthquake of 2010 and in particular,
Special Representative Hédi Annabi, who died in that
tragic event.
In following up on MINUSTAH’s remarkable
work, the capacity-building and professionalization
of the Haitian National Police must remain a priority.

S/PV. 8068

The United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which will take the reins
on 16 October, must build on the success already
achieved in order to fulfil the objectives set out in
resolution 2350 (2017) — strengthening the rule of law,
supporting the Haitian National Police and monitoring
the human rights situation. The new Mission must also
take into account the needs of the Haitian authorities
and civil society and continue to support Haiti on its
path to development. In that regard, special attention
must be paid to justice. Progress in the area of the
rule of law is intrinsically linked to strengthening the
professionalism and independence of the judiciary,
establishing a legal framework that meets international
standards, particularly in the area of criminal justice,
and implementing a prison system that is compatible
with the country’s needs and respects the rights
of inmates.
The issue of human rights will have an especially
significant role to play in the new Mission. No political,
social or economic reform can succeed without taking
human rights into account from conception right
up through implementation. The consolidation of
democratic institutions also depends on this, and we
hope that MINUJUSTH will regularly report back to
the Council on the latest developments in that field.
It is solely up to the Haitian authorities and the
sovereign people of Haiti to establish their political
priorities for the years to come. By modifying its
presence, the United Nations has shown its willingness
to continue assisting Haiti and responding to its new
needs. It is not trying to take the place of its leaders or
stage a hasty withdrawal; on the contrary, MINUJUSTH
will give the relationship between Haiti and its partner
countries new momentum. We have every faith that
the Haitian authorities will take full advantage of this
opportunity. This is an essential stage as we transition
from an assistance-focused approach to one centred on
sustainable development. In addition to MINUJUSTH,
the country team will have an equally important role to
play in its future developments.
I would like to conclude my statement by paying
tribute to Ms. Sandra Honoré, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, as well as to all MINUSTAH
personnel, and by expressing our full support and
solidarity to the great people of Haiti.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

17-3216217/30

The situation concerning Haiti

S/PV.8068

I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti,
and it gives me great pleasure to welcome him.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank the President for inviting the Government
of Haiti to participate in this special meeting of the
Security Council devoted to considering the final report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/840) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
presented to us by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, whose mandate comes to a
close on 15 October in accordance with resolution 2350
(2017) of 13 April.
The report is particularly significant because the
Secretary-General, with the acute sense of reality
that we know he possesses, provides a meticulous and
coherent assessment of MINUSTAH during its 13 years
in Haiti and draws valuable lessons from it for future
peacekeeping operations. He also offers an objective
analysis of the recent developments in the country’s
political and economic situation and its immediate
and long-term challenges. He also welcomes the new
directions that the country is taking, as well as the
opportunities arising from the restoration of its political
stability. The report notes that
“Eight months after the President of Haiti,
Jovenel Moïse, assumed office, the country
continues to take steps to further consolidate its
democracy and stability”. (S/2017/840, para. 2)
The Haitian Government welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s appreciation for that progress, which all
observers have acknowledged. That progress is the
result of the firm determination of the President of the
Republic and the Government to strengthen the rule of
law and democracy, strengthen State institutions and
ensure the promotion and protection of human rights,
while at the same time implementing essential structural
reforms that will enable our national institutions to
cope with recurring crises and deal with our many and
complex development challenges.
In that regard,
rightly underscored,

as

the

Secretary-General

“The Government continues to assume greater
leadership over the development agenda, as
evidenced by the ‘Caravan of Change’ programme
and by investments designed to strengthen the social
and economic infrastructure.” (ibid., para. 23)
18/30

12/10/2017

That approach also encompasses the fight against
corruption, which the President has made a top priority
for his national programme of action.
The Haitian Government has also taken due note of
certain areas of concern raised in the report, particularly
the judicial system’s limited progress, lengthy delays in
the adoption of certain crucial legislative reforms and
persistent concerns related to human rights, especially
the issue of prolonged preventive detention and
overcrowding in prisons. The Government has given
its full assurances that it will focus on those issues
and on finding solutions to them. It is fully behind
the Secretary-General’s call for an inclusive national
dialogue aimed at seeking solutions that will enable us
to strengthen social and political cohesion, consolidate
democratic institutions and re-start efforts to achieve a
sustainable economy.
With regard to the armed forces, the Government
shares the Secretary-General’s view on the opportunity
to make their remobilization a unifying national project
that can enjoy the people’s confidence. That is the
approach we intend to take, in line with the provisions
of the Constitution on re-establishing a national army
that will be essentially focused on development.
The Haitian Government subscribes to the report’s
conclusions on the assessment of MINUSTAH. Even if
the progress it has made can be considered limited in
certain cases, the Mission has succeeded in fulfilling
its three key objectives as outlined in resolution 1542
(2004) — security and stability, support for the political
process and building the rule of law and promoting human
rights. Today Haiti’s situation is radically different from
what it was in 2004, when, according to the Security
Council, it constituted a threat to international peace
and security in the region, justifying the deployment
of a peacekeeping and stabilization mission. As the
report emphasizes, political and institutional stability
is now being strengthened. Haiti is fully capable of
ensuring security and providing a secure and stable
environment conducive to a smoothly running political
process and the revitalization of investment, the
economy and development. An end to instability and
political uncertainty, the restoration of the rule of law,
the peaceful renewal of democratic institutions and
the strengthening of the capacities of various State
institutions, including the judicial system and the
Haitian National Police, are all valuable achievements
that must be protected and consolidated.
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

Similarly, during its 13 years in Haiti, MINUSТAH
has implemented a wide range of valuable projects and
initiatives, including 1,788 quick-impact projects in
various areas, such as the rule of law, good governance,
public infrastructure, revenue-generating activities,
environmental protection, drinking-water supplies,
as well as other social and humanitarian activities.
In particular, the Secretary-General’s points to
our community violence reduction programme as
exemplary and rightly urges that it serve as a model for
future United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Of course, within this assessment, we cannot
ignore the major shadow that has been cast on our
situation by the cholera epidemic, which has brought
thousands of deaths and for which the United Nations
has finally admitted responsibility, recognizing the role
it played in triggering a disease that has caused such
terrible suffering for the Haitian people. In that regard,
the Government of Haiti would like to commend the
Secretary-General’s determination and personal
commitment to carry out what he calls a moral duty by
effectively implementing a new approach to the fight
against cholera. The United Nations
“has a moral responsibility to the victims, as well
as to support Haiti in overcoming the epidemic and
in building sound water, sanitation and health-care
systems”. (S/2017/840, para. 52)
The Government of Haiti associates itself with the
urgent appeal to Member States to ensure that the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund is finally granted the necessary resources to
fulfil all of the commitments made and implement the
two components of the plan of action against cholera
without delay. It is high time that was done.
Today, there is peace, security and political
stability in Haiti, which is reason to rejoice. However,
we are all aware that much remains to be done. The
report highlights a number of deficiencies, gaps to
be filled, and delays and challenges to be overcome.
For its part, the Haitian Government is working
hard to remedy that situation. But this is a longterm project that will require continued, persistent
action. That is why the Government of Haiti and the
Security Council have agreed to establish a mission
to consolidate the achievements of MINUSTAH in
three main areas — strengthening the rule of law, with
a particular focus on improving the justice system;
developing the Haitian National Police and promoting

S/PV. 8068

and protecting human rights. The new United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is
the expression of that new framework of cooperation
between the United Nations and Haiti, aimed at
consolidating the achievements made so far. However,
I should emphasize that MINUJUSTH will carry out
its mandate in a context that clearly no longer reflects
the traditional threats to international peace cited in
resolution 1542 (2004), which created MINUSTAH.
We therefore hope that this new reality will be taken
into account in the next Security Council resolution on
the subject and in the new agreement that will govern
MINUJUSTH’s presence in Haiti as of 16 October,
which is essentially one of technical cooperation.
Stabilization in Haiti has now been achieved. As
MINUSTAH’s mandate ends, now is the moment to hail
its contribution to consolidating civil peace, democracy
and security, establishing the rule of law and promoting
human rights in Haiti. The Government of Haiti would
like to express its gratitude to members of the Security
Council, the Secretariat and all of the entities of the
United Nations system, as well as all Member States,
especially troop-contributing countries, for their
participation and ongoing support for the Mission. We
also thank and congratulate Ms. Honoré, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
for her outstanding work and dedication to the cause
of peace.
If I might deviate from my written text, I would
like to salute the memory of Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti, and
his deputy, Mr. Da Costa, as well as the United Nations
peacekeeping soldiers who met a tragic death during
the devastating earthquake of 12 January 2010 in Haiti.
On a personal note, I met with Mr. Annabi, who came to
lecture at a conference held at an academic institution I
directed, two months before the earthquake.
The country is now turning over a new leaf. In
that context, the Government of Haiti believes that
cooperation with the United Nations system should be
expanded, revitalized and, above all, better adapted to
current realities, while focusing on the country’s true
needs, within the framework of a genuine strategy for
achieving sustainable peace that will enable Haitian
institutions to take ownership of the tools needed to
ensure peace, security and stability and consolidate
the rule of law, while resolutely addressing the

17-3216219/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

country’s economic and social modernization and
sustainable development.
As MINUJUSTH prepares to begin its mandate,
the Haitian Government strongly hopes that the new
Mission will make a lasting contribution to our efforts
to meet the challenge of sustaining peace, which goes
hand in hand with growth, sustainable development and
the eradication of poverty.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, the United States,
Uruguay and my own country, Peru.
We thank the President for organizing this debate
to discuss the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/840) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The report covers the
main events that have occurred since the publication
on 12 July of the previous report (S/2017/604) and the
progress that has been made as MINUSTAH comes
to a close. It also covers the establishment of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).

12/10/2017

The strengthening of the rule of law and
democratic institutions and the establishment of a
political culture conducive to democratic stability and
the improvement of socioeconomic conditions are key
elements for achieving greater security, stability and
prosperity in Haiti. The Group of Friends reaffirms
the primary responsibility of the national Government
for implementing its strategies for peacebuilding and
peacekeeping in order to address the interconnected
nature of Haiti’s challenges. The Group of Friends
acknowledges that, eight months after President
Jovenel Moise took office, Haiti continues to take steps
to further consolidate its democracy and stability,
and we encourage the Haitian authorities to conduct
indirect elections to form municipal, departmental and
interdepartmental councils and assemblies, as provided
for in the Constitution. The Group also notes that the
overall security situation has remained relatively stable
and has not been affected by the ongoing withdrawal of
MINUSTAH’s troops and the reduction of the United
Nations Police (UNPOL) presence.

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, and thanks her
for her detailed briefing. As MINUSTAH’s mandate
comes to an end, we would like to thank Ms. Honoré,
particularly for her role in supporting the political
process in Haiti, professionalizing the police and
maintaining a safe and stable environment.

The Group believes that strengthening the Haitian
National Police (HNP) is one of the most important
contributions that the successor Mission will make to
further consolidate the stabilization of Haiti and in that
regard welcomes the continued increase in its capacity
to ensure public order and provide security to Haitian
citizens and takes note of the objectives of its strategic
development plan for 2017-2021. We have noted the
implementation of a revised approach to mentoring and
counselling conceived as part of the Mission transition
strategy towards MINUJUSTH and observe that
UNPOL has continued to work with the HNP in order
to strengthen its capacity to handle the issue of sexual
and gender-based violence.

The Group acknowledges the work of all the
previous Special Representatives who have contributed
to the stabilization of Haiti and wishes to pay special
tribute to the former Special Representative for Haiti,
Mr. Hédi Annabi, who gave his life in the service of
peacekeeping during the earthquake of 2010. The Group
also recognizes the important role that MINUSTAH
has played in guaranteeing the stability and security
of Haiti, expresses its deep appreciation to the staff
of MINUSTAH and to all Member States that have
contributed to the Mission, and pays homage to those
who were injured or lost their lives in the performance
of their duty.

The Group of Friends underscores the importance
of national ownership and reiterates the vitality of the
commitment of the Government of Haiti to strengthen
the rule of law and continue to make progress in the
justice and security sectors. The Group of Friends
commends the efforts of the Government of Haiti to
address a number of major problems facing the country,
including by intensifying its flagship programme, the
Caravan of Change. The Group agrees with the call
of the Secretary-General for moving forward on a
joint legislative agenda and underlines the need for
MINUJUSTH to support the Government in achieving
progress in the performance of the judiciary.

20/30

17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

The Group of Friends reiterates that there can be
no true stability or sustainable development in Haiti
without strengthened democratic institutions and
credible democratic processes. In that context, the
Group emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule
of law through the strengthening of Haitian institutions
and encourages the Government of Haiti to advance
in the fields of justice and human rights, including the
empowerment of women and their full participation in
decision-making.
The Group of Friends recognizes that strengthening
national human rights institutions as well as respecting
human rights, including respect for women and
children and due process, combating crime and sexual
and gender-based violence, putting an end to impunity
and prolonged pretrial detention and providing
accountability, are essential to safeguarding the rule of
law and security in Haiti, including access to justice. In
that regard, the Group takes note of the conclusion of
the Secretary-General’s report that prolonged pretrial
detention and prison overcrowding remain a serious
human rights problem.
The Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity with
and commitment to the people and the Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and democratic
consolidation, and recognizes that Haiti continues to
face multiple development challenges that require the
implementation of structural reforms.
The Group of Friends welcomes the General
Assembly’s resolution 71/161 on the new United Nations
approach to cholera in Haiti, which aims to renew the
Organization’s efforts to eliminate cholera transmission
and care for victims of the disease. In that regard, the
Group of Friends would like to take this opportunity
to invite Member States, regional, international and
bilateral donors, financial institutions, the private
sector and other donors to provide greater voluntary
financial support and other appropriate support for
the new approach. We note that the United Nations
country team will be responsible for implementing
the new approach, with the coordination of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and welcome
the 10-year national plan for the elimination of cholera
as the basis of the new Government’s policy on the issue,
as well as the renewed engagement of the Government
with the United Nations and other international partners
to that end.

S/PV. 8068

The Group of Friends notes that although
significant progress has been made, Haiti continues to
face significant humanitarian challenges as well as a
vulnerability and particular exposure to natural hazards.
In addition, the Group affirms that progress in Haiti’s
reconstruction and social and economic development,
supported by effective and coordinated international
assistance and an increase in its institutional capacity
to benefit from that assistance, is crucial to achieving
sustainable stability, and reiterates the need for security
to be supported by sustainable development, efforts in
which the Government of Haiti will play a leadership
role with the help of the United Nations country team.
The Group of Friends welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 5 October submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2350 (2017). We believe that
MINUSTAH has succeeded in stabilizing Haiti and that
it is time to begin the transition to a new United Nations
presence, focused on strengthening Haiti’s rule-of-law
institutions, providing support and capacity-building
for the National Police and participating in human rights
monitoring and reporting, as set forth in paragraph 66
of the Secretary-General’s report.
The Group notes that MINUSTAH has continued
to implement its comprehensive withdrawal as well as
the joint MINUSTAH-country team transition plan,
with a view to ensuring a gradual transfer of tasks and
assets to MINUJUSTH, the Haitian authorities, the
country team and other partners, so that the Mission
can close on 15 October and so that the mandatory
core areas, including the good-offices function and
the commitment to the rule of law, justice reforms,
police development and human rights addressed by
MINUSTAH, will be taken up to MINUJUSTH on
16 October, while United Nations support in the areas
of governance will be implemented through the country
team, if resources permit.
The Group of Friends also welcomes the fact that
MINUJUSTH will work closely with the country team
to ensure a smoother transfer of the tasks necessary for
carrying out the reform of the rule of law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank France for convening
today’s debate and to reaffirm the Government of
Mexico’s gratitude to Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite,
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in

17-3216221/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

Haiti (MINUSTAH), and her team, for their tireless
work over the years and their proven commitment to
the Haitian people.
The winding down of MINUSTAH and the
establishment of the new United Nations Mission
in Support of Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) are
positive developments for Haiti. Mexico, as part of the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti, has witnessed the iron determination of the
Haitian Government and people to build prosperity in
their country. The United Nations should support the
Haitian Government in those efforts, in accordance
with the national priorities that Haiti itself has defined.
This new stage is a rare opportunity to test the
concepts behind United Nations coordination of peace,
humanitarian assistance and development on the
ground. We expect the United Nations country team
in Haiti to have impeccable coordination, consistency,
efficiency and transparency. Haiti represents a unique
theatre in which the United Nations system can
show that it is possible to make the transition from
conflict management and humanitarian assistance to
coordinating a truly sustainable peace conducive to
the development and fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable
Development Goals.
The United Nations has a moral and economic debt
to the Haitian people. We must find an appropriate
response to the problems caused by the terrible cholera
epidemic so that we can care for the families of the
victims and those affected by the epidemic. General
Assembly resolution 71/161, on the new United
Nations approach to cholera in Haiti, recognizes the
Organization’s responsibility to the Haitian people.
In that context, I am pleased to inform the Security
Council that Mexico will allocate 100 per cent of its
unencumbered balance from MINUSTAH to the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. I urge the international community to increase
its support for the fulfilment of the mandate of the new
Mission, bearing in mind that its success will depend to
a large extent on continued support from those who have
been part of MINUSTAH and from new contributors.
The two years of Mexico’s participation in
MINUSTAH enabled my country to support the efforts
of the United Nations in Haiti and the Mexican armed
forces to gain experience and build their capacities
for peace operations in a new phase of Mexico’s
22/30

12/10/2017

relationship with the United Nations. My country will
continue to participate in MINUJUSTH, as we believe
that it responds to the important issue of adapting
peacekeeping operations’ mandates to the political and
security context on the ground. If we are to strengthen
institutions in Haiti, particularly as regards developing
the operational capacities of its National Police, as well
as making progress in enhancing the rule of law and the
protection of human rights, full international support
for MINUJUSTH will continue to be essential, and
Mexico therefore wishes to contribute police personnel
to the Mission.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
efforts of the thousands of men and women who gave
their all to MINUSTAH, some of them losing their
lives. I reiterate Mexico’s belief in the importance of
making sustainable peace the guiding thread for the
effectiveness and coherence that we expect from the
work of the United Nations in building and maintaining
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Argentina associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Peru on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, and would like to make the
following brief additional comments.
We thank Special Representative Sandra Honoré
for her presentation of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to resolution 2350 (2017) (S/2017/840).
As the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) draws to a close, we
are grateful for her commitment and professionalism
at its helm and for her work to ensure the stability of
Haiti. We also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Régis, and want to
highlight the joint efforts of the Haitian authorities
and MINUSTAH to build lasting stability and a better
future for the country.
Argentina pays tribute to the personnel of the various
countries that have deployed troops to MINUSTAH
during the 13 years of its existence — men and women,
civilians, military and police — as their contribution
to the fulfilment of the Mission’s mandate. We wish
to highlight the invaluable efforts of the nearly 13,000
Argentine army troops deployed since 2004, including
an army battalion, an air-force unit and a mobile field
hospital, which recently left the country, as well as
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

the 900 officers of the Argentine National Police who
participated in the Mission. We especially remember all
who gave their lives to the service of peacekeeping and
security in Haiti, including four from Argentina.
We agree with the assessment of the Mission’s
legacy in the Secretary-General’s report, highlighting
its significant achievements despite the enormous
difficulties it has faced, which included one earthquake
and six devastating hurricanes. After 13 years and
despite many persistent challenges, MINUSTAH leaves
behind a relatively stable country with a democratically
elected President, three functioning branches of
Government and a window of opportunity for making
progress towards sustainable development. During
that time, among other things, the Mission supported
the efforts of the Haitian Government to strengthen its
rule-of-law institutions — the police and the justice
system in particular — and to implement the various
human rights mechanisms. It also helped 6 million
Haitians through violence-reduction programmes and
7 million through quick-impact projects, in line with
priorities identified by the Haitian authorities.
Argentina supports the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy on cases of sexual abuse and
exploitation in Haiti, as well as the Organization’s new
approach to cholera in that country, with the hope that
the United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will contribute to implementing
and monitoring those policies, in close collaboration
with the Haitian authorities. In that regard, my
country recently signed the Voluntary Compact on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse and has
made a voluntary contribution to the United Nations
Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund.
Argentina notes the continuing progress that has
been made in closing MINUSTAH and establishing
MINUJUSTH, in particular as it relates to the future
implementation of the new Mission’s important
mandate to assist in consolidating the country’s rule-oflaw institutions, strengthening and professionalizing
the Haitian National Police (HNP) and promoting and
protecting human rights. In that regard, and in addition
to continuing our bilateral cooperation with Haiti, we
will continue to contribute trained police personnel
to the new Mission, in accordance with our ability to
do so and the specific requirements set forth in the
new police advisory and oversight programme, in
the framework of the Secretary-General’s transition
plan, as well as the Haitian National Police’s 2017-

S/PV. 8068

2021 strategic development plan. In that connection,
notwithstanding any sovereign decisions that may
be taken by Haiti on issues related to its security and
defence, we are confident that the planned development
of the armed forces in the country will not interfere
with the effective implementation of the HNP’s
strategic development plan or involve funds originally
earmarked for development.
In line with the Secretary-General’s latest report,
we welcome Haiti’s involvement with international
human rights mechanisms and encourage State
institutions, human rights institutions and civil
society to cooperate extensively with the human rights
component of MINUJUSTH.
I would like to conclude by once again reiterating
Argentina’s commitment to the Haitian people and
acknowledging the work of Ms. Sandra Honoré and all
the military, police and civil personnel of MINUSTAH.
We also honour the memory of those who gave their
lives in fulfilling their noble mission to help Haiti
make progress on its path to sustainable peace
and development.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank France and you personally, Madam Ambassador,
for having convened this meeting, which marks the
official closure of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) after 13 long years.
We have mixed feelings today, because now we can
say that it is possible to have United Nations missions
that conclude their mandates and move into new phases,
as in this case, where MINUSTAH is transitioning
to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in order to strengthen Haitian
institutions and be able to respond adequately to the
challenges that all democracies face, as Ambassador
Régis just noted in his statement.
I would echo the words of appreciation expressed
here in connection with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré. She
has brought honour to her post and to her gender
through her efforts for the Mission, her leadership
and her commitment. Above all I would stress, as the
Ambassador just stated, the work she has done in recent
years, which has promoted coordinated efforts with
the national authorities, the Government and Haitian
society, including in difficult periods of political
instability, in which the commitment of all sectors and
national ownership were key. I thank Ms. Honoré and

17-3216223/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

her team and all her predecessors, some of whom paid
with their lives in that effort.
Colombia endorses the statement delivered by
the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti. We are convinced of the value of
the role played by MINUSTAH in guaranteeing and
ensuring stability and security in the country up to a
point of no return, whose logical consequence was to
develop and transition towards a quest for justice and
the strengthening of the rule of law. As President Juan
Manuel Santos said in this very Chamber when we held
the presidency of the Council in 2012, this is a natural
transition, a transition from a peacekeeping operation
to a genuine operation focused on development.
The actions undertaken to ensure that the Haitian
people have a strengthened and professional national
police force have the full support of Latin America, as
has been made clear here. The Colombian Government
will continue to contribute our men and women
police officers and to provide training in our country,
focusing in particular on the training of Haitian women
police officers, who will undoubtedly play a key role
in the coexistence and security of their communities,
within the framework of the strategic development plan
established by the Haitian National Police.
If we all pool our efforts to preserve the progress
made and overcome the tremendous challenges and
obstacles that remain, particularly in the area of
economic and social development, with the ongoing
support of the country team, we are sure that the
brave people of Haiti, with whom Colombia has stood
since their independence, will be able to reach their
maximum potential.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. I thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/840) and Ms. Honoré for her briefing
and her work as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and the European Free Trade
24/30

12/10/2017

Association country of Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
On 13 April, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2350 (2017), which extended for the last
time the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) by a further six months.
The resolution contains the legal framework for the
transition to the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), whose role will be to
strengthen the police and the rule of law, and to defend
and promote human rights.
MINUSTAH played a key role in the field of
citizen security in Haiti, including by ensuring security
during particularly difficult times, such as during the
recent elections.
The long period of institutional instability that has
characterized the political process in Haiti finally seems
to be behind us, at least with regard to the electoral
process. This has made possible the transparent and
credible election of a President who, despite a very
low turnout, obtained a broad majority of votes. The
National Assembly was also renewed, and the new
Government’s programme has been given a vote of
confidence. Despite major difficulties and weaknesses
in the system, we congratulate the country on its return
to constitutional order based on the will of voters. This
was urgently needed in order for Haiti to be able to
address the numerous political, economic, social and
environmental challenges facing the country.
However, the return to constitutional order is not
enough to guarantee the democratic stability and the
development that the country needs. Bold reforms of
the Constitution, the electoral system and the judicial
system are needed to restore the confidence of the
Haitian people in their democracy and in the political
system in its entirety. It is particularly important to
ensure genuine access to equitable justice for all. Signs
of a willingness to reform have been shown, but they
must be pursued, and the historic opportunity offered
by this period of stability and legitimacy must not
be lost.
As in recent years, the efforts of all parties to
guarantee the stability and security of Haitian citizens
continue to be crucial elements for the process of
democratic consolidation. A thorough and consensual
17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

reform of the electoral system is necessary to avoid fresh
crises and to regain the confidence of the population.
The European Union remains a faithful partner of
the Republic of Haiti and remains determined to support
the country in this sensitive phase, in consultation with
other partners, including as part of this indispensable
reform process. We would also like to recognize the
presence here of the Permanent Representative of Haiti.
Resolution 2350 (2017) closes out MINUSTAH
on 15 October and replaces it with a reduced mission,
MINUJUSTH, which focuses on supporting the Haitian
police. The European Union believes that the security
situation in Haiti remains very fragile. We therefore
deem it essential to complete the strengthening and
professionalizing of the Haitian National Police. During
the transition period, it will be key to ensure continuity
by preparing for it thoroughly. The security and wellbeing of citizens and the stability of the country are
at stake.
In conclusion, allow me to express once again the
gratitude of the European Union for the contribution
made by MINUSTAH in terms of security and
consolidating democracy and the rule of law in
Haiti. We welcome the preparations for a transition,
which must be designed carefully so as to ensure the
continuity of our joint efforts. The series of events
that will culminate in making the Haitian State fully
responsible for the security of its citizens and civilian
protection will need to be clearly defined, planned and
implemented, with particular attention paid to respect
for human rights in the security sphere and access to
impartial justice for all. It is essential that the Haitian
police and judicial system be adequately prepared,
including in these key areas, for the time when they
will have to assume all the tasks currently undertaken
by the United Nations Mission.
The European Union, together with the United
Nations and the international community, will
support the Haitian authorities in consolidating their
commitment and their efforts aimed at ensuring a
better future of peace, democracy and well-being for all
the Haitian people. It is also important that the United
Nations apply to future missions best practices and
lessons learned from the missions that, as MINUSTAH
is doing, are now drawing down.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Venezuela.

S/PV. 8068

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin
by congratulating the delegation of France on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month. I also
congratulate the delegation of Ethiopia for its leadership
last month. Likewise, we welcome the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honoré, whose years
of work at the helm of that extraordinary mission
were guided by firm commitment and dedication to
strengthen the stability and the development of the
Haitian people.
Haiti occupies a special place in the minds of
Venezuelans. Both nations are united by deep historical,
political and cultural ties that stem from the struggle for
independence. Haiti and the Haitian revolution served
as an inspiration to our nineteenth-century patriots and
to the Liberator, Simón Bolivar, who, 200 years ago,
was supported by President Alexandre Pétion and the
Haitians in the heat of our war of independence. Our
country is fully committed to the social development
of a free and sovereign Haiti. Since the beginning
of our Bolivarian revolution, with the presidency of
Commander Hugo Chávez Frías, our cooperation with
Haiti has expanded and deepened in an extraordinary
way, and that cooperation is built on the principles of
solidarity and social justice. A deep sense of solidarity
motivates Venezuela’s aid to Haiti. We recognize the
remarkable efforts made by Haiti in recent years to
promote peace, stability and development. Despite
the progress achieved, serious challenges remain
as a result of prolonged crises and numerous natural
disasters, which have had a negative impact on the
political, economic and social life of that brotherly
country and require the sustained cooperation of the
international community.
The colonial Powers made Haiti pay dearly for its
freedom and independence. Throughout the nineteenth
century, the Haitian people were forced to pay exorbitant
sums to the former colonial Power. Moreover, the entire
twentieth century was marked by military interventions
and brutal dictatorships. Without a doubt, all of that
has negatively affected the stability of the country. It is
necessary to remember those events as the root causes
of the instability throughout the history of that brotherly
country in order to understand why the Haitian people
have sunk into a deep crisis of political instability and
a dramatic situation of poverty and social injustice.

17-3216225/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

The fight against poverty and for social justice in
Haiti, the poorest country in our America, still requires
solidarity and direct support for stable assistance
mechanisms, in addition to cooperation, in order to
address the challenges and structural problems in that
country. For example, according to data from the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
between 2014 and 2016, more than 5 million Haitians,
equivalent to 47 per cent of the population, were
undernourished. It is for that reason that cooperation
must be focused on the social-development agenda,
within the framework of the Sustainable Development
Goals, in particular those dealing with the eradication
of poverty and the reduction of inequalities, with
emphasis on the consequences of the disasters caused
by climate change in the Caribbean.
In recent years, Haiti has experienced the effects of
natural disasters, which have had a devastating effect
on its population and its economic and institutional
structure. The aftermath of the January 2010 earthquake
and the passage of Hurricane Matthew in 2016 continue
to be felt and have aggravated even further the overall
situation in the country, particularly in the humanitarian
sector. In that regard, and as we have done in similar
disasters in the recent past, Venezuela heeded the
request of the Haitian authorities to provide immediate
and ongoing assistance to help overcome the difficulties.
That is the essence of solidarity and cooperation among
brotherly nations. For that reason, we will continue
to provide support, through the PetroCaribe Energy
Cooperation Agreement and the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America, for all initiatives and
projects prioritized by the Haitian authorities in the
areas of social development, humanitarian assistance,
construction, rehabilitation and the maintenance of
infrastructure and education, which have had a positive
impact on the people. It is worth mentioning that since
the beginning of the Bolivarian Revolution, Venezuela’s
cooperation with Haiti has been aimed at empowering the
Haitian State through the strengthening of institutions,
as demonstrated by the fact that all funds given by
Venezuela for cooperation to Haiti are administered
by the authorities of that Caribbean nation. Likewise,
since 2005, within the framework of the PetroCaribe
Energy Cooperation Agreement, our country continues
to provide 100 per cent of the country’s fuel-supply
needs and 20 per cent of the country’s electricity
production, as well as various initiatives and projects
prioritized by the Haitian Government, which, in recent

26/30

12/10/2017

years, have had a positive impact on the reconstruction
efforts in Port-au-Prince and on the economic and
social development of that sister nation.
We remain concerned about the impact of the
outbreak and spread of cholera in Haiti since 2010.
We commend the courage of the United Nations in
recognizing its responsibility for the initial spread
of the virus and in demonstrating its commitment
to providing direct assistance to the victims of the
epidemic. That is why it is necessary to strengthen
stable mechanisms of cooperation so as to be able to put
together a timely and effective response, with a view
to strengthening Haiti’s national plan for eliminating
cholera by 2022, and in order to contribute to a
transition from emergency humanitarian interventions
to development programmes in the country. In that
regard, we strongly support the new approach of the
United Nations to combat the spread of cholera. In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 71/161,
Venezuela made a financial contribution to the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. That contribution was intended to support the
Secretary-General’s initiative to continue to address
both immediate and long-term needs in dealing with
the cholera epidemic in that sister Caribbean nation.
Now that the work of MINUSTAH has concluded,
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti,
which will succeed it with new functions, will be focused
on supporting the Haitian National Police, promoting
the rule of law and strengthening the promotion and
protection of human rights. We believe that the United
Nations should continue to support the Haitian people
and work in close coordination with the Haitian
Government on the basis of its national priorities and
in strict adherence to the principles of the sovereignty,
independence and self-determination of that country.
In the process of strengthening institutions, we should
support the possibility of creating a professional armed
force with the mandate to safeguard the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
that nation.
Venezuela recognizes and wants to pay tribute to
the performance of MINUSTAH and its entire staff,
civilian and military, as well as the troops contributed
by various Latin American nations, in particular Brazil,
Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, Peru and Guatemala. In
that regard, Venezuela supports the initiative of the
Government of President Jovenel Moise to promote the

17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

process of national dialogue and constitutional reform,
as well as his initiative to address a number of important
issues facing the country through the establishment
of several presidential commissions composed of
representatives of various national sectors. We consider
it vital to continue with the strategic development plan
for Haitian National Police for the period 2017-2021.
In conclusion, our country will continue to be a
part of regional efforts within the framework of the
Bolivarian Alternative for the Peoples of Our America
and the PetroCaribe Energy Cooperation Agreement,
and within the framework of United Nations cooperation
with the Haitian people, with a view to helping that
country overcome the economic and social problems
that have for decades affected the brotherly Haitian
people in the land of Pétion. Today more than ever,
such cooperation is necessary in order to contribute to
political stability and strengthened institutions in that
Caribbean nation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile): Chile associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of Peru
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. I would
also like to make the following remarks in my national
capacity.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré,
for her briefing, and we take this opportunity to
reiterate Chile’s gratitude for her tireless efforts to
achieve a stable, democratic and prosperous Haiti. Her
commitment to the Haitian people and to the values of
the Organization have been exemplary. We also welcome
the presence today of the Permanent Representative of
Haiti, Ambassador Denis Régis.
Chile began its support to Haiti in early March
2004, with 340 troops, the largest contingent that Chile
had ever deployed to a United Nations peacekeeping
mission. Over the past 13 years, the total Chilean
presence in Haiti has amounted to more than 12,000
men and women, including troops and police officers.
As President Bachelet said when she greeted the last of
our troops on their return to Santiago, all the women and
men who were part of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) throughout the 13
years of its operation have been ambassadors for their
countries, working together with our Haitian brothers

S/PV. 8068

on behalf of their countries and their people. Chile
and the international community will never forget the
sacrifices of those who served this Mission on behalf of
peace and security.
While the military presence of the United Nations
in Haiti has come to an end, the principles that led us
there are as valid as ever. Chile, through its support
and cooperation, together with that of other actors,
will continue to build on the achievements of the past
13 years, particularly in the area of cooperation for
development and in accordance with Haitian priorities.
Indeed, it is not that the United Nations is leaving
Haiti, but rather that its presence is changing in order
to launch a new phase, with new challenges to the
consolidation of peace and development in Haiti. We
hope that MINUSTAH’s successor, the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
will reap the fruits of MINUSTAH in supporting the
Haitian people and make a concrete contribution to
enabling the rule of law and stability to reign.
The United Nations country team will also play
a key role in supporting Haiti in its economic and
social development and strengthening its institutions
and its respect for human rights. In that regard, Chile
welcomes the appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran
as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and
assures her of our support for her important work in
designing a comprehensive strategy for implementing
the Organization’s new approach to combating cholera
in Haiti and supporting Haitian efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals.
We should also mention the importance of
continuing to strengthen the Haitian National Police,
which has a key role to play in consolidating Haiti’s
stability. In that regard, we note the campaign launched
by the National Police, with the support of MINUSTAH
and in cooperation with the Ministry of Women’s Affairs
and Rights, to strengthen the recruitment of women, and
we urge the authorities to continue to support women’s
equal participation in the security sector, as well as in
the relevant decision-making bodies.
In conclusion, we reiterate Chile’s commitment
to the country and the people of Haiti and reaffirm
the importance of continuing to support that sisterly
nation in its responsibility for its own development.
We also acknowledge the work of all the previous
Special Representatives. We thank Brazil, which
has contributed military personnel during all those

17-3216227/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

years, as well as all the military, police and civilian
personnel of MINUSTAH, and we pay tribute to the
memory of those who gave their lives in fulfilling this
noble mission.

12/10/2017

Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil) (spoke in
French): I thank France for convening today’s debate. I
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her detailed briefing
and reiterate my Government’s appreciation for her
leadership. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Haiti, Mr. Denis Régis, for his statement.

Brazil will continue to support a peacekeeping
doctrine that truly contributes to the sustaining peace.
We are in favour of integrated mandate approaches
that promote stabilization, dialogue, reconciliation,
development and human rights. We were pleased to
see in the report of the Secretary-General that the
planning for the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
is well advanced, in line with the parameters set out
in resolution 2350 (2017). We commend the smooth
transition of tasks from MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH,
the Haitian authorities, the country team and other
partners, which required close consultations between the
Mission’s management team and the local authorities.

I would like to begin by acknowledging the
efforts of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to support that country’s
political process over the past 13 years. MINUSTAH
has demonstrated the potential that innovative
approaches offer and that could serve as a model for
future peacekeeping operations elsewhere in the world.
Its positive efforts include its coordination between
civilian and military personnel on the ground, its
community outreach strategies aimed at building trust,
and the remarkable role played by women in all areas of
the stabilization process.

We would like to emphasize that among
MINUJUSTH’s many tasks, developing the police
force is very important. Although the capacities of the
Haitian National Police have improved, that relatively
young institution is still facing considerable challenges.
We commend the efforts to fully implement its strategic
development plan, particularly the goal of increasing
the ratio of the number of police officers to the
population, as well as the percentage of women in the
police force, and we support the Secretary-General’s
call to international partners to increase their support
for the Government of Haiti’s efforts in this area.

We would also like to emphasize the importance
of tools such as the community-violence reduction
programme and the quick-impact projects that have
played an important role in supporting the primary
objective of stabilization and have been crucial in
strengthening the rule of law in Haiti. As highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/840), the
Mission has implemented 1,788 such quick-impact
projects covering areas as wide-ranging as human
rights, the rule of law, good governance, the protection
of the environment and the supply of drinking water.

We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment
that further measures are needed to protect and
promote women’s rights. For example, the role of the
Victims’ Rights Advocate should be transferred from
MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH in order to address
the problem of sexual exploitation and abuse. Sexual
violence in peacekeeping operations is a major concern
for the United Nations. MINUSTAH has always
been very rigorous in dealing with the rare cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse, none of which were
committed by Brazilian peacekeepers. Brazil reaffirms
its commitment to supporting all initiatives aimed at
combating such crimes.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.

The past 13 years have been a unique and
unprecedented experience for Brazil, which has
served as commander of MINUSTAH’s troops and
deployed more than 37,000 soldiers to help the Haitian
authorities ensure a stable and secure environment
for its inhabitants and rebuild the country following
various natural disasters. Brazil’s commitment
throughout the Mission’s mandate was affirmed once
again by our troops’ decision to temporarily reactivate
their operations to support Haitians when Hurricane
Irma passed through.

28/30

We thank the Special Envoy for Haiti for her
strategy in the fight against cholera. We take note of the
reduction in the number of cases of the disease during
the past year. We call on States to redouble their efforts
to secure the funds necessary for the implementation of
national and international plans aimed at stopping the
spread of the disease.
The work of the United Nations in Haiti is not
finished. We agree with the Secretary-General’s

17-32162

12/10/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

observation that the success of MINUJUSTH will
depend, in large part, on its ability to rapidly establish
a relationship of partnership, mutual understanding and
cooperation with the Government.
The end of MINUSTAH and the transition to
MINUJUSTH represent a step forward in building
a culture of peace, but, as stated by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, the security and development of
Haiti can be ensured only by the national authorities
and the Haitians themselves.
We are paying close attention to recent political
developments and call for moderation from all parties
at such an important juncture for the country.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Brazil’s long-term
commitment to and solidarity with Haiti, as well as our
confidence in the determination and perseverance of
the Haitian people to succeed in their quest for stability,
democracy and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jamaica.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I express sincere appreciation
to you, Madam, for having convened this timely public
debate on the situation in Haiti. I also express my
gratitude to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her comprehensive
briefing, as well as for her invaluable contributions
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) throughout her tenure.
Both Haiti and the United Nations have arrived at
a pivotal juncture of transition from MINUSTAH to
its successor, the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). Jamaica has long
recognized the significant role of peacekeeping in
the maintenance of international peace and security
and appreciates the role that MINUSTAH has played
in supporting Haiti since its inception. We recall in
particular the vital relief response that MINUSTAH
provided in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake. We
recognize that the Mission’s remit over the years has
been wide-ranging, encompassing the critical social,
political and developmental needs of Haiti.
As the Secretary-General reported this month,
MINUSTAH has recorded many clear accomplishments,
such as the implementation of more than 1,700 quickimpact projects, the progress made by the community
violence reduction programme in mostly vulnerable

S/PV. 8068

and urban areas, the implementation of human rights
mechanisms, including the Universal Periodic Review,
and the establishment of committees to oversee
the implementation of specific treaties, such as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. What is of
paramount importance at this time, however, is that
concerted efforts be made to expand access to justice
and that the institutions of the rule of law, including the
Haitian national police, be strengthened.
While the range of achievements recorded by
MINUSTAH is laudable, now is the time to turn our
attention to the consolidation of the gains registered by
the Mission over its more than 13 years of operation.
We therefore support the international community’s
commitment to sustaining its active engagement
through effective partnership with the Government
and the people of Haiti as they proceed on their path
towards stabilization and democratic consolidation.
I reiterate Jamaica’s strong support for the urgent
action that needs to be taken by the international
community in order to resolve the health and
humanitarian situation caused by the introduction and
presence of cholera in Haiti. We recognize that there
is no simple solution to this unfortunate situation
and appreciate the steps being taken by the United
Nations and other partners to address the effects of
cholera in Haiti. Jamaica looks forward to the effective
implementation of the three-part strategy planned by
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, which
includes mobilizing funds to address the significant
financing deficit that retards the full implementation of
the overall response to the critical situation of cholera in
Haiti. In that respect, Jamaica was pleased to facilitate,
along with Mexico, General Assembly resolution 71/161
B, adopted in July, which called on Member States to
voluntarily redirect any unencumbered balances from
MINUSTAH to the United Nations Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund.
Mindful of ensuring that residual stabilization
needs are afforded priority, we urge that attention be
placed on addressing issues surrounding justice reform
and the promotion of human rights, including the
protection and promotion of women’s rights. We note
that areas of concern include the prolonged periods of
pre-trial detention and prison overcrowding.
As MINUSTAH withdraws, Jamaica recognizes
the importance of ensuring that the transition period
be executed in close cooperation with the United

17-3216229/30

S/PV.8068

The situation concerning Haiti

Nations country team. The aim is to enable a smooth,
careful and progressive transfer of assets and duties to
MINUJUSTH, the Haitian authorities and other key
stakeholders, in alignment with the on-the-ground needs
of Haiti. Jamaica concurs with the observation of the
Secretary-General that ultimately, the security, political

30/30

12/10/2017

and development agenda of Haiti can be shaped only by
the national authorities and the Haitian population.
I reaffirm the Government of Jamaica’s long-term
commitment to Haiti and its people as they proceed on
the path towards sustainable development.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

17-32162
