United Nations

S/PV.4136

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4136th Meeting
Tuesday, 9 May 2000, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Yingfan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Duval
Mr. Doutriaux
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Keita
Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi
Mr. Hamer
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Yel’chenko
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Briefing by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina

00-42325 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Briefing by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance with
the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Petritsch to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting
in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 4 May 2000 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting a letter
dated 3 May 2000 from the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, enclosing his report, document S/2000/376.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I call on Mr. Petritsch.
Mr. Petritsch: It is with great pleasure that I am here
once again to address the Council and to present the
sixteenth report on developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This report — the second since I was
endorsed as the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the Security Council on 3 August 1999 —
covers a six-month period from last November. As in

2

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
November, I think it best not to dwell in any detail on the
substance of the report. Members can refer to the report
itself for this.
Broadly speaking, progress in Dayton
implementation is as slow and painful as ever, but it is
working. I believe that it is more important than ever that
the international community stick to the task. It is vital
that our successes be consolidated.
I will give an assessment of the more significant
recent successes and failures of Dayton implementation a
little later on. But I would like, first of all, to give an
indication of how I see our work developing in the future
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My office, as members are perhaps aware, is now
deep in preparation for the Brussels Peace Implementation
Council (PIC) on 23 May. This will be the first full PIC
since Madrid in December 1998. The PIC Steering Board
met in Lisbon at the end of last week. There was broad
consensus on the strategy I outlined to them at that time.
I would like to hear what members have to say about this
strategy, too.
In the past, Peace Implementation Council meetings
have tended to take something of a scatter-shot approach
to the problems of Bosnia and Herzegovina. There have
been so many problems and the international community
has striven to tackle all of them head on. This year’s PIC,
however, will be different. It has to be, because the
international community no longer has the resources for
the approach adopted in the past. It is therefore
imperative that diminishing resources be concentrated to
maximum effect.
Time is running out for international engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Donor fatigue has set in. The
$5.1 billion, four-year reconstruction aid package pledged
after Dayton is now all spoken for. This spring, the
Stabilization Force has reduced its troop numbers by
nearly a third. That is why I focus on just three key areas
of peace implementation. If we succeed in these areas, I
firmly believe, reform in others will follow.
There are three areas: first, economic reform;
secondly, the acceleration of the return of refugees and
displaced persons; and thirdly, the consolidation of
institutions, especially those at the state level.
The economy first. As I am sure members know,
Bosnia is still far too dependent on international aid,

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4136th meeting
9 May 2000

which in turn is steadily diminishing. If Bosnia is to have
any hope of a secure future, the economy must become
self-sustaining — and fast. This is still a poor country and,
without growth, it is likely to become poorer still. Last year
in the Republika Srpska — still by far the poorer entity of
the two — the average monthly salary still languished at
$100 a month.

Many of the public-sector banks may be on the verge of
bankruptcy due to their loans to loss-making
publicly-owned enterprises. The numerous private banks
are too small to provide the working capital necessary to
kick-start enterprise. Overhauling the banking sector
should encourage the participation of foreign banks and
thus the necessary injection of capital.

Jobs and a secure economic future are increasingly
important issues for the ordinary citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is of far more concern to them than the
diet of ethnic separatism that is still being fed to them by
the nationalist parties. That is why economic aspiration
must be nurtured and cherished. Economic reform is one of
the most potent weapons in our armoury in the fight to
reverse the evil effects of the 1992-1995 war.

Another key to modernizing the Bosnian economy is
privatization. The process is already well under way,
although the first stage — the opening up of the books of
the big state-sector companies to independent audit prior
to evaluation — has met with fierce political resistance.
Perhaps this was inevitable, since the state companies are
yet another source of funding for the established
nationalistic parties. Such arrangements must not be
tolerated. We have to start protecting the economic sphere
from this kind of old-style intrusion.

What is needed is investment, both domestic and
foreign. The trouble is that the system governing the
country’s economy is to a large extent the same as it was
in the days of communism, despite international pressure.
Investors, unsurprisingly, are discouraged. Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s industry is still geared to the old command
economy model. It largely comprises giant, state-run
concerns — mines, steelworks and the like. They are
completely out of step with the market requirements of the
new millennium.
The Government’s urgent task is to create an enabling
environment so that investors can invest without going
through a maze of bureaucracy. Most of all, we need to
encourage small and medium-sized enterprises, to which the
workforce in that country, most economic observers agree,
is well-suited.
But the present system simply stifles enterprise.
Perhaps the worst example of communist-era bureaucracy
are the so-called “payment bureaux”, through which all
commercial and public bank transfers have to pass and
which levy a substantial sum along the way. The payment
bureaux are totally non-transparent and have a stifling
effect on business of all sizes. They are also a cash cow for
the nationalist parties, which exploit the system
remorselessly. Consequently, we have agreed that the
payment bureaux will be abolished in the course of this
year.
The lack of a reliable banking system is another
important obstacle to private investment, closely connected
to the payment bureaux system. There are currently over 50
banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but not one of them can
play the intermediary role necessary in a market economy.

I wish to turn now to the second of my strategic
priorities: the acceleration of the refugee return process.
Before I go any further, I should like to take this
opportunity to extend a warm thank you to the United
Nations and its agencies for their continued sterling work
in this sector, in particular through the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).
The contribution of these agencies should not be
underestimated. In this reporting period, I have had a
chance to get out into the field more and see for myself
the often unsung work that the United Nations agencies
are doing there. I can assure the Council that I am
thoroughly impressed. In the course of these trips to the
field I have had a chance to speak to many refugees and
displaced persons and I am more convinced than ever that
return remains the number one concern among the public
at large.
The issue is highly emotive. Four and a half years
after the war, some 800,000 people are still internally
displaced throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. A further
300,000 are still refugees abroad. Facilitating their return
is the number one means of normalizing life in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Last fall I took two important measures designed to
accelerate the return process.
First, I imposed a package of reforms to the
legislation governing property return in the two entities.
This removes the bureaucratic hurdles to property return,

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
which were being mercilessly exploited by politicians on all
sides whose agenda was to obstruct the implementation of
Dayton.
Secondly, I dismissed 22 public officials from across
the country who had a proven track record of
obstructionism, particularly of annex 7 of Dayton, the annex
governing refugee return.
Now that spring is here and the refugee return season
is properly under way, these two measures are beginning to
bear fruit. So far this year there have been more than twice
as many returns as there were in the same period in 1999.
All the indications are that this welcome trend will
continue. Granted, there is still a long way to go. Granted
also that obstruction of the returns process continues in
some areas.
But in general we have every reason to be encouraged.
We are making headway in a task that was once thought
impossible by naysayers. The ultimate goal, refugee return,
which has become self-sustaining, is no longer merely gold
at the end of the rainbow; it has become an achievable
reality.
I reiterate: these successes would not have been
possible without the tremendous support and expertise of
the UNHCR, nor without the security provided in many,
many instances by the United Nations International Police
Task Force (IPTF).
I will turn now to the third of my strategic priorities:
the consolidation of the common institutions.

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
ago, on 5 May, the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board met with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jacques Paul Klein of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
in Lisbon to discuss the crucial role of JSAP for the
reform of this essential pillar of civil society.
Far too often in the past, inter-ethnic cooperation at
the State level has been blocked by the nationalist
bickering that, as we know all too well, has become a
byword for Balkan political discourse.
Last November, as you may recall, the Members of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina made a
declaration before the Security Council, pledging
themselves, inter alia, to the establishment of a State
Border Service. The arguments for such an agency are
very clear. The citizens of any modern state have the
right to expect their borders to be protected. When
borders are as porous as those of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have been in the past, the state treasury loses millions,
because porous borders are an open invitation to graft and
corruption in the sphere of customs and excise.
The State Border Service was seen at the time as an
acid test of the Members of the Presidency’s commitment
to the concept of a functioning state — a concept to
which they have all too often paid mere lip service.
Sad to say, the Presidency failed the test. The
bickering began the moment they got home. In the end,
I was forced to exercise my powers and impose the State
Border Service. Not even a solemn declaration before the
Security Council, it seems, could hold them to it.

This is really about state-building. If Bosnia and
Herzegovina is ever to join the European family of
nations — a family in which I firmly believe Bosnia truly
belongs — then it must become a cohesive State, with
central State structures that exercise real power. This
includes a fully independent judiciary, without which
long-term economic development and effective protection
of individual liberties will be impossible. We are actively
promoting the rule of law at the State and entity levels. For
instance, we currently have a major public affairs campaign
to promote respect for property rights as part of our efforts
to accelerate returns.

Such disregard for the international norms and
standards of State leadership was shown also with regard
to other commitments the Presidency has entered into
with the Security Council in the New York Declaration.
The much-fought-over draft election law experienced the
same fate as the State Border Service law. The Presidency
did pass the draft election law to the Parliament as
promised. But when it came to the vote, the Presidency
Members were not prepared to influence their respective
party members. They just stood by and watched as the
draft law was voted down.

I would like to commend the efforts of the United
Nations Judicial System Assessment Programme (JSAP),
which has worked tirelessly at its task of monitoring and
assessing the existing judicial system and has participated
in the developments of reforms to date. Just a few days

The New York Declaration committed the
Presidency to also resolve another central institutional
crisis, although one of a different kind, concerning the
State Council of Ministers. Their efforts at resolving this
crisis have been only slightly more encouraging.

4

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Since 1997, the chairmanship of the Council of
Ministers, which equates to the post of prime minister, has
rotated. This compromise was probably necessary in order
to get the institution formally working in the first place.
Last year, however, the Constitutional Court ruled that the
rotational and ethnically defined arrangement was
unconstitutional and would have to be changed. The
deadline for agreement on a new arrangement came and
went. The result? This common institution, central to the
workings of democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, fell
into abeyance in February this year.
Almost unbelievably, the issue is still far from being
satisfactorily resolved. The new law on the Council of
Ministers, based on a proposal by the Presidency, follows
the old patterns of ethnic parity and rotation. It remains to
be seen whether the law will stand the test of the
Constitutional Court.
The Members of the Presidency have given us yet
another unedifying display of the kind of politics that they
practice best. The ethnic agenda has once again taken
precedence over what is best for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. For example, the primary principle guiding
reorganization of the ministries was the ease with which
they could be divided up among the three ethnicities.
All this merely confirms that the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are still far from ready to take the
responsibility that they should for their country.
Last November, I outlined to the Council my concept
of “ownership”. In the affair of the Council of Ministers, I
have deliberately kept out of the fray, stressing the strong
desirability of a solution arrived at purely by domestic
consensus. The results are, I freely admit, a little depressing
at first sight, although I believe that the policy of insisting
on ownership is still the right one. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is, and must always remain, their country.
But we will continue to press — by whatever means,
including my powers to impose, if necessary — for the
strengthening of the common institutions and an extension
of their role in the life of the country. They are too
important for the future to be left entirely to their own
devices.
There are, I am pleased to say, signs that my central
message, the establishment of the concept of ownership, is
starting to take root in the hearts and minds of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The result of the municipal

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
elections, held across the country on 8 April, was one
important sign.
Given the understandable scepticism expressed by
some parts of the international community before the
elections, two important points need to be made. First, the
elections were peaceful and routine. They were run
skilfully by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, while both the IPTF and the Stabilization
Force played important roles in providing security at the
polls. Secondly, the political landscape in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is now more pluralistic than it was before.
I am much encouraged by this development: political
pluralism is a sure sign that democracy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is maturing. It is also a sign that the voters
are beginning to think for themselves, and to think about
how politicians who seek to represent them will represent
their interests. This does not mean the narrow, sectarian
interests of the old ethnic ways of thinking, but the
everyday interests of the ordinary public — issues like
housing, employment, education and infrastructure.
The most significant shift of power was in the
Bosniac areas, where the Social Democratic Party (SDP)
made substantial ground at the expense of the Party of
Democratic Action (SDA). This is important, because
parties like the SDP — a modern, relatively multi-ethnic
party — hold the keys to the country’s future.
Only with leadership from modern, civic-orientated,
tolerant political parties can Bosnia and Herzegovina hope
to integrate with Europe. Based on the results of the
municipal elections, the SDP is now the strongest party in
the Federation. We expect it to do even better in future
elections.
It is true that in the Bosnian Croat areas the Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ) still dominates, but it is worth
noting that voter turnout in those areas was down to
around 40 per cent — far lower than in previous
elections, and also much lower than the national average.
This indicates that Bosnian Croat voters are growing
weary of the HDZ, but have not yet found an attractive
alternative. The HDZ, already shaken by the defeat of its
parent party in Croatia earlier this year, seems to have
taken this message to heart. It is now in the midst of a
major restructuring, which we hope will lead to more
cooperative officials at the municipal and cantonal levels
in the future.

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
In the Republika Srpska, the exclusion of the Serbian
Radical Party, the SRS, was completely successful. Its
threats of physical violence and voter boycott proved to be
a bluff. Even the arrest by the Stabilization Force of
Momcilo Krajisnik, the one-time Serb member of the
Presidency, only a few days before the elections, had little
impact on voter behaviour.
Interestingly enough, although the Serbian Democratic
Party (SDS) did well, it did not pick up as many SRS votes
as it might have expected. In 1997, the SDS and SRS
together won 44 per cent of the vote. Yet in this election,
the SDS only won 37 per cent.
So pluralism is also growing in the Republika Srpska.
The rise of a new party — the Party of Democratic
Progress (PDP), led by a respected economist from Banja
Luka, Mladen Ivanic — is significant, although we will
have to see the PDP in action before blowing a trumpet.

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
Dayton is working in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
remedy we are administering — our adherence to the
principle of multi-ethnicity and the reversal of wartime
ethnic cleansing, together with our insistence on real
political and economic reform — is the right one.
The remedy can work elsewhere too — in Kosovo,
for instance. The international community’s patience has
been sorely tried in that province, but Bernard Kouchner
should not be discouraged. Success in establishing peace,
as we have learned the hard way in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, takes a great deal of time.
Believe me when I say that in Bosnia and
Herzegovina there is light at the end of the tunnel.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Petritsch for his comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.

Overall, I would say that while the nationalist parties
are still strong, their grip is weakening. Our reform of the
media, the professionalization of the police, our insistence
on economic reform — all of these things are steadily
eroding their sources of power.
Let us not lose sight of what this means. The defeat of
the nationalist agenda in the political discourse of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will have ramifications not just for that
country, but for the entire Balkan region.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we should always remember,
is in the heart of the Balkans. If — by reforming the
economy, by accelerating refugee return and by
strengthening the common institutions — we can help the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina live peacefully with one
other again, we can achieve that noble goal elsewhere in
the Balkans, too.
I sense that the tide has already turned against the
forces of nationalism in the Balkans. The defeat of the
HDZ in Croatia earlier this year was convincing proof.
Slobodan Milosević is increasingly isolated in Belgrade.
The tide is turning in Bosnia and Herzegovina, too,
although less dramatically. It must continue to be pushed.
It must continue to be pushed because the price of
failure is too high. If we fail in our project in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, then ethnically pure mini-States are likely to
dominate South-East Europe in the twenty-first century. It
is imperative that we persevere.

6

Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): The thorough,
engaging and very sobering presentation which has just
been made by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch forces me to set
aside my prepared speech. I believe that this is a very
special presentation that Mr. Petritsch has made. His
thoughts are very poignant and full of implications, not
only for Bosnia and Herzegovina but also for the whole
region.
On 22 March we had an open briefing on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, at which of course we did not have the
privilege of listening to Mr. Petritsch, but we had a fairly
good exchange on the current issues regarding that
country. We very much appreciate Mr. Petritsch’s
briefing. I will touch on a few points from his speech.
But we also appreciate the detailed report, the printed
report which Mr. Petritsch presented to the SecretaryGeneral for circulation to us on the implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The appearance before the Security Council last
November of the joint Presidency and the reaffirmation in
the New York Declaration of the commitment to the
Dayton Peace Accord were significant steps. But we are
dismayed to hear from the High Representative that the
implementation of the Declaration has been disappointing.
The chief reason appears to be a lack of sufficient
political will and motivation. As Mr. Petritsch has said,
they are far from ready for the implementation of that
Declaration. We are disappointed to hear that, but I
believe that, in Bosnia, that is the reality.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
We are very pleased that at one point the High
Representative imposed the State Border Service on the
region so as to establish law and order.
The pace of the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Accord needs to be accelerated, and we hope that our
discussion today will produce some guidelines in that
direction. Much of the success of the efforts will depend
upon the seriousness of the authorities, as we have just
mentioned. Compliance and active participation by all will
determine, to a large extent, how much political influence
we — the Security Council, and the international
community in general — will be able to exert, and how
keen our involvement will be in the reconstruction efforts
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Here, we take full account of
Mr. Petritsch’s mention of the donor fatigue setting in with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also agree with him
that it is imperative that diminishing resources be
concentrated to maximum effect. I think that that is a very
important point, and we are very pleased to hear about the
three areas that he has identified: economic reform, the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons and the
consolidation of the institutions. I believe that this
prioritization of focused action is very important, and I
would like to support him fully in that regard.
We have noted with keenness the initiatives that the
High Representative is taking to boost economic activities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. His office has already taken
laudable initiatives in drafting laws on restitution, various
privatization schemes, the investigation and prosecution of
corruption cases and privatization and reform in the banking
sector, which are worth noting and should be appreciated.
We are also pleased to note that continued improvements
have been seen in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
implementation of the decisions of the Human Rights
Chamber and the recommendations of the Ombudsperson.
We urge the entities, which are still being slow in
implementing recent decisions of the human rights
institutions, to redouble their efforts for compliance. We
also note from the report that efforts to develop the
capacity of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, to address human rights issues have
continued.
We are happy to note that, as a result of the municipal
elections on 8 April, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the
High Representative has said, the political landscape is
perceived to have become much more pluralistic, and we
welcome that.

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
On the subject of refugees and internally displaced
persons, we are very happy that decisive action has been
taken by the High Representative and that the issue of
refugees and internally displaced persons and of their
return has become what he calls an achievable reality. We
are very happy to learn about the collaboration of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations International Police
Task Force in that regard. We convey our appreciation to
them for that.
The point made by the High Representative
regarding the Government’s task of creating an enabling
environment, so that investors can invest without going
through a maze of bureaucracy, is very important and
should receive our full support.
I should like to make one final comment, regarding
institution-building. We believe that this is a very
important aspect to be borne in mind. As the High
Representative said, Bosnia and Herzegovina must
become a cohesive State with central State structures that
exercise real power. We believe that the independence of
the judiciary and the setting up of institutions to ensure
the rule of law are very important in that regard.
Finally, I should again like to express our deep
appreciation to the High Representative for all the
initiatives that he has taken and for his very significant
statement and report with regard to the implementation of
the Dayton Accord.
Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I thank the High
Representative, Mr. Petritsch, for his comprehensive
briefing. We commend him for his energetic leadership in
helping Bosnia and Herzegovina emerge from the
miseries of its recent past.
The High Representative’s report makes it clear that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is far from functioning as a
unitary State, and it notes explicitly that the ruling
political parties maintain opposing visions of the State in
which they are supposedly united. What is particularly
disturbing is that this unproductive attitude prevails
unabated at the level of the collective Presidency. Indeed,
the biggest problem facing the country now appears to be
the continued failure of its leadership to take collective
responsibility rather than behave like unreformed
ethnically based warlords protecting their own, and their
communities’, narrow, entrenched interests.

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The same lack of commitment on the part of the
country’s political leaders is manifest in the economic field.
In fact, economic and political vested interests converge in
such a way that political dividing lines are maintained in
order to protect economic interests. This absence of real
leadership is unproductive and stands in the way of the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement in
accordance with the aspirations of the vast majority of
citizens of all ethnic groups. Economic reform is an urgent
matter if efficient use is to be made of the assistance
provided by the international community and lasting
economic stagnation is to be avoided.
The third main area for Dayton implementation is the
return of refugees and displaced persons. Their return is
essential to sustainable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and remains a litmus test for the peace process. I should
like to reiterate my Government’s view that the question of
the return of internally displaced persons and refugees, and
assistance to those who are willing to return, should be
given the highest priority by all authorities at all levels. In
this context, the Netherlands wholeheartedly supports the
approach to the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons taken by the High Representative.
In summary, I would like to assure Mr. Petritsch that
we subscribe fully to his three strategic priorities of
economic reform, acceleration of returns and institutional
strengthening. We agree that economic reform is the most
potent weapon for changing the economic status quo, which
currently consolidates the entrenched interests of the
leaders. Finally, we are encouraged that the impoverished
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina are realizing more and
more that their leaders are keeping their own personal
interests closer to heart than the interests of their people.
Indeed, the election results can be seen as an indication
that, at last, the political landscape may be changing.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): The
French delegation thanks the High Representative,
Mr. Petritsch, for his briefing this morning.

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
the essence. International assistance cannot continue at
current levels. Other matters demand attention and
resources. Local actors must be encouraged to shoulder
their responsibilities. This is no easy matter. The High
Representative has had to resort once again to his broad
powers to impose important legislation on which local
leaders were unable to agree. There continues to be a
dilemma between the need for the High Representative to
impose reforms and his wish to make sure that the
authorities understand the responsibilities they must
shoulder. That is another reason why we should
demonstrate our support for the High Representative and
encourage him to act decisively, maintaining the
necessary dialogue, to make progress in key areas he has
identified.
With the High Representative’s permission, I should
like to offer a suggestion with respect to the preparation
of future reports to the Secretary-General. It might be a
good idea if he were to devote a portion of his reports to
detailed analysis of a specific problem or theme.
Our priorities echo those that the High
Representative has just outlined: to weaken the grip of the
nationalist parties, to strengthen and improve the
functioning of institutions, to create the context necessary
for the economy to take off, and to promote the return of
refugees and displaced persons.
With regard to refugees, the next few years will
probably provide the last chance for meaningful action to
promote return. Later on, refugee and displaced families
will have been away from the homes in which they lived
before the war for more than 10 years. Children will have
grown up there. Return will have become more difficult.
We must take advantage of the new situation, relating to
such factors as the political changes in Croatia, to resolve
the problem in a regional framework.

Once again, we regret that States not members of the
Council that are directly involved in the search for a
settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in particular the
presidency of the European Union, were unable to speak at
today’s meeting.

The recent municipal elections increased the
pluralism of Bosnian political life, and we hope that this
trend will be strengthened in the next elections. Media
reform and action in the area of the financing of political
parties should also contribute to this needed movement
towards greater democracy. In our view, such movement
would be encouraged also by the adoption of a permanent
election law.

Mr. Petritsch can count on French and European
Union support for his work to achieve what he has called
ownership of the future of the country by local leaders and
by the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Time is of

In the economic sphere, much remains to be done to
overcome local authorities’ resistance to reform. The
upcoming ministerial meeting of the Peace
Implementation Council ought to accord particular

8

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
importance to economic priorities and reform, including the
political effect of such measures. Greater importance should
be accorded to the creation of a common economic space
by eliminating all barriers and harmonizing the legislation
of the two entities. Privatization must resume; there have
been scanty results here, and the High Representative must
play a catalyzing role. The privatization of public services
is especially important. This economic reform must be
aimed, inter alia, at promoting foreign investment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. All of this must be accompanied by a
strengthened fight against corruption and organized crime.
The strengthening of central structures has a certain
impact on such desirable developments. A true State, a
State based on the rule of law, must be established. Projects
carried out in close cooperation between the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office of the
High Representative are aimed at evaluating the judicial
structure and establishing a border service.
The European Union and its member States, which are
by far the largest contributors in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
can play a decisive role. The European perspective involves
conditions that must be respected. The “road map” and the
agreements on stabilization and association are useful tools
in that regard. In our view, that European perspective is a
powerful lever for achieving the changes that are needed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me put three questions to Mr. Petritsch. In his
view, would it be possible quickly to make a difference in
some of the important areas that he has mentioned?
Secondly, does Mr. Petritsch believe that the elections to be
held in the autumn will gradually enable a new generation
of politicians to come to power, encouraged by the results
of the recent municipal elections? And finally, in the longer
term, after those elections, what does the High
Representative consider can be done to strengthen
cohesiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Tunisia takes note of the reports of the
Secretary-General and of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We thank them for their efforts and for the
excellent quality of the documents before us. The reports
refer to significant progress in the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH). Despite obstructionist
manoeuvring and delays in the complete implementation of
the mandate, the situation has continued slowly but surely
to evolve.

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
Let me make some comments on the two reports. It
deserves to be noted with satisfaction that municipal
elections under the rules of the Provisional Election
Commission took place in April without major incident.
The notable success of multi-ethnic parties shows, in our
view, that ethnic parity is gaining ground.
Tunisia welcomes the steps taken by UNMIBH in
police restructuring, including through the creation of the
Law Enforcement Personnel Registry and of the
inter-entity Ministerial Consultative Meeting on Police
Matters, and through the integration of specialized police
forces. All these important reforms will change the ethnic
composition of the entire police force and will help
strengthen integration. Such steps are particularly crucial
because they will help strengthen national identity, which
is the only way to mobilize parties around a common
goal.
My country is particularly interested in the way in
which the judicial system is developing. The international
community must support UNMIBH efforts to ensure the
success of the judicial reform that is under way. Here,
impartial and trustworthy justice will be of particular
importance in consolidating a State based on the rule of
law and in rejecting a culture of impunity.
We note that despite encouraging progress the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains precarious.
Questions of the return of refugees and displaced persons
and of the lack of security are reasons for concern,
requiring firm commitment on the part of the international
community. In that connection, we note the activities of
United Nations bodies in various spheres.
I welcome the initiative to set up a Bosnia and
Herzegovina police contingent for a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. The psychological importance of
this contribution, with its powerful symbolic potential,
cannot fail to benefit the image of a Bosnia and
Herzegovina that is multi-ethnic and prosperous, and by
extension that of the entire Balkan region.
Clearly, the commitment of the international
community, the international financial institutions and the
donors is a priority to which due attention should be
given. There is no doubt that lasting peace can be
established only if it has an equally lasting economic and
social basis.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Petritsch for his

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
informative briefing and report, which give a generally
objective evaluation of the current situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We agree with his idea that the Bosnian State
must finally stand on its own two feet, reject the mentality
of dependence and learn to live not merely from donors’
assistance, but rather on their own internal resources.
We feel that the main task in the Bosnian process
today is to help make Bosnia and Herzegovina a unified,
sustainable State consisting of two equal entities on the
basis of full and consistent implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. We see no alternative to this for the
foreseeable future. If we make a realistic assessment of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we cannot fail to
recognize that, despite the series of achievements we have
heard of today, serious problems remain, primarily in the
creation of state structures and economic reform.
We must acknowledge that no major breakthroughs in
the implementation of the Dayton Accords have been made
to date. The situation is far from ideal in the
implementation of the New York Declaration of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the
creation of a permanent secretariat for that body, the
adoption of a law on elections, the introduction of a single
national passport and the creation of a unified border
service, all of which Mr. Petritsch addressed in great detail
today. Despite the positive effects of the elections in
Croatia, tension remains in the interaction between the
Croatian and Bosnian entities of the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Although moderate forces were successful in the
municipal elections held in April in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the nationalist parties continue to dominate
the political life of the country, which remains divided
along ethnic lines.
We cannot fail to be concerned at the persistence of
serious problems with regard to the return of refugees,
primarily representatives of ethnic minorities, because of
the strong resistance of local authorities. We hope that the
forecasts for the return of refugees that we heard today
from Mr. Petritsch will be realized in the near future.
Still urgent is the task of reviving a normally
functioning economy. The economy continues to be held
hostage to rampant corruption and an all-pervasive
bureaucracy.
On the whole, despite what we feel to be positive
efforts by the High Representative, the Bosnian power

10

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
structures are still unable to assume primary responsibility
for the fate of their country. As a result, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to be governed by command
administrative methods and, to a significant extent,
remains a kind of protectorate of the international
community, kept afloat by the international presence there
and economic assistance from abroad.
In this connection, we feel that the efforts of the
international community — and primarily those of the
Bosnians themselves — must be mobilized if the Bosnian
settlement is to be made sustainable and irreversible, on
the basis of scrupulous and comprehensive
implementation of the Dayton Accords, by strengthening
the multi-ethnic statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina
through the development of democratic structures and the
observance of the rights of all peoples of the country and
through solid mutual reconciliation and the cohesive work
of all Bosnian parties and securing the appropriate degree
of cooperation between both entities in all areas and at all
levels, particularly in order to progress towards finding
solutions to the outstanding issues.
For its part, Russia, as one of the active participants
in the Bosnian settlement, intends to continue to make an
active contribution to advancing the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir, and
High Representative Petritsch for coming to brief us this
morning. I have to say that, like Ambassador Chowdhury
of Bangladesh, I found his contribution thoughtful,
insightful and the basis for what I hope will be a
stimulating continuing consideration of the complexities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina by this Council.
Mr. Petritsch and his team have clearly been
working hard over the last six months. The United
Kingdom particularly supports his efforts to focus the
agenda on economic reform and to ensure that the
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina take real
responsibility for the future of their country. That is the
only sustainable way forward. The international
community — as other representatives have pointed
out — cannot forever take the difficult decisions in
Bosnia.
That is why we share Mr. Petritsch’s concern at the
inability of the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
take their political responsibilities. To paraphrase him, an
ethnic agenda cannot be allowed to take precedence over

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
what is best for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
lack of implementation of the New York Declaration is,
frankly, depressing.
As Mr. Petritsch makes clear, there is some way to go
before we can be confident of long-term stability in Bosnia.
Institutional reform must be accompanied by economic
restructuring and progress on human rights. I would like to
address briefly some of the areas where problems remain
and ask for Mr. Petritsch’s views on the next steps.
First, Mr. Petritsch has expressed frustration at the
Parliamentary Assembly’s failure to pass the election law.
We share his concerns. This is an example of a broader
problem - a tendency by the collective Bosnian leadership
to duck the really difficult problems, as we also saw over
the border service. We are concerned that Serb
obstructionism in the Constitutional Court and on the
constituent peoples decision is restricting our options. I
should be grateful for the High Representative’s views on
how this issue can be tackled.
Secondly, and as Mr. Petritsch has said, we face
serious challenges on the economic front. Although the
economy has registered stronger than expected rates of
growth, serious underlying weaknesses remain. We must
make clear to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina that
they face a serious economic downturn if structural reform
is not implemented. Again, this will require difficult and
sometimes courageous decisions by the Bosnian leadership.
We can only hope they will face up to them.
Thirdly, we must make progress in dealing with the
inheritance of war. The United Kingdom welcomes the
arrest of Momcilo Krajisnik. This sends a clear message
that indictees of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 should be
under no illusions. They will be held to account. The
United Kingdom also welcomes the increased pace of
return of minority refugees and internally displaced persons
this year. We hope that the new Government in Croatia will
have a positive effect on regional refugee return.
We also commend the Office of the High
Representative and the Independent Media Commission on
their comprehensive media reform programme, particularly
the successful action against the illegal broadcasts by
Erotel. But we remain concerned by the continued
intimidation of independent media by established Bosnian
political parties.

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
To return to what has become a constant theme of
my — and, indeed, Mr. Petritsch’s — interventions,
senior Bosnian political leaders should take concrete steps
to fulfil their responsibilities in this regard.
Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Let me at
the outset welcome the High Representative,
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, to the Council table and thank
him for his important briefing to this open meeting of the
Council, although it could have been in an open debate.
As was emphasized by the Ambassador of
Bangladesh, this is a very important report and contains
elements that are applicable to more than just Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I am aware that the High Representative has
just come from Ottawa, where he had very detailed and
important discussions with our Minister for Foreign
Affairs and our Minister for International Cooperation, as
well as two Canadian parliamentary committees. In view
of yesterday’s very heavy Canadian agenda and the
detailed talks that took place in Ottawa, I am not going to
reiterate today to him the Canadian position in detail. I
should simply like to assure him of the full support of
Canada in his efforts to bring about lasting peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I would also like to add that his focus on three
priorities — economic reform, return of refugees and
institutional consolidation, as presented today in his
briefing — seem to Canada to be the proper course of
action. We believe that these are the major challenges
before the international community, and that this is where
our resources must be directed.
Let me conclude my very brief statement by asking
Mr. Petritsch a question. In his briefing he described a
rather paradoxical political situation. On the one hand, the
municipal elections in April showed that the moderate
parties have increased their share of the electorate,
particularly in the Federation, and that the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina seem to be getting away from
ultra-nationalism. On the other hand, however, the
political leaders do not seem to be adopting the more
progressive, future-oriented and flexible approach taken
by the electorate.
I would like to know what the High Representative
and the international community can do to alleviate this
paradoxical situation and take advantage of the positive
trends that are emerging among the electorate, which is
moving away from ethnic issues and is focusing on issues

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
of reconciliation. How can those positive trends be used to
relaunch the political process at the State level?
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I also
want to thank High Representative Petritsch for his briefing
to us today and to welcome him back here. We applaud the
fact that he has been aggressive and effective in addressing
some of Dayton’s most difficult issues.
We note in particular Bosnia’s recent municipal
elections, which were conducted peacefully despite
inflammatory rhetoric from certain quarters. The results
reflect some important positive trends. Bosnia is finally
beginning to transcend the excessive influence of ethnicity
in its political life, and we hope that the Ambassador is
correct that the everyday interests of ordinary people are
starting to come to the fore.
We commend High Representative Petritsch for his
strong leadership and for the close and effective
relationship he has forged with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We encourage
him to continue to draw on the full authority of his office
to ensure that the parties live up to their international
commitments.
In that regard, I would note that for all of our success
in working out the New York Declaration last November,
implementation remains critical. Some of the important
commitments have been carried out, but more needs to be
done. It will take the active efforts of Ambassador
Petritsch, Special Representative Klein and OSCE
representative Robert Barry to ensure that these important
commitments are respected.
As noted by Ambassador Petritsch in his comments to
us today, the international community must maintain its
focused attention on priority areas such as economic
reform, refugee return and the consolidation of central State
institutions. The Security Council itself must maintain its
commitment to the peace process, including continuing our
strong support for the efforts of the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) to carry out its
difficult and dangerous mandate.
With the help and support of High Representative
Petritsch, Special Representative Klein has made important
progress in strengthening Bosnia’s police institutions. We
welcome that, but we remain concerned about the security
situation as the international community continues its more
aggressive approach.

12

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
We applaud High Representative Petritsch’s efforts
to push the parties on economic reform. This is essential.
Progress on this front is the best way to support
responsible reformist leaders who have focused on peace
and prosperity rather than on rekindling old hatreds.
We note also the progress that has been made in
reducing defence expenditures. The positive electoral
results in Croatia are accelerating this welcome
development, which will help strengthen Bosnia’s fiscal
health and advance key common State institutions.
I want to draw special attention to the conclusion of
Ambassador Petritsch’s report to us today. He suggested
that the tide has turned against the forces of nationalism
in the Balkans, and that if we can assist the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to live peacefully with one
another again, we can achieve that goal elsewhere in the
Balkans. That is a crucial point. Our aim is, and must
continue to be, regional stability and peace. We must send
a clear message to all, inside and outside Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who would undermine this effort — the
extreme nationalists, the indicted war criminals, the
promoters of ethnic politics, the underground elements —
that the Security Council and the international community
will not be diverted and that we will not tolerate
continued efforts to undermine the Dayton Agreement
and, more broadly, lasting peace.
I thank Ambassador Petritsch for reminding us that
the price of failure is too high.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation extends a
warm welcome to Ambassador Wolfgang Petritsch, the
High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We thank him for
his latest report and additional briefing to the Council. We
continue to support and fully appreciate his determined
efforts to ensure the full implementation of the Peace
Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There has indeed been progress in the peace
implementation process, although it continues to be at a
slow pace. We agree with Mr. Petritsch’s assertion that
the Dayton implementation process is working in spite of
the slow pace.
We congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
successful holding of its second municipal elections on 8
April without significant incident or disruption. We are
gratified to note the relatively high voter turnout,
particularly in Republika Srpska, despite calls by the Serb

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Radicals party for a boycott of the elections. This is not an
insignificant development and is a telling blow to the
extremists. This trend should be further encouraged so that
the extremists can be further marginalized, if not
completely isolated.
The writing on the wall is clear to the so-called
nationalist groups. The people are increasingly abandoning
the politics of narrow sectarianism for those of moderation.
We agree that this maturing of the political process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina may have wide-ranging
implications for the entire Balkan region, in particular
Kosovo.
Clearly much more remains to be done before peace
and stability will endure in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
success of the peace process depends as much on the
continued strong support of the international community as
on the commitments of the Bosnian leadership and people.
The continued cooperation of the people at every level is
crucial for the full implementation of the Peace Agreement
and the realization of the goal of a unified multi-ethnic
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is in this context that we support the strategic
concept of ownership as laid out by the High
Representative. However, we continue to be concerned at
the obstructionist policies and activities of certain extremist
groups and individuals who are determined to undermine
efforts to fully implement the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Strong and specific measures may be necessary to counter
such obstructionist activities.
A number of major challenges remain to be overcome.
In addition to the strengthening and consolidation of
common State institutions, the return of refugees and
displaced persons — in particular the return of
minorities — reconciliation among various ethnic groups
and the overall promotion and protection of human rights,
as well as economic reform, are among the main
outstanding problems that have to be urgently and
comprehensively addressed to facilitate the establishment of
viable statehood for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
All of these require the continuing active involvement
of the international community and the constructive support
and cooperation of the leadership and people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Ultimately, of course, the main responsibility
for the achievement of peace and national reconciliation lies
with the Bosnian leaders and the people themselves. We are
of the view that the strategy being pursued is the correct
one. The measures being taken in respect of the three areas

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
outlined by the High Representative this morning with
respect to economic reform, accelerated refugee return
and the consolidation of institutions are commendable and
should be sustained. Clearly, a fully functioning modern
economy is imperative for a viable Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The same is true in respect to the
consolidation of its institutions.
The international community accords high priority to
the return of refugees and displaced persons in all parts
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The safe return, particularly
of minorities, is one of the important ingredients for
lasting peace in that country. We note that minority
returns took place in much greater numbers in 1999,
compared to previous years. But the rate of these returns
is still below expectations. We note the problems of
administrative integration following return, and we hope
that the implementation of the action plan of the
reconstruction and return task force and the property law
implementation plan, together with the improvements in
other administrative matters, will address these issues,
thereby encouraging more returns.
The New York Declaration, adopted by the Bosnian
Presidency last November, was a landmark document that
provides a road map for further progress in the peace
implementation process. We note the High
Representative’s continuing disappointment regarding the
implementation of the Declaration. We regret the fact that
despite the recognized importance of the State Border
Service, the law for this Service was not passed by the
Parliament and had to be imposed by the High
Representative. We strongly urge that the other measures
embodied in the New York Declaration be implemented
fully and without delay.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the special
importance my delegation attaches to the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is a crucial and integral
part of the overall reconciliation process in this country.
We note the close cooperation of the Stabilization Force
and the High Representative with the Tribunal and the
increase in the number of recent arrests of indicted war
criminals by the Stabilization Force. We are encouraged
by the continuing efforts to apprehend other indictees who
are still at large. We welcome the arrest of Momcilo
Krajisnik and hope that the arrests of other indictees will
follow soon. We encourage the Office of the High
Representative to continue to work closely with the
Tribunal and to assist it in carrying out its mandate fully,

13

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
with the sustained strong support of the international
community.
Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): We thank Ambassador
Petritsch for his very comprehensive briefing and the
submission of the report covering the activities of the High
Representative and the developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the last six months.
We appreciate the activities of the High Representative
and his Office. We have taken note of a number of positive
steps that have been achieved during the latest six months
with the assistance of the Office of the High Representative
in almost all areas of implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.
We are satisfied with the successful holding of the
second municipal elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
April, reported facts regarding the increasing use of the
convertible mark and growth of foreign reserves, progress
in the implementation of the ownership concept, the
increase in the number of minority returns, promotion of
the comprehensive judiciary reform and the establishment
of judicial training.
My delegation commends the High Representative and
his Office on the creation of the Brcko District of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which was officially proclaimed on 8
March 2000, and the appointment of its interim
government, as well as the completion of the formation of
the tri-ethnic Brcko District Police Service.
At the same time, it is obvious that the progress made
by the entities in establishing their own State has been very
slow and that the acts of obstruction persist. It is truly
disappointing that the adoption of important legislation by
the Parliament, or the elimination of persistent obstruction
by entities officials of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, often requires decisive actions by the High
Representative, as was the case in the imposition in January
of a very important draft law on the State Border Service.
It is with regret that we learned from the report that
some of the specific commitments made by the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the New York Declaration of
last November are still to be fulfilled. Specifically, these
relate to the establishment of a permanent Secretariat of the
Presidency, the adoption of the draft Permanent Election
Law and the creation of a single national passport.
Despite the existing problems with implementation of
the civilian aspects of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement,

14

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
in our view the overall current situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina seems to be more promising than
discouraging. Slowly but hopefully, the country, with the
assistance of the international community, is moving
forward from its recent tragic past towards a better future.
Activities of the High Representative and his Office
continue to play a vital role in international efforts aimed
at restoring peace and stability in this part of the Balkans.
Therefore, as a member of the Peace Implementation
Council and a member of the Security Council, Ukraine
will continue its support for the High Representative’s
activities.
Finally, I would like to put a couple of questions to
Mr. Petritsch on the basis of the information contained in
his report.
The first question relates to the implementation of
property laws. The registration of property claims is
largely complete in both entities. At the same time,
according to paragraph 71 of the report most claimants
have still not received decisions confirming their property
rights, because of the lack of political will and proper
funding. Could Mr. Petritsch elaborate more on the
reasons for such delays? How is the Office of the High
Representative going to proceed in this situation with a
view to enforcing the property laws?
My second question relates to what is being
undertaken by the Office of the High Representative to
eliminate discrimination against national minorities and
returnees with regard to their social and economic rights,
as set out in paragraph 82 of the report, and in particular
with regard to the issuance of their identity cards, which
give access to basic social services such as health care.
And, what are his views on the prospects for the
establishment of the unified armed forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina?
Ms. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We would like
welcome the High Representative, Mr. Petritsch, to our
midst, and we also thank him for his briefing. The
excellent work that the High Representative and his
colleagues are doing in Bosnia and Herzegovina on behalf
of the international community deserves our support. We
believe that the Dayton/Paris Accords remain the viable
mechanism for bringing peace and stability to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4136th meeting
9 May 2000

We note with appreciation that, as reported by the
High Representative, in November 1999 the Parliamentary
Assembly adopted two essential laws: the Law on Asylum
and Immigration and the Law on Refugees and Displaced
Persons. In addition, we also observe with satisfaction the
introduction into the legislative procedure of the Draft
Permanent Rules of Procedure for Parliament, as well as
the adoption by Parliament, on 13 April 2000, of the Law
on the Council of Ministers.

the High Representative and the international community
in their quest for a comprehensive peace.

In our view, the second municipal elections in Bosnia
were among the positive developments that could not have
taken place without the firm guidance and support of the
Office of the High Representative and other major players
involved in the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement.

Once again, we thank the High Representative for
his very useful briefing, and Namibia wishes him well as
he labours to assist the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to realize their dreams.

We also regard the official proclamation of the Statute
of the Brcko District as an exemplary achievement. The
appointment of the interim government and District
Assembly stand out as one of the practical building blocks
for a future multi-ethnic and multi-religious Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Indeed, the leaders in that country should set
aside their political and ethnic differences and embrace the
strength that they have in diversity so as to harmonize the
wishes and aspirations of their people.
Against the backdrop of these positive developments,
my delegation expresses its concern, in line with that of the
High Representative, with respect to the little tangible
progress on privatization programmes and the lack of
political will from the leadership, especially the legislators
in the upper House of Parliament, to get things done. We
also register our concern about the application and practice
of human rights and humanitarian law in the country. On
balance, my delegation shares the frustration of
Mr. Petritsch with the slow pace at which these issues are
being considered by the leadership in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In this context, we hope that the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes and regions will
provide the necessary momentum for the leaders of both
entities to implement property laws throughout the country.
We also hope that the implementation of the Stability Pact
will help to speed up economic recovery and, as a result,
create employment opportunities for the people.
Notwithstanding the problems involved in the
fulfilment of the Dayton Peace Accords, we cannot fail to
recognize the fact that the authorities in both entities have
no meaningful alternative to cooperating with the Office of

In conclusion, my delegation acknowledges the
contribution of the international community, major
international humanitarian institutions, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, United Nations
agencies, the European Union and others to the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like to
join other delegations in thanking Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch
for the introduction of his very detailed report. My
delegation would like to make the following comments on
the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina, under
consideration today.
Despite certain difficulties in their implementation,
the Dayton/Paris Accords have established a sense of
moral responsibility, a certain balance and a political
framework guaranteeing stability and a real chance for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this regard, the collective
Presidency is required to ensure the full implementation
of the Accords, showing real political will at the domestic
level while seeking complementary solutions at the
regional level.
My delegation welcomes the positive developments
in the restructuring and modification of the mono-ethnic
nature of the police force, in the creation of a stable
judicial system and in the consolidation of a State based
on the rule of law, all of which are essential for a truly
democratic society. Real progress has been made in
consolidating peace, freedom of circulation and the
rebuilding of infrastructures.
However, despite the important contribution of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) to the strengthening of national identity and
the mobilization of the population around a common
endeavour, we note that the initiatives are being
obstructed, and the support of the Security Council for
UNMIBH is absolutely essential to overcome such
resistance and to change the will of the forces opposing
change. The best guarantee for lasting progress and
stability in the country remains economic development.
My delegation therefore requests the Bosnian authorities

15

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4136th meeting
9 May 2000

to work at bringing about economic and structural reform
and cooperate more closely with the international financial
institutions, in order to speed up the process of
incorporating the country into the Euro-Atlantic structures.

encouraged to see in Mr. Petritsch’s report that there has
been considerable progress in the establishment of an
independent and impartial judiciary. We must also stress
the great effort being made in the war on corruption.

The activities of the United Nations institutions — the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization — must
focus on programmes to strengthen capacities and training.
Many tasks remain, requiring the cooperation of all the
groups concerned. We therefore believe that it is necessary
to strengthen programmes for the return of refugees and to
combat violence against women and children.

We note that a considerable part of the report is
devoted to economic matters. To be sure, economic
reforms of various kinds are crucial to ensure that Bosnia
and Herzegovina can be a State that is self-sustaining and
hence less dependent on outside assistance.

In conclusion, I should like to express the support of
my delegation for the priorities identified by Mr. Petritsch.
Ms. Moglia (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
should like to join other delegations in thanking
Mr. Petritsch for his detailed written report, as well as for
the very important information that he has just presented to
us in this Chamber.
While there can be no doubt that, since the signature
of the Dayton Agreement, progress has been made in a
number of areas, it is also undeniable that such progress has
largely been due to the constant pressure exerted by the
international community to overcome obstructionist
activities and the lack of political will on the part of those
who, for ethnic reasons, continue to oppose the existence of
a single, multi-ethnic State, thereby sacrificing the efficient
functioning of the institutions. In this context, we, like other
delegations, believe that it is disappointing that the New
York Declaration has not yet been fully implemented, as
can be seen, for example, with regard to the question of the
single passport, and that in other cases, such as that of the
law on the State Border Service, it has been necessary to
resort to strong measures in order to ensure implementation.
Among the events to which Mr. Petritsch referred in
his report, we cannot fail to mention the 8 April municipal
elections. The participation of 66 per cent of the electorate
was an important phenomenon, as was the even higher
participation in the Republika Srpska in spite of the call by
radical Serbs for an election boycott. In our view, whatever
the actual results of the elections, the election of municipal
officials is a valuable way to familiarize the population with
the functioning of democratic institutions.
With respect to the rule of law and judicial reform,
matters to which Argentina attaches high priority, we were

16

We are pleased that throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina a greater number of members of minorities
returned in 1999 than in 1998. But the conduct of some
officials — who for ethnic reasons or to further their own
interests thwarted the right of refugees and internally
displaced persons to return to their homes — was
unacceptable. Here, we would be interested to know
whether, despite the difficulties that persist for those who
wish to return to Croatia, there has been progress in
relations between the two countries since the new
Government took power in Croatia.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins in
welcoming the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We wish to thank him for his very
enlightening briefing. We also found his report to the
Secretary-General extremely useful and informative.
While we appreciate that there have been several
positive developments, it is clear that much remains to be
done. In his statement to the Council last November the
High Representative focused, inter alia, on the issues of
property, the development of election law and common
institutions, and their implications for the promotion of
the national interests of a sovereign State. Today he drew
our attention to the areas of economic reform, the
acceleration of the return of refugees and displaced
persons, and the consolidation of institutions.
When looked at as a whole, Mr. Petritsch’s two
presentations and his written reports indicate that the
Office of the High Representative and other organizations
responsible for the implementation of the Dayton accords
are faced with monumental challenges, particularly as
they relate to entrenching a multi-ethnic society with
multi-ethnic institutions. My delegation fully recognizes
that success is contingent upon the cooperation of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their leaders, as
well as on the continued commitment and support of the
international community. We therefore need to re-

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
emphasize our expectation that the political will expressed
at Dayton will be followed up in practice.
My delegation believes that peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina are inextricably linked to peaceful
coexistence and reconciliation. Without these, efforts at
long-term sustainable economic development will not
succeed. The implementation of the New York Declaration
of 15 November 1999 is, in my delegation’s view, central
to the process currently under way in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that declaration, commitment to the
Dayton-Paris accords was reaffirmed, as was commitment
to the establishment of a permanent election law and to the
creation of a national passport and of the framework for the
State Border Service. We note that some efforts have been
undertaken in respect of the permanent secretariat.
Regrettably, there has been limited progress in other areas;
indeed, the implementation of the State Border Service had
to be imposed in January by the Office of the High
Representative.
My delegation would wish to hear more about the
laws on asylum and immigration and on refugees and
displaced persons that were passed by the Parliament in
November 1999. And we ask whether these laws have
contributed to the development of a proper legal framework
on refugees and displaced persons.
My delegation is pleased that the second municipal
elections were held, as scheduled, in April. This should
have a positive impact on the democratic process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and should increase the accountability of
politicians to the electorate. This, we hope, will lay the
groundwork for the eventual development of a multi-ethnic
national government.
We believe that the consolidation of efficient State
institutions is of fundamental importance to the long-term
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we are
therefore concerned at the slow pace of the adoption of
legislation, as noted in the High Representative’s report.
Jamaica continues to attach importance to the rule of
law and judicial reform. There have been positive
developments in judicial reform, particularly the move
towards the creation of an independent and impartial
judiciary through the completion of laws regulating the
selection of judges and prosecutors. The cooperation of all
the relevant domestic organs in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
of critical importance in these reform efforts. Training is
also important and must be one of the pillars of judicial
reform. In this regard, we note the efforts of the Office of

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
the High Representative to promote the establishment of
a nationwide structure for judicial training, and we would
be interested in hearing more about the work of the joint
advisory board which was formed under the auspices of
the Council of Europe in February of this year.
We believe that judicial reform and the restructuring
of the police force are linked. In order to effectively
promote the rule of law, the judiciary and the police force
must work in tandem. It is therefore encouraging to note
that there has been movement towards a multi-ethnic
police force, as we were advised at the open briefing of
the Council in March. These efforts must continue. At the
same time, the issues of trafficking in persons and of
domestic violence have to be forcefully addressed.
My delegation also wishes to emphasize the
importance that we attach to the cooperation between the
Office of the High Representative and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. This has
resulted in the apprehension of several individuals. We
hope that the lack of funding will not delay action on
missing persons and on exhumations.
It is encouraging to note that the rate of minority
returns has increased. We recognize the efforts that are
being made to create the conditions necessary for the
reintegration of refugees and returnees. One example is
the property law implementation plan launched in October
1999. We urge that efforts at depoliticization of the
process continue, and we commend the Office of the
High Representative, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, among others, for
their work in seeking to remove impediments to the return
and reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons.
We are, however, concerned at reports of obstruction
to minority returns and urge the Office of the High
Representative to continue to target political interventions
to unlock refugee potential. The establishment of effective
mechanisms that will allow returnees to restore their
property and occupancy rights and their access to personal
documents is essential and should be actively pursued.
The inclusion of returnees in reconstruction programmes
in a non-discriminatory manner must also remain a
priority.
As the High Representative reminded us, jobs and a
secure economic future are increasingly important issues
for the ordinary citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is

17

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4136th meeting
9 May 2000

therefore of concern to my delegation that problems of
unemployment, education and administrative integration
remain, and we hope that these will be actively addressed
in the coming months. Programmes of capacity-building
and technical assistance will undoubtedly be useful in
helping returnees and internally displaced persons to
integrate.

I call on Mr. Petritsch to respond to comments and
questions raised.

We were interested to learn from the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report that the United Nations Development
Programme has been seeking to secure funds to support a
three-year framework for capacity-building and technical
assistance and has also been involved in the village
employment and environment programmes. We would
appreciate hearing from the High Representative about
progress in capacity-building, as we believe that this will be
the only real foundation for the creation of an enabling
environment.

There were a number of questions asked and I
should like to undertake to answer them.

Finally, my delegation wishes to express its support
for the work of the High Representative, the United Nations
and other organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina and we
encourage them to continue their efforts to restore peace
and stability and to promote sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of China.
Like all members of the Council, the Chinese
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Petritsch for his detailed
briefing. We have noted that, since the end of last year, the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has steadily improved.
The municipal elections held in early April proceeded
smoothly, by and large. Overall economic reconstruction in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has also met with some measure
of success. All this is the result of the efforts made by the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and is also closely
linked to the support of the international community.
We have also taken note of the fact that the building
of national institutions has been progressing very slowly
and that national reconciliation has encountered many
obstacles and difficulties. The solution of these problems
requires long-term and tireless efforts from the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and from the international
community. In this context, the international community
should focus its efforts more closely on realities in that
country in an attempt to assist its people to realize their
autonomy and independence.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

18

Mr. Petritsch: I greatly appreciate the support
expressed by the representatives of the Security Council
here today and I consider it to be very important
encouragement for our work in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There was first a suggestion on the part of the
representative of France with regard to the format of the
reporting to the Security Council. First of all, I need to
say that, of course, the report has been complemented by
my presentation today. Secondly, I consider this a very
pertinent and important suggestion which we will look
into, since, as I expressed in my presentation, we are now
engaged in an effort to streamline the agenda by having
adopted three priority areas. We might as well follow this
streamlining in our reporting technique.
In regard to the questions asked by the French
representative, I should like to answer as follows. When
we talk about drawing distinctions, I believe it is
important to point out that what we are trying to achieve
in the field of economic reform is pertinent to this. This
is a separation of the economy from political influence.
This is the development of an attractive business climate.
Of course, the privatization process must be conducted in
a transparent manner and the creation of an institutional
framework is necessary for a modern market economy, as
is a judiciary framework, which we need to pay attention
to. In short, what we are looking for is a system wherein
the economic regulation, the regulatory system, is in place
in regard to bank supervision, tax reform and
enforcement, to give just a few examples.
Regarding the prospects for the fall elections, I
should just like to say that I am expecting further
progress in terms of people realizing how important the
bread-and-butter issues of their daily life are, as opposed
to the ethnic agenda that was put forward far too many
times in the past. I also expect from the election that a
new generation of politicians is going to enter politics in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. There is concrete hope for a
generational change, for an infusion of fresh blood into
Bosnian politics.
Now, when it comes to reinforcing cohesion in
politics in the system of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
believe that we need also to look at some of the issues of

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
reconciliation. I believe that this will add to the
cohesiveness of society. The arrest of war criminals and
education reform need to be pushed much harder than they
have been so far. This is, of course, a long-term project, but
it is a necessary one. We have started to develop core
curriculums to see to it that the nature of multi-ethnicity is
represented in the schools, the school books and so on.
The return of refugees and displaced persons is also,
of course, adding to the cohesiveness of society. Above all,
there is, again, economic growth, which will contribute to
a making a more prosperous country, to the fact that the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will realize that they
have a stake in this process: economic and social
prosperity. Then, too, there is tolerance — coexistence as
a first and realistic step towards a better future there.
By this, I do hope that I have also answered the
question posed by the representative of Canada as well as
one that was asked by the representative of the United
Kingdom.
Now, in regard to the question on the election law
posed by the representative of the United Kingdom, the
status of the discussions on the election law is such that we
will, immediately after the Peace Implementation Council
at the end of this month, revisit the issue and see to it that
the State Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina takes on
this issue. The next elections this fall will, however —
according to this new election law, which, as we know, has
not been adopted by the State Parliament — be conducted
according to the provisional rules and regulations of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which, most likely, pending the decision of the
Permanent Council this coming 11 May, will be conducted,
organized, supervised and financed by the OSCE. Again, I
have to underline that this is a decision still ahead of us in
the Permanent Council.
Turning to other questions posed by Canada in regard
to the support for voters to move away from nationalism,
I think that three points have to be made in this context.
First, elections are important. We need to exploit the
election opportunities. We need to point out to the people
time and again that change is possible and that democratic
change is being brought about by elections.
Secondly, we need to emphasize economic reform.
This is what I would call economic empowerment. People
want jobs and opportunities for themselves and for their
children, and we at the Office of the High Representative,

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
we the international community, need to ally with the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in insisting that the
leaders take responsibility for economic reform. It is
important for the international community, with regard to
economic reform, to maintain conditionality.
Thirdly and lastly, I believe that public diplomacy
could be very supportive. We have initiated some
programmes to support and encourage domestic
journalism to be more forthcoming when it comes to
getting and telling the story as it is. Investigative
journalism is very important in this context. We need to
stress the importance of independent media, particularly
in a country where the media played such a terrible role
in the course of the war.
Let me now turn to the questions posed by the
representative of Ukraine.
First, with respect to military reform, I believe it
important to stress that the perspective of unified armed
forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a long-term one. We
need a longer-term perspective. Factually and basically,
the armed forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina still consist
of three groups. We need to consolidate them.
I believe it is also important to stress the aspect of
human security. We need to put this into place. It is, of
course, a gradual process, in which the institution of the
Standing Committee on Military Matters, a common
institution at the State level, is playing a key role.
Finally, we need to reduce military spending. We are
now in the process of a 15 per cent reduction in terms of
units and budget, which will go on through next year as
well. In this context, I should like to point out that the
new Government in Zagreb was extremely helpful in
getting more transparency into external support —
Croatian support — for the military in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is a very welcome addition to our
efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Last year, as I have mentioned, I imposed property
laws. This year we are actively pursuing their
implementation, and so far we have seen quite good
progress. But there is still some obstruction, and I am, of
course, prepared to remove officials who obstruct this
process. This is an absolutely necessary precondition in
order to facilitate and improve on our performance in
refugee return.
Some donors, particularly the United States, have
given money in order to strengthen the local capacity to
19

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
implement the property laws. This is a very welcome
addition to our efforts. I should like to point out that over
the past few months, as a measure, the housing offices in
the communities all have been reinforced by an
international representative. There are more than 150
housing offices throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. They
are the ones who facilitate property legislation and thus
refugee return. Each has now been beefed up with an
international representative, who is seeing to it that the laws
are being implemented properly.
The next point raised by Ukraine was the prevention
of social and economic discrimination against returnees
with respect to identity cards. We at the Office of the High
Representative are pursuing a policy aimed at ensuring the
full enforcement of laws regardless of the ethnic
background of the persons concerned. We have intervened
to force the issuance of documents when local authorities
refuse to do so. I will give just one example of the way we
are reacting to refusal or non-compliance: just a few
months ago, I removed the Minister of the Interior of
canton 10 in part because of his refusal to apply the law
equally and to protect all the people.
Finally, I should like to add that the Stability Pact
focuses on regional return. We have established a very
close working relationship with the Pact, which is basically
following our practice of refugee return implementation. I
can assure the Council that we have established an excellent
relationship. I am confident that the Stability Pact will add
to our efforts in the region, because refugee return is not a
question that can be resolved within one country only, such
as Bosnia and Herzegovina. We need to keep in mind the
whole region of South-Eastern Europe.
In response to the question posed by Ukraine as to
social and economic rights, let me say that we are working
on this also in terms of accessing pensions and securing
employment. We are also trying to eliminate discrimination
against minorities and returnees when it comes to some of
the utility companies in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Now, finally, let me come to the delegate from
Jamaica. These are of course highly technical issues that
you have raised. I can say that with regard to the laws on
asylum and immigration that were passed last November,
these contribute remarkably and substantially to our overall
efforts to regulate these issues. It might be of interest to
you to note that Bosnia and Herzegovina, which — if I
may say so — is basically a contributor to emigration, has
in the course of the past year taken in refugees from
Kosovo.

20

4136th meeting
9 May 2000
Regarding the judicial training, the joint advisory
board that was formed by agreement at the meeting of the
Council of Europe in Strasbourg in February of this year,
as the delegate of Jamaica has pointed out, is a very
important contribution and active support on the part of
the Council of Europe to try to accelerate progress in the
area of social and economic rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
I might also note that we are now in the process of
getting Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to accession to the
Council of Europe. I do hope and I am confident that the
three basic conditions that were set two years ago will be
met in the course of the next month by the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This would basically give the
green light for entry into the Council of Europe — a very
important step towards European integration for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I would like to close by again thanking the Security
Council and you, Mr. President, for having been such an
attentive audience here. I would like to thank the Council
also for the support it has expressed. This is what we
need in our work in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Petritsch for the clarifications and answers he has
provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
