•

.....
..• J

p.-.

~

. ~_.

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
.

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE .

No. 49

145th meeting
·24 June 1947

14'eme seance
24 juin 1947
Lake Success

New York
;it. ll. ).

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and forty-fifth meeting

Cent-quarante-cinquieme seance
Page

Pages

181. ProvUdonal agenda .. \
1065
:
1065
182. Adoption of the agenda
183. Continuation of the discussion on the
special agreemen.ts under Article 43 of
the Charter ~d the organization of the
lJ~ted ~ations arnned forces
1066

181. Ordre du jour provisoire
1065
182. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1065
183. Suite de la discussl\>n sur les accords speciaux prevus a l'Article 43 de la Charte
et sur l'organisation des forces armees
des Nations Unies
" .. 1066

Documents

Documents

The followitig documents :relevant to the hundred

Les documents suivants, se rapportant a, la centquarante-cinquieme seance, figurent dans les
publications suivantes:
Proces-verbaux offiqiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 43:
Lettre, en date du 30 avril 1947, adressee au
. Secretaire general par le representant suppIean~ des Etats-lJnis au Conseil de seqU"ite
(document S/338).
Proces-verbaux officiels du Con5eil de Securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 1:
Lettre, en date du 30 avril 1947, adressee au
Secretairf; general par le President du Comite
d'etat-Jr jor et rapport, joint a cette lettre, sur
les prim.lpes generaux regissant l'organisation
des forces armees mises a la disposition du
Conseil de securite par les Etats Membres des
~ations Unies (document 8/336).

and forty-fifth meeting appear in:

Official records of the Security Council, Sec9nd
Year, No. 43
Letter dated 30 April 1947 from the deputy
representative of the United States on the
Security Council to the Secretary-General
(document S/338).
Official records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 1
Letter dared 30 April 1947 from !he Chairman
of the Military Staff Committee to the Secretary-General, and enclosed report on genera!
principles governing the organization of the
armed forces made available to the Security
Council by Member nations of the United
Natiol1ll (document S/336) .
.

NATIONS UNIES

UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CGNSEIL
DE, SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORQS

PROCES.VERBAUX OFflCIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 49

DEUXIEME ANNEE

'No 49

HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIFTH MEETING

CENT-QUARANTE·CINQUIEME SJ:ANCE

Heid at. Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 24 June 1947, at 3 p.m.

T enue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mardi 24 juin 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. A. PAROD! (France).

Pr4sident: M. A. PARODI (France).

Present: The representatives of the following
Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
countries: Australia, . Belgium, Brazil, China, Australie, Belgique; Bresil, Chine,. Colombie,
ColQmbia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
Sodalist Republics, United Kingdom, United sociaIistes sovietiques Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
States of America.
d'Amerique.

181. Provisional agenda (document' 181. Ordre du iour provisoire(document
S/381)
S/381}
1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2.. Special agreements Under Article 43 of the

2. Accords speciaux prevus a- I'Article 43 de la

Charter and the organization of the United
Nations armed force.

Charte et organisation de la force armee des
Nations Uilies.

(a) Letter dated 30 April 1947 from the
deputy representative of the United States
on the Security Council to the SecretaryGeneral (docum~nt 8/338).1
,

a) Lettre, en date du 30 avril 1947, adressee
an Secretaire general' par le representant
suppIeant des Etats-Unis au Conseil de
securite (document S/338)~.

(b) Letter dated 30 April 1947 from the
Chairman of the Military Staff Committee to the Secretary-General"and enclosed
report on general principles governing
the organization of the armed forces made
available to the Security Council by
Member nations of the United Nations
(document S/336).2 ,

b) Lettr~, en date du 30 avril 1941, adressee
au SecretaiI'e general· par le President du
Comite d'etat-major et rapport, joint· acette lettre, sur les principes generaux
regissant l'organisation des forces armees
mises a- la disposition du Conseil de securite par les Etats Membres des Nations
Unies (document S/336)2.

182. Adoption of the agenda

IIIb:d.,

The agenda was adopted.

y 1 See Official Records of th(J Security C011ncil, Second

ear, No. 43.

Special Supplement No. 1.

182. Adoption de I'ordre du iour·
Dordre du jour est adopte.
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels .du Conseil de securitlj,
Deuxieme Annee, No 43.
'Ibid., Supplement special No 1.

..........
183. Continuation of the disc:ussi~n on the 183•. Suite de la discussion sur I~s accords
speciaux prevus. Cl I'Article 43 de la
special agreements under Article. 43
Charteet sur I'organisation des
of the Charter and thecrgC!nb:'2tion
forces armees des Nations Una'es
of the United Nations armed forces.
Le PRESIDENT: Je pense qu'a la suite de la
The . PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I feel that, as a- result of ,the discussion which , discussion qui a eu lieu, le. sens d,es articles 5 et
has taken place, the meaning of articles 5 and 6 6 est clair pour tous, et je vouspropose de passer
is now clear to 11& all, and I suggest that we a l'e.'lCamen des amendements qui ont ete soumis
proceed to consider the amendments which have a propos de ces deux articles.
been submitted to th~e tv,ro articles:
The .Australian representative has submitted
an amendment to article 5, which would now
read as follows-:
'

·En ce qui conceme rartic~e 5, nous sommes
saisis d'lID amendement de la part du' represen.
tant de l'Australie; I'article amende se 1h'ait
de la fa~on suivante:

CClnasmuch as the moral 'weight and the potential. power behind av' decision to employ the
armed forces made F lailable to the SecUrity
Coundlby 'Member natio~ of the United. NationS in enforcement action will be very grt~at,
this fad will directly infiuence the size of the
aimed forces required to' be -made available to
the Council, in accordance with the special
·agreements/'l

teEtant donne' qu.e toute decision tendant a' .
mettre en reuvre les forces armees mises a la
dispositi~n du Conseil de securite par les Etats
Membres des Nations Unies en vue d'une action
coercitive aura l'appui d'une autorite morale
et d'un potentiel immense, ce fait aura une reper.
cussion rlirectesur l'importance d~ forces armeci
qu'il faudra, aux termes des accords speciaux,
mettre la disposition du ConseiP/'

. Colonel HODGSON (Australia): The members'

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie). (traduit de
l'anglais): Vous vous souviendrez sans doute,
Messieurs, que l'accord ne's'etait pas fait ~ur le
'sens a donner a l'article 5. Nous avions crn que
l'article 6 coneemait la puissance d'ensemble des
forces armees mises a la disposition du Conseil
de securite e~ vertu des accord speciaux, et nons
avionsestime, par consequent, que eet article
aurait dO. preceder Particle 5, puisque I'article 5
parle de "toute decision" tendant a mettreees
forces en ceuvre - ce qui, a notre avis, implique bien tIne decision du Conseil de securite.
L'article 5, par sa redaction, faisait done allusion,
pensionsnhous, a des forces bien deteI'Illirtees
destinees a accomplir une ~che bien determinee
a la suite d'une .decision bien determinee du
Conseil de secunte.
.

will recall that th,;, reptc;sentatives hada different
view-point as to the' real meaning. of article 5~
We took it that article 6 referred to the overall
strength of the forc.cs available to the .Security'
Council under the special agreements. We therefore felt that that article should have preceded
article 5, because the wording of article 5. mentione<. "anydecisio~" to employ these forceswhich obviously related, in our opinion, to a
decision of the Security Council. Therefore, in
its wording, article 5 refen'ed to a particular
force, for a particular task, follmying a particul~r
decision by the Security Council.

a

In, the course of discussion, it became clear
Au cours de la discussion: il est apparu que teIs
that this was not the intent of article 5 nor its ne sont ni le but que, se propose l'article 5, ni la
true interpretation, and the opinion this. Council vraie interpretation qu'il faut en donner; la
received, following the request for the view- reponse .donneepar le Comite d'etat-major a, la
point of the Military Staff Comnlittee, made it, c!emande d'eclaircissement du Conseil de seeuvery clear that article 5,' in effect, did deal with rite' a tres clairement montre que c'est l'article 5
~e overall streng'thunder the special agreements. qui, en fait, concer'1e la puissance d'ensemble
des, forces armees envisagees
par les accords
.
speClaux.
I

..

Therefore, the Australian amendment is de~
signed to make the position quite clear so that
,th,eYej shall be no doubt about it; it is in ac-.
cord~ce with.the view-point expressed by four
out of the five members of the Military Staff.
Committee.

\.

. L'amendement· australien se' propose-done de
clarifier la question_de maniere a dissiper toute
equivoque et il est en accord. avec le ,point de
vue exprime par quatte .des cinqmembres d1.l
Oornite ·d'ei:at-major.

Le PRESIDENT: S'il n'y a pas d'observations
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
If there are no observations· on the AuStralian concemant l'amendement du representant de
_ representative's amendment, I will put, it to the l'AustraIie, je vais le mettre aux voix te1 qu~iI
'vient de nous e.tre soumis.
vote in the form in which it was submitted.
.

1

Italicized words represent the suggested additions to
.
.

the text.

i Les mots qui constituent l'amendement sont en italique.

1067
.A vote was taken. by show of hands 4nd the
Australian amendment was adopted by eight
votes with. three abstentions.

Le vote a lieu a main levee, et l'amendement
du representant de I'Aurtralie est adoptl par
huit voix, avec trois abstentions.

Votes for: •
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
ColombiaFrance
SyTia
.
United Kingdom·
United States of America

V otent pour:
Australie
Belgique
Bresil
Colombie
France
Syrie
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

Abstentions:
China
Poland
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

S'abstiennent :
Chine
P01.ogne
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We now come to article 6 of the report to which
the Belgian representative has tabled an amendment. Thus amended, article 6 would read as
follows:
c'The armed forces specified in the special
agreements, and which shall be made available
to the Security Council, on its call, by Member
nations of the United Nations shall be limited to
a strength sufficient to enable the Security Coun
.cil to take prompt action in any part of the world
for the maintenance or the restoration of international peace and security as envisaged in Article 42 of the Charter."
m

Le PRESIDENT: Nous passons maintenant aI'article' 6 du rapport, qui· a fait l'objet d'un
amendement de la part du representant. de la
Belgique. Ainsi amende, l'article6 se ·lirait
comme suit:

"Les forces armees desig1!.eesdans les accords
speciaux et qui doiven~ ~tre mises, sur soni?ivitation, a la disposition du Conseil d~ securite
par les Membres des Nations Unies, seront
limitces a la puissance suffisante pour permettre
an Conseil de securite d'entreprendre une action
rapide en tout point du globe· pour lemaintien
ou le retablissement de la paix et de lasecurite
intemationales, comme prevu a l'Article 42 de
la Charte.",
.

-' La discussion est ouverte sur cet amendenient.
The discussion on this amendment is opened.
Avez-vous des observations a presenter?
Are there any observations?
Mr. GIiOMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : I should like
to ask the representative of Belgium to explain
the difference between his text and the text
agreed upon by the Military Staff Committee.

M. GROUYKD (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je voudrais demander au representant de la Belgique
de m'expliquer la difference entre le texte qu'il
propose et le texte adopte par le Comited'etatmajor.

Mr: VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): I would find it difficut to add
much to the explanation which I gave at our
last meeting. I would like, however, to repeat
that the Belgian delegation's concern is to bring
the expressions used in this article completely into
Jinewith the corresponding expressions in Article
43 of the Charter.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique) : 11 me serait
difficile d'ajoutei' beaucoup aux cxplications que
j'ai donnees a la seance precedente. Je voudrais .
cependant repeter que la preoccupll.tion de la
delegation bclge est de mettre les termes'
employes dans cet article en parfaite concol'dance
avec le sens qu'ont les lllemes termesdans
l'Article 43 de la Charte.

According to Article 43 of the Charter, before
armed forces can be made available to the Security Council, the State to which these forces
belong would have to be invited by the Council.

Suivant l'Article 43 de la Charte, pour que
des forces armees soient mises a la disposition
du Comeil de securite, il faut que l'Etat dout
relevent ces forces armees ait re~u une invitation
du Conseil.

That is why, in the new wording, we do not
say: "The armed forces made available to the
Sec?rity Council by Member nations. shall be
Jimited etc. . . ." as it appears in the Military
Staff Committee's text, but "The armed forces
specified in the special agreements and which
shall be made available to the Security Council,
on its call, by Member nations shall be
"mited . . . ".

C' est pourquoi, dans la nouvelle redaction,
nous ne disons pas "les forces armees· mises la
disposition du Conseil de secnrite par les .Etats
Membres des Nations,Unies seront limitees ..•",
ainsi que le porte le texte du Comite d'etatmajor, mais "les· forces armees designees dans
les accords speciaux et qui doivent' etre mises,
sur son invitation, a la disposition du Conseil
de stkurite par les Membres seront limitees ..."

a.

\

1068
En effet, ksenS del'article'-la reponse faite
Inde~d, the article-as is further shown by the.
Militp.ry Staff Conm,littee's reply of 20 June to par leCorpite d'etat-major, le 20 juin,ala
the United, States representative's questionclearly refers to the armed force':1 which are not
yet placed at the Council's disposal, but are
simply specified in ~ecial agreements as forces
to be 'made available to the Council should the
latter make such a call upon the States concepled.

question pbsee par le representant d~ EtatsUnis est venue encore le confirmer- vise bien
les forces armees qui ne sont pas encore:niises
.a la disposition du Conseil,mais qui sont simplementdesignees dans des accords specia1.ix
pour ctre mises a la disposition du Conseil si
celui-ci adr~e aux Etats interesses lme invitation en ce sens.

I would add that the words "limited to a , J'ajoute que, dans ,le texte'de cet amendement
strength" were omitted from the text of this distribue a la seance precedente, les mots "limj,-.
.amendment which was circulated' at our last tees a la puissance" avaient ete. omis, le repremeeting, as the United States representative sug- sentant des Etats-Unis ,.ayant, aucOllrS de la
gested their deletion in the course of discussion. discussion, suggere l' omission de ces mots; mais'
Since the, Council, however" rejected that sug- le Conseil n'ayant pas retenu cette suggestion,
gestion,the words "limited to a strength" have les mots "limitees a la pui'3sance" ont ete retablis
been put back in the text now before the Coun- dans le texte 'lw nolls· avons en ce moment sous
., eil, as they appear in the Military Staff Com- les yeux, tels qu~i1s figurent dans le texte du
mittee's report.
.
rapport dl.l Comite d'etat-major.
,

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet SocialiSt ReM. GROMYKO ('Onion des' Republiques socia~
publics) (translated from. Russian): I have no ' listes sovietiques)( traduit du russe): Je ne
objection to reference being made i;n article 6 to m'oppose pas a ce que nous mentionnions les .
the special agreements, sjnce a similar reference· accords speciaux dans l'article 6, etant donne
is ~Cl made in the con'esponding Article 43 of que l'Article 43 de la Charte en fait egalement
the·Charter. I have np objection, either,·to men- mention. Je ne m'oppose pas non plus a cc
tioning the fact that the armed forces' are made que nous disions que les forces arm~es seront
available to the SecUrity Council on its call, since mises it la dispositiondu Conseil de securite
this too is :rt:ated ID Article 43 of th'eCharter. But sur une demande de celui-ci, puisque l'Article
1 find it difficult to agre~ with the Belgian repre- 43 de la Charte contient egalement cette dause.
sentative's proposal to delete from the text agreed Mais il m'est difficile d'accepter la proposition
up,on by the Military Staff Committee the phrase du representant de, la, Belgique qui tend a
which as previously drafted'reads: " ... shall be eliminer du texte 'adopte par le C!lmite d'etatlimited to a. strength sufficient to enable the Se- tilajor la phrase qui se lit, dans sa fo~e non
curity Council • . .".1
'
modifiee, COIIDne suit: ". . . seront .limitees a la
puissance suffisante pour permettre au Conseil ..1 .1"
The Belgian representative suggests replacmg , L~ representant de la Belgique propose de
this phrase by one which completely omits the remplacer cette phrase par une autre, dans
following words: cs• • • Member States to the laquelle iI omet les mots suivants.: " ...les MemSecurity Council shall be limited to a strength bres des Nations Unies seront limitees a la
sUfficient to enable ... • '~'}In place of this the .puissance suffisante pour permettre . . .1", qu'll
words "shall be sufficient to enable" are used.
remplace ,par le membre de phrase suivant:
, "... seront suffisants pour permettre ..."
11 serait extr~mement desirable, me semble-toil,
lleel it would be extremely desirable to retain
de
garder la redaction qui avait ete adoptee
the wording agreed upon by the Military Staff
-Committee. It has;' after all, a clearly different par le' Comite d'etat-major. Entre cette redac.'3hade of meaning from .that conveyed in ·the tion et le texte propose par le representant de la
. wording proposed by the Belgian representative. . Belgiqile, il y aunedifference de nuance tres
It particularly draws our attention to the' fact nette. Le texte du Comite d'etat-major, attire
that these forces should be comparatively small, notre attention sur le fait que les forces armees
and at the same time indicates that they should' doivent ctre relativement reduites, mais il,soube sufficient to enable the Security Council to ligne en meme temp~ qu'elles doivent ctre suffisantes pour permetire au' Conseil de securite
cope with any problem confronting it.
d'accomplir les taches qui lui incombent.
Perhaps the Belgian representative ~elf will
feel able to alter his amendment, and leave this
part of article 6 in the wording agreed upon by
the Military .Staff.Committee.

Peut-ctre le representant de la'Belgique luimcme acceptera-t-il de modifier son amendement
et de laisser cette partie de l'artic1e 6 telle qu'elle
aete recligee par le Comite d'etat-major:

,The USSR representative'continued .his re,marks in English:
.

Apres l'interpretation de sa declaration, M.
Gromyko reprend la parole et presente les observation suivantes:

I

,~

~.

1

-

Quoted in English.

1

Cite en anglais.
...

~

1069

When I made my sta~ement, I had th~ old
version of the Belgian· amendment before me. A
few moments ago,· I was provided with the new
version. It.lllnk the new version differs from the
original, and I accept it.

M.'GROMYKO (Union des Republiques 8ocia!i<rt:es ,sovietiques) (traduit· de I'an-glais): Monsieur le President, lorsque j'ai pris la parole,
j'avais sous les yeux le texte de la premiere
version de. la proposition belge. On vient de
me remettre le nouveau texte. Je crois qu'il
existe une difference tres nette entre ce nouveau
texte et l'ancien: je l'accepte.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Are there any further observations?
.

Le PRESIDENT: Quelqu'un desire-t-il encore
presenter des observations?
/

Mr. HSIA (China): I share the hesitation of
.. my colleagues across the table to enter into the
debate and defend the original text. The permanent members would undoubtedly welcome any
suggestions which would effect an improvement
in .the text, to the end that we would not then
consider these articles as the exclusive property
of the. perJ'lanent members, but rather as the
proper.ty of all of us. I ta1:e it that that is the
spirit in which we pI:'oceed.

M. HSIA (Chine) (traduit de f'anglais): Je
partage les hesitatio~ de mes collegues assis en
face de moi a intervenir dans le debat et a
defendre le texte primitif: les nlembrespermanents sont certainement favorables a toute suggestion qui ameliorerait le texte, ce qui permett~ait deconsid&t~r cesarticles, non pas comme
etant la propnett des membres permanentS,
mais plutot comme emanant de nous tous. Je
presume que tel em:. bien l'esprit dans.lequel se
. .
poursuit la discussion.

I agree with the Soviet representative that we
have no fundamental ohjectiol1 to the amendment proposed by the representative of Belgium..
However, if it could be retained, we should prefer
the original text.

Je suis d'accord avec le representant sovietique pour dire qu.e nous n'eIevons aucune
ob}~ction fondamentale contre l'amendenient
propose par le repre.sentant de la Belgique. Nous
preU;~rions toutefois le texte primitif, s'il etait
pos8ib&~ de Je conserver.

Hien que les raisolfls qui nous dictent cette.
. The reasons are not too important, but I shall
state them. In the first place, the wording of the preference ne soientpas tres importantes,' je vais
amendment is exceedingly co:mplicated. It is so cependa..llt les exposer. D'abord, I'amendement
complicated that it might mislead the. general est redige dans des termes beaucoup trop complipublic, in that it might be thought to mean 1;hat ques. lli sont si compliques qu'ils risquent
there were (I.ifIerent kfuds of armed forces. Ac- cl'induire le public en erreur et de lui faire
t~y, there is .only. one kind of armed force croire qu'ilexiste differentes sortes de forces
provided for in Article 43 of the Charter of the armees. En realite, l'Article 43 de la Charte
United Nations. Therefore, safeguards seem to des Nations Unies n'en prevoit qu'une seule.
be .unnecessa.ry.
'-Ainsi done, des mesures de precautions paraissent
inutiles.
Ensuite, si nous alloIis, par mesure de preIn the second place, if we are going to provide
this safeguard and. follow the wording .of 'the caution, suivre le libelle de la Chaite, nous
Charter, we must follow it right through, even devo~ le faire partout, meme lorsqu'il s'agit de
in the case of assistance, facilities and rights of I'assistance, desfacilites et des droits de passage.
passage. If you read Article 43 in that sense, all Si vous (;Omprenez I'Article 43 comme moi,
these are to be macie available by special agree·· toutes ces mesures doivent etre assurees par accord
special et sur invitation. Telle est mon interpre- ment and on call. That.is my interpretation..
tation.
Si nous voulons agir logiquement,. il nous faut
If we do this logically, we must insert all the
wording of Article 43. In other words"the same inserer integralement dans notre texte le libelle
safeguards and specifications should be included. de I'Article 43; en d'autres termes, il nous faut
inclure les memes sauvegardes et les memes
specifications.
It is understood that every time you refer to
Il est entendu que chaque fois que l'on fait
these ~ed forces, facilities and rights of passage, allusion a ces. forces armees, facilites et droits
you are basing that reference on At"iicle 43 of de passage, c'est sur J'Article 43 de la Charte
the Charter. There is no other Article and, there- que l'on se fonde. Il n'y a pas d'autre Artide et,
fore, t!: ~re is no possible cause of misunder- par consequent, il ne peut y avoir aucune cause
standing.
de malentendu.
Therefore, the worcliDg "made available to
the Security Council" seems sufficient, if for no
other reasons than for the purposes of simplicity
and clarity. The original wording would seem
preferable, but if the majority of the membel's
of the Council agree to the amendment, we will
not object to -it.
.

C'est pourquoi les mots "mises a la disposition
du Conseil de securite" me semblent suffisants,
ne fUt-ce que pour des raisons de simplicite et
de clarte. La redaction primitive me paraitrait.
preferable, mais si les membres du Conseil
sont en majorite partisans de l'amendement,
nolls ne nous y opposerons pas.

~i.It:t.'.~!!!M( ..,._!!.;;'.!I.J] h

V.;lia:gUJIl

£IIIB

The PRESlD~NT'-( translated from French) :

:Do any other reprcsentatives .wish to make any
obsenrations?

'.

Le PRESlDENT: D'autres representants de..
sirentailspresenter des observations?
.

.

Jem,e .perinettrai de faire remarquer que
May I say that the Belgian amendmentseems
.to have. the. merit of being clearer, inasmuch as l'amendement bclge sembleavoir un avantage
it. ShoWs from the very beginning of the report , de .clarification, ~n' ce sens qu'il fait apparaitre,
that thae are· reiilly two stag~ two steps to be des 1e!3 -premiers articles du rapport, qu'il existe
taken in Ihaking certam armed forces available en realite deux etapes, deux degres dans la mise
to· the '. Military Staff Committee. There is the a la disposition de certaines forces entre les
preliminary' stage, that of the agreements, .and mains du Comite d'~tat-major. U yale stade
then the stage of employing these forces or mak- prealable, celui des accords, et ensuite la mise
ing them truly available,. whichhNl the effect of en jeu, la mise a la disposition veritable, qui
bringing. them. under intemationalauthority. I fait passer ces forces sous une autolite interthink itisbettex to -make.t¥s P:Qint dear at nationale. n me semblequ'il ya un' interct de
the .oUmet of the report~
'clarification a ce que cette idee soit indiquCe
au debut du rapport.' ,
Mr. MUNIZ' (Brazil):' A careful analysis. of
M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (t1o,duit de l'anglais):.
the language of Article 43 justifies the conclusion Une analyse attentive des tennes de l'Article 43
reached. by the representative of Belgium in the , justifie lesconclusions alL.xquelles Je representant
amenetment he proposed to article 6 of the report. de .la BeIgique eSt arrive dans l'amCfndement
The eXistence of'two different stages in the or- qu'il propose d'apportera I'article 6 du rapport.
ganjzation ~fthe international armed force is L'Article 43 de la Charte montre clairement,
,evident from theJanguage of Article 43 of the par sori' libelle, qu'ilexiste deux stades diffeCharter•. Reference is mllde there not only t6the ,rents dans. l'organisation d'une' force armee
special agreements, specifying the type and degree ,intemationale:il fait effectivement allusion non
of readiness of the -armed forces and the nature seulement aliX accords speciatlX precisant la
of the facilities. to be supplied by the Melpber nature' et le degre de preparation des forces,
Nations, but also to the invitation of the Council, 'armees ainsi que la nature des facilites qui
in·accordance with which such forces and· facil- doivent ctre accordees par les Etats Membres,
ities are :made available·. for employment in mais aussia Yinvitation du Conseil en vertu de
~cific. cases.
laquelle ces forces et facilites sont mises a sa
disposition pour. ctre' utilis,ees dans des cas
p~ecis.

In . interpreting the Charter, we cannot
ignore the distinctions made by, or implied in,
its language.· Such disregard of exL~g distinctions may be of serious consequence in the applition of the provisions' of the Charter.

En interpretant la Charte, nous ne pouvons
pas ne pas tenir compte des distinctions que sa
redactionprevoit ou sous-entend. Nous noUB
exposons a des consequencesserieuses lors de
l'application de la Charte si nous ne veillons
pas a en observer toutes l~ nuances.

Dans le cas que nous examinonS, la Charte
In the caSe under examination, the Charter
clearly established two different phases with ,prevoit clairement deux phasesdistinctes dans
regard to the organizatioJ;l' of _the international 'l'organisation d'une force armee intemationale:
aqned force: first, the phase which starts with la premiere commence avec la 'ratification de
the ratification of. the agreement entered into l'accord 'conclu entre l'Etat Membre et le
between "the, Member State and the' Security Conseil de seclJl'ite et se ~ermine par I'invitation
Council and ends.with the invitation of the Coun- adressee par le Conseil a l'Etat Membre de lui
cil to the Member State to supply the armed fournir la force armee que ce demier s'est engage
force which it has undertaken to supply; secondly, a mettre a sa 'disposition; la seconde suit la
the phase which follows the notification by the notification par le' Conseil de securite .de son
Security Council of its intention to' employ, the itltention d'utiliser les forces armees .:.it question.
. armed forces in question.
Therefore, in examining the situation dealing
with the organization of the armed forces and
their employment, we cannot disregard that
distinction without creating c~nfusion and inviting pos.'lible conflict between the Member
States and the Security Council because of the
lack of a. clear understanding with regard to the
duties and obligations of the Member States.

C'est pourquoi, en examinant la situation
decoulant de l'orga.@sation des forces armees et
let,U'utilisation, nous ne pouvons laisser cette
distinction de cote sans creer de confusion et
susciter d'eventuels conflitsentre les Etats Membres et le Conseil de securite, faute d'une comprehension claire des droits et des devoirs des
Etats Membres.
' -

. It is not difficult to explain the importance
of differentiating between those two stages in the
process. of organizing the armed force of the
, .United Nations. Without making that differentiation, it is impossible to establish the exact moment

Il n'est pas, difficile de saisir I'importance
qu'il y' a a distinguer entre ces deux stades de
I'organisation des forces armees des Nations
Unies. Sans cette distinction, il est impossible
de preciser le moment exact OU les forces arm~

when the armed forces cease to be forces ofa
given nation and become an interna!ional ~ed
force lUlder the command of the Umted Nations.
We '1St not forget that the international
armedL.rce is only a derivative force. Therefore,
it is important to know at which precisenioment
it come<) under the service. of the United Nations,
That distinction also has an important bearing,
with regard to the aF"'lication of Arti~le 51 of
the Charter.
.
The PRESIDENT (translated trom French):
I am going to put to tb.e vote the Belgian repre~
sentative's amendment to article 6.

cessent •d'etreJes forcesd~unEtatdonn.epour
devenirune force armeeinternationale releVaht
de l~autorite desNa~ons UnieS.
N'oublionspas que la force. armeeinternationale. n'est qu'une force derivee. n ·est. done
important de deteI'm!ner le·. moment precis
ou elle cOIIl1l1:em::eaetre an service des Nations
Unies. Cette distinction presente . egalementune'
grande importance pour l'application ·de ·l'Artide 51.· de la Charte..
Le PRESIDENT: Je vais'mertre am( voix
l'amendement a Yarticle 6 propose par le represenf;an.t d~IaBelgique.
r

A vote was taken by show of hands and. the
Belgian amendment to article 6 was adoj..ted by
ten votes ,with one abstention.
'
Votes for:
Australia
Belgium

Brazil
Colombia
France
Poland
Syria
United Kingdom
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United States of America

Abstention:
China

••

.-

•

Le vote a lieu a main levee" et l'arn,endement
de la Belgique est adoptl par dix voix~ avec une
abstention.
Votent pour:
AustI'alie
Be1gique
Bresil
Colombic
France
Pologne
Syrie
Royaume-Uni
Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

S'abstient :
Chine

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The decision Wh1dl the Cowlcil has jUst taken
makes it nc;cessa.ry for us to reconsider the articles
previously set aside, pending a decision on article

6.

Le FR;ESIPENT: La decision que le Conseil
vieJl! .de prendre nous a.mcne maintenant a
rlee~aminer les articles que nousavions reservis
en attendant qu'une decision fQt prise en re
qui concerne l'artic1e 6.
•

The first of these is article 10, to which there
is also a Belgian amendment. With this amendment the article would read as follows:

. -_ .. -~'- :< .. :~_....

n s'agit d'abord de l'artic1e 10, leque1 fait
egalement l'objet. d'un' amendement beIge; cet
¥ticle, dans sa forme modifiee, serait ainsi.
con~u:

"In order to facilitate the early establishment'
of the armed forces which, in accordance with the
special agreements, are to be made available to
the Security Ccuncil, on its call, the permanent
members of the Security Council shall contribute
initially the major portion of tllese forces. A'!l the
contributions of other Members of the United
Nations become available; they shall be added
to the forces already contributed."

"Min de faciliter la -creation rapide des forces
armees qui, conformement aux accords speciaux,
doivent 2tre mises, sur son invitation~ a la disposition du Conseil de securite, les rnembres permanents du·. Conseil de securite fourruront
initialement la majeure partie de ces forces. Au
fur et a mesure que les .contributions des autres
Membres des Natinns Unies deviendront disponibles, elles seront ajoutees aux forces deja
fournies."
.

Are there any observations on this amendment?

Y a-t-il deS observations sur. cet amendement?

Mr. GROUYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : , I have no
objection to these amendments, but the result is
~ great many repetitions. I fed that the wording
IS not of the happiest sm.cf; the same stereotyped
phrases are repeated in every article.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je n'ai
pas d'objection a cet amendement, mais il donne
lieu a un grand nombre de repetitions. La redaction generale ne me semble pas tres heureuse;
en effet, les memes phrases, stereotypees se
retrouvent dans chacun des articles.

Perhaps we could follow this procedure: we
could use this wording the first' time, and then
we could use the wording agreed upon by the

Peut-etre pourrions-nous proceder .de la fa~on
suivante: nous pourrions employer cette formule
la premiere fois et .employer ensuite celles qui

IIIrz

.

1072
Military Staff Committee. In principle I have
no objection but I doubt· whether it if expedient
to repeat the same stereotyped expressions. These
are very ~ort articles and that makes the
repetitions -leap to· the eyes all the more.

ont ete adoptees par le Comite d'etat-major. En
piincipe, je n'ai pas d'objection, mais je doute
de l'utilite qu'il y aurait a repeter les' memes
expre..'lSions stereotypees) d'autant plus que les
articles sont. tres brefs et que, par consequent,
ces repetitions sautent immediatement aux yeux.

l\iIr~ VAN LANGEHOVE. (Belgium) (translated
from French) : I realize that the expression used
in the amendment submitted by the Belgian
delegation is repeated in several articles. However, I would like to point out that the Military
Staff Committee's report is extremely important,
because it lays down fundamental principles, and
because it is, I think, of major importance that
these fundamental principles should be expressed
with the utmost clarity, even at the cost nf some
repetition.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Be1gique): Je
reconnaiB que l'expression dont se sert 1;amende.
ment presente par la delegation belge se repete
dans plusieul'S articles. Mais je ferm toutefois.
observer que le :.apport du Comite d'etat-major
est tres important en ce qu'il formule des principes fondamentaux, et qu'il y a, me semble-toil,
une importance majeure a ce que ces pri:r.Lcipes
fondamentaux soient exprimes avec le maximwn
de clarte, flit-ce au prix de certaines repetitions.

Moreover, if we retained the shorter fonn of
words used in the Military Staff Committee's
text, .I believe we would be using an expression
which is grammatically incorrect, since, in French
at any rate, the expression "armed forces made
available to the Security Council" means forces
which are already av.ailable to the Council,
whereas what we mean is forces which would
possibly be made available in future to the Security Cuiillcil, if the latter were to call for them
under the provisions of Article 43.

D'autre part, si I'on maintenait l'expression
abregee qui se trouve' dans le texte du Comite
d'etat-major, je crois que I'on emploierait une
expression grammaticalement erronee parce que,
en fran~ais tout au moins, quand on parle de
"forces arrnees mises a la disposition du Conseil", '
on dit par 13. que ce sont des' forces qui sont
deja a la disposition du Conseil, alors que I'on
veut designer des forces qui seront eventuellement, dans l'avenir, mises a la disposition du
Conseil si celui-ci adresse l'invitation prevue par
l'Article 43.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
From the point of view of style, I would like to
.add to that remark that these articles, which were
cited consecutively because they all contain Belgian amendments, will be inserted in numerical
order in the text of the report. Therefore they do
not follow one another, which will lessen the
inconvenience in the repetitions mentioned by
the representative of the &oviet Union.

Le PRESIDENT: .Je me permettrais d'ajouter
a cette remarque, du ,point de vue du style, que
ces articles, qui oht ete mentiomies a la suite
les uns des autres parce qu'ils reproduisent taus
les amendements beIges, seront replaces suivant
leur numero dans le corps du texte et que, par
consequent, ils ne se suivront pas, ce qui dirninue
I'inconvement des repetitions signalees par le
representant de rUnion sovietique.

If there are no further observations, I shall
put article 10, thus amended, to the vote.

S'il n'y a pas d'autres observations, je vais
mettre aux voix l'article 10 ainsi amende.

A vote was taken by show of hands and the
Belgian amendment to article 10 was adopted
by .nine votes with two abstentions.

Le vote a lieu a main levee, et l'amendement
de la Belgique est adopM par neuf voix, avec
deux abstentions.
V otent bour:
Australie
Be1gique
Bresil
Colombie
France
Pologne
Syrie
Royaume-Uni)
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

Votes for:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Colombia
France
Poland
Syria.
United Kipgdom
United States of America
Abstentions :
China
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
The PRESIDENT (translated from' Frnch) :
We will now pass on to article 13, the amended
, text of which reads as follows:
"No Member nation of the TJn2ted Nations
shall be urged to increase the strength of its anned
forc€S or to create a particular component thereof
.....................

~<'

. . ". """'• • . sw

·••

..

"~~~=~~~."_""'~"'."~"

S'abstiennent
, :
Chine'
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
Le PRESIDENT: Nous passons a l'article 13
dont le texte amende se lirait ainsi:

I

"Aucun Etat Membre des Nations Unies ne
sera tenu d'augmenter la puissance de ses for~es
armees ou de mettre sur pied UIl element SpeCIal .'

__. . . . . . . . . '

u..

•

•

._••. , , '

"""""'11II

>

1073
far the specific purpose of making a contribution
to the armed forces which are to be made available to the Security Council, on its call, by Member nations of the United Nations."
.

de ses forces dans le but precis d'apporter sa
contribution aux forces armees qui doivent etre
Inises, sur son invitation, a la disposition du
Conseil de securite par les Membres des Nations
Unies." .

Are there any observations on this amendment?

Y a-t-il des observations sur cet amendement?

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
I expect that there is very good reason f?r it, but
why do we drop the refer~nce~o the speCIal agreements in the case of this artIcle?

(traditit de l'anglais): Je ne doute pas' qu'il y

Mr. VAN UNGENHOVE(Be1gium) (translated
from French): There is no special reason for it;
the reference to special agreements can certainly'
be added if the Council.thinks it desirable.

Sir Alexander

CADOGAN

(Royaume-Uni)

ait d'excellentes raisons a ceIa, mais j'aimerais
cependa.."1t que l'on m'indique pourquoi l'on a
ab~.ndonne dans cet article l'allusion aux accords
speciaux.

M VAN UNGENHOVE (Beigiqtie): n n'y a
pas de raisons particulieies; .la reference aux
accords speciaux peut certainement etre ajoutee
si le Conseille juge souhaitable.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The text would then read as follows: ". • • of
making a contribution to the armed forces which,
in accordance with the special agreements, are
to be made available to the Security Qouncil on
its calL ..". I understand that the Belgian representative would accept this adQition.

Le PRESIDENT: Le texte se lirait done comme
suit: " .•• d'apporter sa contribution aux forces
armees qui, conformement aux accords s/Jeciaux, doivent etre Inises, sur son invitation . ~ ."
Je crois comprendre que le representant de la
BeIgique accepte cette addition.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated

M. VAN UNGENHOVE (Belgique): Oui, Monsieur le President.

from French): Yes, Mr. President.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall put to the vote the Belgian amendment
to article 13, with the addition which has just
been suggested.

Le PRESIDENT: Je me~ aux voix 1'amendement beIge a 1'article 13, avec 1'addition qui
vient d'etre suggeree.

A vote. was taken by show of hands and the
Belgian amendment to article 13, with the addition suggested by the United Kingdom, was
adopted by nine votes with two abstentions.

Le vote a lieu a main le7Jee, et l'amendement
de la Belgique a l'article 13, ainsi que l'addition
proposee par le representant du Royaume-Uni,
est adopte parneufvoix, avec deux abstentions.

Votes for:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Colombia
France
Poland
Syria
United Kingdom
United States of America

Abstentions:
China
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

Votent pour:
Australie
BeIgique
Bresil
Colombie
France
Pologne
Syrie
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

S'abstiennent:
Chine
Union Ol;d Republiques socialistes sovietiques

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The suggested amendment to article 18 is somewhat longer; as amended, this article would
read as follows:
'

Le PRESIDENT: La modification proposee pour
l'article 18 est un peu plus longue; le texte de
l'article amende serait ainsi con~u:

"As provided in Article 43 of the Charter,
the armed forces specified in the special agreements .are to be made available to the Security
~ouncil by Member nations of the United Natio~ o;U1y on its call. They shall be employed
by It, ID whole or in part, only for the period

"Ainsi qu'il est prevu a l'Article 43 de la Charte, les forces armees designees dans les accords
speciaux ne devrontetre mises, par les Etats
Membres des Nations Unies, it. la disposition du
Conseil de securite que sur· son invitation. Elles
neseront utilisees par lui, en totalite ou en partie,

1IItt

_

n - r for the. Mfdmentofu ilie tasks
in Article 42 of the Charter.

1

enmg~O~:~
.

ponr la

P~O~::=~;'~'

ment des missions prevues par l'Article 42 de la
Chartel ."

Are' there any remarks on this amendment?

Y a-t-il des observations sur cet amendement?

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Would the
Belgian representative explain the purpose of this
amendment?

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques soda.
listes sovietiques) (traduit du 7usse): Le representant de la Belgique peut-il nous expliquer le
but de son amendement?

.

.

!

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgi1.lIl1) (translated
~"r. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): Le but dej.
from French ) : 'The object of this amendme:mtis cet amendement est d"expnmer plus clairement
to state more clearly than is done in the original que dans le texte primitif que lesforces artnees .
text that the arIlled forces envisaged in the special qui ~erontdesignees dans les accords speciaux ne
agreements will be made available to the. Security . seront mises a la disposition du Conseil de seeuCouncil only on its call. It is the same principle r~teque.s~r s~n invit~~on. C'est d'ailleurs (~prin­
which underlies the various amendments we have clpe qU11DSprre les divers amendements que nollS .
proposons.
.
.
tabled.
·.·.i

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodaMr. GROMYKO (Union of S()vie~ Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We have listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Nous avons
already repeated in articles 6, 10 arid 1,3 that the deja dit a plusieurs reprises, aux articles 6, 10 et
armed forces are to be made available to the 13, que les forces armees seront inises a la dispo.
Security Council on its call. This view is' ex- sition du Conseil. de securite sur son invitation.
pressed in the text three times already, ~d then Cela ne figure pas moins de trois fois dans le
in article 18, which follows the articles already texte, et pourtant, dans l'¥ticle 18 qui suit les
approved, the idea that the anned forces are articles deja approuves, on presente' comme que!to be made available to the Security Council on que chose de nouveau l'idee que les forcesarmees
its call is' advanced as an independent idea. I seront mises a la disposition du. Conseil deseeu.
feel that this is simply unnecessary. The. idea has rite sur la demande de celui-ci. Je crois que eela
already been repeated three times, and there is est simplement inutile. L'idee en question a
no need to put it forward as an independant deja ete repetee trois fois et il n'y a pas lieu
idea, though it is being expressed for the fourth de l'introduire comme une idee independante,
time. It is ilnmediately obvious that the idea has en oubliant qu'on l'exprime une quatrieme fois.
been interjected here artificially. It is not implicit On s'aper~oit tout de suite que cette idee a ete
inartkle 18. The substance of this article is ' inseree id d'une fa~on artificielle. Elle ne ressort
expressed in the second sentence, and I consider pas du sens de l'article 18. Le fond meme de eet
that the original text, approved by the Military . article figure dans la seconde phrase' et il me
Staff Committee, is clearer and more concise and semble donc que le texte primitif, le texte adopte
expresses perfectly the idea which should be con- par le Comite d'etat-major, est plus clair, plus
veyed, that is, that the armed forces made avail- precis, et traduit l'idee meme qu'il convient
able to the Security Council by agreement, will d'exprimer, a savoir que les forces armees mises
be employed, in whole or in part, only by the en totalite ou en partie a la disposition 'du Conseil
decisiop ofthe Security Council. This is a defin- de securite en vertu de certains accords seront
ite idea and it should be expressed in this article. utilisees sur decision dudit Conseil. C'est la une
idee bien definie qu'il etait necessaire de faire
figurer dans cet article.
M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
Mr. LANGE (Poland) : It seems to:qJ.e that the
Belgian amendments are very helpiul in introduc- .n me semble que la redaction des amendements
ing clarity in their formulation. But I must say beIges presente le, grand avantage de rendre la
than in this particular case, I, too, prefer the old question plus claire.. Je dois· cependant dire que,
text. It is shorter and conveys immediately the dans ce cas particulier, je prefere moi aussi l'anbasic idea, which is the limitation of the employ- den texte, plus concis,et qui exprime immediament of the armed forces to the period necessary tement l'idee fondamentale, a savoir que
l'utilisation des forces armees est limitee dans le
for the fulfilment of their task.
temps a la perlode necessaire a l'accomplisse'
ment de leur mission.
It seems to me that the revised formulation of
n me semble que la redaction amendee que
article 18, which is proposed to us, is rather 1'011 nous propose pour l'article 18 est .plutot
cumbersome and contains an unnecessary repeti- alambiquee et repete inutilemelltce qui a deja
tion of a point which was made clear in the ete exprirne clairement a l'article precedent.
previous article.
I
1 The original. alticle 18 recommended by the. Military
Staff Committee read as follows: "The armed forces made
available to the Security Council by Member nations of
the United Nations will be employed, in whole or in part,
only by the decision of the Secunty Council and only for
the .period necessary for the fulfilment of the tasks·
envisaged in Article 42 of the Charter.

_rnl

7llllJlDlHlllIIU nUIJIO'lIUiilidJJl . .

1 Le texte original de l'article 18, recommande par le
Comitl: d'etat-major, se lisait ainsi: "Les forces anuees
mises a la disposition du Conseil de securite par les E~~
Membres des Nations Unies ne seront utilisees, en totali
ou en partie, que sur decision du Conseil de seeurite, et
seulement pour la periode necessaire a l'accomplissemenl
des missions prevues par l'Article 42 de la Charte."

1IIJii··.····:---------lilOl'T.77:li5r---..-------:------.. . . '""':"""Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
It· appears to my delegation that, in view of.the
adoption of the Belgian amendments by the Security Co;mcil. all along th~, ~e, we .had .best
continue m this way, even if It does mvolve a
certain amount of repetition, and make those
changes wherever ne~essary, in order that the
meaning may. be conslStent.

M; JOHNSON (Etats-Unisd'Am&ique) (traduit de l'anglais): Ma delegation estime que, en
vue de permettre au Conseil de securite d'adopter
integralement les am~ndements proposes par le
representant de la Belgique, nous ferions mieux,
au risque de nous repeter un certain nombre de
fois, d'aIler jusqu'aubout, quitte a apporter les
changements partout ou ils seront necessaires, de
maniee a preserver la constance dans le sens.

As we read the report of the Military St~
Committee-and our thought is confirmed by
our own military members-the expression "the
armed forces made available to the Security
Council" is used to express two different meanmgs. In some places, those words refer· 'to the
,forces which are at the disposal of the Security
Council, as a result of its caIl, for a specific purpose. In.other cases they refer to the forces which
are pledged to the Security Council under the
terms of the agreements that are to be negotiated.

nous semble
la lecture du rapport du
Comite d'etatLmajor - et les membres am&icains de ce Comite partagent ce point de vue que l'expression "les forces armees mises ala disposition du Conseil de securite". est utiliseedans
deux sens differents. Suivant 'les .passages, elle
vise, soit les forces dont dispose le Conseil de
securite a la suite d'un.e invitation adressee par
lui pour une fin precise, soit les .forces que les
Etats Mem1;>res s'engagent a mettre a la disposition du Conseil de securite en vertu d'accords
qui devront etre negocies.

n

a

TIlerefore, .while I do not insist at all on the
C'est pourquoi, encore que je n'insiste pas
wording. of the amendment presented by the du tout en faveur de la redaction de l'amenderepresentative of Belgium, my delegation does feel ment propose par le representant de la' Belgique,
we should be consistent; and iU<-l.smuch as that ma delegation estime que nous devrions etre
phrase is usedwittt different meanings through- logiques avec nous-memes et que, chaque fois
out the report, it ought to be c1armed in each que l'expression qui fait l'objet de notre discuscase, along the line of principle initiated by the sion est utilisee dans le rapport, i1 conviendrait,
Belgian representative.
dans '·la ,mesure ou e1ie est 'employee dans. des
sens differents, d'en preciser le sens conformement aux priucipes exposes par le representant
.
de la Belgique.
Mr. LANGE (Poland): I think there is something in what has been said by the representative
of the United States, and it occurs to me that
we might formulate the article in the following
way, which would preserve its former brevity and
also bring it into' accord with the earlier formulation. We could say: "The armed forces made
'tlvailable to. the Security Council .•."-and
now· I would add the words "on its call"-and
then follow the old text.

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglaisJ:
Je crois qu'il y a une part de verite dans ce que
vient de dire le representant des Etats-UIlis et iJ
me semble que nous pourrions formuler l'article
de maniere a lui conserver sa concision premiere
et a nous rapprocher de' la redaction anterieure.
Nous pourrions dire: Les forces armees mises
la dispqsition du Conseil de securitl. . ., intercaler ici les mots sur son invitation, et reprendre
ensuite l'ancien texte.

I do not insist on that particular wording,
because I do not think the matter is very important.

Je n'insiste pas surcette redaction particuliere
parce que je ne considere pas'la question comroe
tres importante.

a

Le PRESIDENT: Accepteriez-vous cependant
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
But would you agree to retain the words "speci- de laisser dans ce texte les mots "designees dans
,les accords speciaux"?
fied in the special agreements" in the text? .
Nous aurions alors le texte suivant:

We would then have the following text:

•

"Les forces armees designees dans les accords
"The armed forces specified i'1t the special
agreements and made available to the Security 'speciaux et mises a la disposition du Conseil de
Co~ncil, on its call, by Member nations of the securite, sur son invitation, par les Etats Membres
Umted Nations will be employed, in whole or in des Nations Unies ne seront utilisees, en totalite
Part, only by the decision of the Security Council ou en partie, que sur decision du Con..<:eil desecuand only for the period necessary for the fulfil- rite, et. seulement pour la periode necessaire a
ment of the tasks envisaged in Article 42 of the l'accomplissement des missionS prevues par l'Arti·Charter.;'l
.
,
cle 42 ~e la Chartel ."
. It would therefore be the same text with the
addition of a refe;ence to the special agreements,
as was done preVlously~
1

tl1 Ita!i<;ized passages represent suggested diversions from

e.ongmal text.

.ft

I1 s'agit donc du meme' texte, auquel on
ajouterait la reference aux accords speciaux,
comme nous l'avon: fait auparavant.

I

1 Les mats en italiqueconstituent des projets d'amendements au texte. primitif.
.

-----------.. . .

-------"":"'""-.-.~u~~~-~~,.".....,,...,.....~---~~--I!!I!!!!!!!!!4ii!!!!.

Would the Belgian delegation accept this
wording?

La delegation de la Belgique accepterait-e1le
cette redactian?

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French) : Yes, certainly.

M.VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): Oui, certainement.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Sbcialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociapublics) (translated from Russian): I feel that listessovietiques) (traduit du russe): n me
the point at issue here isnot that referred to by semble que la question qui se pose n'est pas
the United States representative. There could, of celle qui a ete soulevee par le representant des
course, also be a Il"eference here to the fact that Etats-Unis. On pourrait certes rappeler, ici
the armed forces may be employed only on a call aussi, que les forces armees ne peuvent ctre
from the Security Council, just as is done in utilisees qu'a la demande du Conseil de securite
articles 6, 10 and 13. That clause could be in- condition qui figure deja aux articles 6, 10 ei
serted, but I see no need to go on repeating the 13. On pourrait inset'er cette clause, encore que
same stereotyped expressions.. In the Belgian je ne voie pas la necessite derepeter les meIlles
amendment, the idea that the armed· forces can cliches. Dans l'arnendement belge, l'idee que lei
be made available to the Security Council only forces armees ne peuventetre mises a la dispo.
at the latter's call is an independent idea. In sition du Conseil de securite qu'a la demande
other words, whereas previously we said that the du Conseil lui-meme revet un caractere inde.
armed forces referred to in the special agreements pendant. En d'autres termes, alors que nons
would be made available to the Security Council declarions auparavant que les forces armees desi.
on its call, or Qn its demand-that is,. that we gnees dans les accords speciaux seraient mises
mentioned, 'as it were incidentally, that they are la disposition du Conseil de securite sur son
placed at the disposal of the Security Council on invitation ou sur sa demande, et que nous nous'
its call-:-here, after-stressing this idea thrice, we bornions a rappelcr, pour ainsi dire en passant,
, now declare that the armed forces provided for que ces forces armees seraient mises a la.dispoin the special' agreements shall be placed at the sition du Conseil de securite sur sa demande,
disposal of the Security Council only on its call. nous declarons maintenant, apres avair repete.
That is quite. a different approach. It is not just a trois reprises,l'idee que je viens de mentio~er,
the 'expression of an idea already eXpressed in que les forces armees prevues danS les accords
~cles 6, 10 and 13, but the transformation of speciaux ne pourront etre nrises a la' disposition
this idea into an independent idea, which does du Conseil de secur,ite que sur sa demande. C'e.t
not follow from this article. It would be another la une fa~on differente d'aborder la question.
matter if, for example, instead of saying!: "As En effet, il ne s'agit plus seulementd'exprimer
provided in Article 43 of the Charter, the armed . l'idee deja contenue aux articles 6, 10 et 13,
forces specified in the special agreement are to mais bien de la tranSformer en une idee inde.
be made available to .the Security Council by pendante, qui ne decoule pas du texte del'article
Members of the United Nations only on its call. que nous sommes en train d'examiner. Il n'en
They shall be employed by it..." etc. we were to serait pas de meme si, par exemple, au lieu de
say: "As provided in Article 43 of the Charter, dire1 : "Ainsi qu'il est prevu a l'Article 43 de la.
the armed forces specified in the special agree- Charte, les forces armees designees dans les
ments to be made available to the Security Coun- accords speciaux ne devront etre mises, par Ies
cil by Members of the United Nations on its call Etats Membres des Nations Unies, a la disposi8hall be employed by it..." l etc.
tion du Conseil de securite que sur son invitation.
Elles ne seront utilisees par lui ..." etc., on disait:
"Ainsi qu'il est prevu a l'Article 43 de la
Charte, les forces armees desighees dans Ies
accords speciaux et mises· a la disposition' du
Conseil de securite par les Etats Membres des
Nations Unies, sur sOIl invitation, seront utilisees
parlui", etc1 •

a

The word are should be omitted, of course;
the word only is not necessary, nor is the. period
after the word call.

Les mots devront etra sont naturellement sup"
primes; la locution ne ... que n'est pas necessaire,
ni le point finaljapres le mot invitation.

But I would like to draw your attentionto yet
another point. The Belgian amendment omits
the phrase which states .that-these armed forces
can be employed only on a decision of the Security Council. I cannot find this phrase in
the Belgian amendment. It has been omitted
although it is a fundamental idea. This is precisely the idea which the Military Staff Committee wanted to express. Thus, a completely new
idea has been unnecessarily stressed and over-

D'autre part, je vouckais encore attirer l'attention des membres du Conseil sur cet autre point:
la clayseselon laquelle les forces .armees ne
pourront etre utiJisees que sur decision du
Conseil de securite ne figure pas dans l'amendement beIge. 'Je ne l'y trouve poin~~ EIle a
ete omise, bien qu'il s'agisse la d'une idee fondarnentale. C'est bien cette idee-la qu'a voulu
exprimer le Comite d'etat-major. Ainsi, l'amendement beIge fait ressortir sans necessite une

"
:tRead in English.

1

Cite en anglais.

1JIZ-..-------...--rfo~'7'~7'-------------developed in the Belgian version,. whilst th~ idea
which this article should have expressed, has
completely disappeared.

idee absolument nouvelle, lui donne tme importance .exageree, tout en faisant entierement
disparaitre l'idee qui auraitdo. etre exprimee
dans cet article.

I consider the old text prepared by the Military
Staff Committee much better. The closer we
keep to that text the better, even though we
ado~t some part of the Belgian amendment.

A mon avis, l'ancien texte prepare par le
Comite d'etat-major est nettement preferable.
Plus nous serrerons de pres l'ancien texte, mieux
cela vaudra, meme si noLS retenons une partie
de l'amendemeI1t beIge.

Mr. JOHNsqN (United States of America):
I agree in part with the observations of Mr.
Gromyko regarding the affirmative way in which
the Belgian amendment has been stated. It seems
to my delegation that the only point we are
endeavouring to make clear' here is the nature of
the forces being described:. whether they are
the overall forces which will be provided in the
agreements, or whether they are those forces
which will be at the disposal of the Security
Council when it has called for them in any
specific case.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : ]'approuve en partie les observations de M. Gromyko quant a- la forme
affirmative dans laquelle l'amendement beIge
a ete redige.. Ma delegation estime que le seul
point que nous nous effor~ons ici de rendre elair
conccrne la nature des forces decrites: s'agit-il
de la puissance d'ensemble des forces designees
dans les accords, ou s'agit-il des forces mises}l
la disposition du Conseil de securite, sur son
invitation, dans un cas precis?

In the view of our delegation~ and in the
view of the United States members. of the Military Staff Committee,that is clearly the latter
. idea which is envisaged. That idea is borne out
by the very title of chapter V, which is: "Employment of armed forces."·
.

Selon ma delegation, et selon les mem.bres
americains du Comite d'etat-major, il s'agit
clairement de la seconde conception. Le titre
meme du chapitre V le prouve: "Utilisation
des forces armees:'

I therefore wonder whether we could not
effect the decision we desire by simply leaving
article 18 as it is, with an insertion which would
cause the article to read as follows: "The armed
forces made' available to the Security Council,
on its call, by Member natio~ of the United
Nations will be employed, in whole or in part..."

Je me demande donc si nous ne pourrions
trouver la solution que nous recherchons en
laissant sinlplement subsister l'article 18 dans
sa forme actuelle, quitte a- y ajouter quelques
mots, de manihe a- lui faire dire: "Les forces
armees misesa- la disposition du Conseil de
securite par les Etats Membres des Nations
Unies, sur son invitation, ne seront utilisees, en
totalite ou en partie ..."

That, it seems to me, would make article 18
consistent with previous articles, and would ex~
press the true meaning of the Military Staff
Committee. My purpose is simply to make it
clear that we are dealing only with those contingents which are under the effective control of
the Security Council after the Security Council
has called for them.

Je pense que cette redaction rendrait l'article 18 conforme aux articles preceaents et exprimerait la pensee .veritable du Comite d'etatmajor. Je desire simplement faire ressortir" qu'il
s'agit uniquement des contingents qui se trouveront places sous le contr61e effectif du Conseil
de
, securite apres que le Conseil aura fait appei
aeux.

Mr. LANGE (Poland),: It seems to me that the
best formulation is the one proposed by the representative of the United States. It is really the
formulation which I first proposed. At the request
of the President, l agreed to add the words "by
special agreements." However, I really think
those words should be omitted, because the reference is to the forces after they have been made
available to the Secu,rity Council.

.

,

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):

n me semble que la meilleure redaction est celle
qu'a proposee la representant des Etats-Unis.
C'est, en fait, celle que j'avais proposee tout
d'abord. A la demande du President, fai accepte
d'ajouter les mots "en vertu des accords speciaux". Toutefois, je suis, au fond, d'avis que
l'on de i.t les supprimer, car il s'agit id des
forces arm.ees une foisqu'elles ont ete mises aIn disposition du Conseil de securite.

Le colonel. HODGSON (Australie)·· (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia) : I should like to
ask what amendment or formulation we are really . l'anglais): Je voudrais savojr quel amendeconsidering. I have heard about five different ment ot! quel libelle nous examinons ence
proposals, and I am rapidly reaching a stage of moment. J'ai entendu formuler cinq propositions
hopeless confusion. It seems to· my delegation differentes, et j'en arrive tres rapidement ne
that up to the last one, none of the drafts is plus savoir a- quoi m'en tenir. Ma delegation
really clear. One of them mentions the special estime qu'aucun des projets, y compris le dernier,
agreements which are to be made available to the n'est vraiment clair. L'un d'entre eux parle des
Security Council-not the forces which are to be accords speciaux qui doivent etre mis a- la dispo-

a.

br ____

,$
.

'

. "

.

.

i678

made available, but the ~pecial agreements which
'are to,,- made available.
.

iJIIIIIIII

sition du Conseil de securite --, non pas des
forces qui doivent etre ,mises a sa disposition'"
m$ bien des accords speciaux qui doivent etr;
mis a sa diSposition:

D'autre part, on a parle de la necessite
Furthermore, there has been talk about. the
consistency of the amendments. In all the pre- d'harmoniser les amendements. Dans aucun
vious Belgian amendments, .there is no reference des amendemen~be1ges precedents on ne s'est
to Article 43 of the-Charter, but that i'eference refere a l'Article 43 de la .Charte,et void que
is suddenly brought into article ,18. All this article tout a coup l'on introduit cette reference dans
can apply only to Article 43 of the Charter, why, .1'article 18. Comme cet article ne peut faire
then, mention it at all,
allusion qu'a 1'Article 43 de la Charte, pourquoi
done en faire etat?
,
,
For these reasons, the Australian delegation
," prefers 1;b.e origin~text: It is clea,r and it is simple.
We have only two suggestions: first, instead of
HMemberilations" to use only the word M ember:s;
secondly, to insert the words on its call suggested
by, the representative of the United States. That
will make the article perfectly clear' and will
- provide, I thin,k, the simplest solution., _
.

Aussi la delegation, ausfralienne prefere'-t-elle .
le texte initial. Ilest claj.r, et ilestsimple. No)lS
ne presentons que deux propositions: que l'on
remplace Ies mots "Etats Membres" par le mot
Membres, et que 1'oninsere les mots sur son
invitation suggerespar le representant des EtatsUnis. L'article sera ainsi parfaitement clair, 'et
nons aurons, je pense, trouve la solution la plus
simple.'
,

, Mr., GROMYKO (Union of the Soviet Socialist
"Republics)' (translated from Russitln): When
there aremany amendments, and amendments to
an amendment, it is verydifIicult to draft them
during a meeting without seeing a te~t. I think
the Secretariat sh9uld be asked to prepare a text,
possibly more than one text, containing the varioUS amendments.

M. GROMYKO (Union des RepubliqueS sodalistessovietiqueS) (traduit du russe): Lorsqu'il
existe de nombreux amendementc;, et qu'ils se
rapportent eux-memes a un amendemeht, 'il
est ~es difficile, sa~ un texte ecrit, d'etabIir
une iedactionen seance. n me semble que le
Secr~tariat devrait preparer, un texte, ou peutetre meme ,plusieurs textes qui tiendraient
compte des differents, amendements.

If we find itdifIicult' to agree on ~y text, it
might be advisable toast- 'tIle Military Staff
Committee to make some amendmerits to the,
text' and submit them' for consideration at our
next, meeting. Otherwise, judging' by the various
amendments, it· would take a very long time to
discuss this' question orally with01,lt seeing a
definite text. .

S'il nollS eSt difficile de nous entendre sur un
texte particulier, il serait peut-etresouhaitable '
que no~ demandionsau Comite d'etat-major'
d'apporter ,certaines modifica~onsau texte primitif et de' nous les soumettre a notre prochaine
reunion. Aen juger d'apres ce qui s'est produit
pour les differents amen.dements, nous pourrions
discuter pendant fort longtemps si nous ne, disposons pas d'un texte ecrit.
'

Sir ALEXANDER CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
I do not want to complicate the discussion, but
oile question has occured to ine, ~d I should
, like to know the/proper view on this. After all,
it is important that we should all have the same
meaning in mind and that there should be no
misunderstanding.
'

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Je ne veux pascompIiquer les debats, mais une question m'est venue
a l'esprit et je desirais savoir queUe reponse elle
comporte au juste. Apres tout, il importe que
nous ..oyons tous d'accord sur le sens des tennes
et qu'il n'y ait pas de malentendus.

"

En parlant a 1'instant de 1'article 18, le repreI think that in speaking about article 18 just
now, the representative of the United .States said sentant des Etats-Unis a, si jene ni' abuse, dit
that the expreSsion "the armed forces made avail- que l'expression "les forces armees misesa la
able to the Security Council .•." in this context disposition du Conseil de securite ..." designait
meant the armed forces made available as a id les forces armees mises a la· disposition'du
result of a call. If that is the case, I'am not quite Conseil,' spr son invitation. Si tel est le cas, je
clear as to. the meaning or force of the words ne comprends pastres bienle sens Oll la valent
thattheamied forces "will be employed, in des mots suivants: "Les forces arrnees . .. ne
whole or in part.•." I maybe wrong, but the seront utilisees, en totalite ouen partie • : ." Les
words '"in wheleor in part" ~ed me to 'believe ,mots "en totalite- ou enpartie" m'induisenta
'that the armed forces mentioned here were the croire- je puis me tromper -, qu'il s'agit Ia
overall pledged forces, and that it might be that de la puissance cl'ensemble des forces quel'on
the ,Council'did ,not wish to call, upon all those s'est'engagea fournir, ensemble de forces auquel
'forces. That wo1,1ld account for the words '!in le CQnseil pourrait ne pas desirer faire appel
whole Qr in part" in this article. I may be wrong, dans sa totalite. TeUe serait la raison de la prebut those words have given me some doubt as to sence,'dans cet article, des mots "en totalite ou en
the real meaning of this article; and if we do partie~'. Je puis me tromper, mais ces mots on~

1IIlIIb-------$

~-Ul0rn79r-- .......-

.

:a_---.

......- - ·

differ on the real meaning of this article, it irJght
lead us to difficulties.
.

quelque peu obscurci, pour moi, le sensveritable
de l'article; et si nous ne sommespas tous d'ac'cord sur le veritable sens de eet article, nous
risquons denous heurter a des clifficultes.

1£ the an'ned forces in this article· do mean the
whole overall~strength, I should like to suggest,
for the sake of absolute. clarity, that even at the
cost of repetition, if that is really what we mean,
we should use again the phrase that we have
used before in. preceding articles. Actually, I
should be content with the article as drafted by
the Military Staff Committee, the meaning of
.
which I think is quite clear~

Si les forcal armees sigIlifient, clans cet article,
la puisance d'ensemble des forces armees dans
leur totalite, je voudrais proposer, dans un but
de clarification, que nous employions de neuveau, au risque de nous repeter, l'expression dont
nous nous sommes deja servisp~ .h~. articles
precedents, si c'est bien c.eque nous vouIons dire.
En·· fait, je me satisferais. de' la n§daction que le
Comite d'etat-major a donnee al'artic1e, et
dont le sens est tout a fait clair.

Mr. HSIA (O~a): I thought I was the only
.M. HSIA (Chine) (traduit de fangiais): Je
. person who was trying to defend the draft report croyais atre le seul a defendre le. projet de rapof the Military Staff Committee. I am glad to port du Comite d'etat-major. Je me rejouishave some members join me on this point. Mter .de voir que quelques membres se. sont joints
all this article is not the whole report. I mean . a moi. Apres tout, cet article ne .constitue pas
th~t to read· any article intelligently, the Council tout le rapport. Je veux dire que, pouresperer
really has to understand the whole report from saisir le sens d'un article quelconque, leConseil
beginning to end. Nobody can read one article doit, en realite, comprendre· l'ensemble du
and expect to· understand, the whole report. I rapport du commencement a la fm. PersoIm.e
am· sure all the members of the Council will ne peut esperer, a la' lecture d'un article, comagree with me. If .any member of the Security prendre l'ensemble du rapport. Je suis sftrque
Council should try to make every article clear tous les membres du Conseil seront d'accord
by itself, that would prove to be an impossible avec :rIoi sur ce point. Toutmembre du Conseil
'task.
de securit~ qui vouclrait essayer de rendre chaque
article futelligible independamment du contexte
se trouverait en presence d'une tache impossible.
For example, let us,consider article 18; to
Considerons, par exemple,.l'article .18 auquel
which Mr.Johnson justproposed an amendment. M. Johnson vient de· proposer un amendement.
Just look at these words: "available to the Secu- Voyez donc les differcnts.· termes employes:
rityCouncil," "on the call of·the Security Coun- "mises a la disposition du Conseil de securite",
cil," "by' the decision of the Security Council." "sur invitation 'du Conseil de securite"; "sur
It isa very confusing business to an ordinary decision du Conseil desecurite". Voila des
person unless he understands the entire back- expressions .bien deconcertantes pou~qui ne
ground. From the very beginning I was not connait pas les .tenants et 'les aboutissants de
happy about this amendment and I think tlie la question. Je n'etais pas
satisfait de cet
Belgian representative was quite right. It was' arnendement des le debut, et j'estime que le
only at article .18 that Mr. Johnson began to representant de la Belgique a tout a faitraison.
realize that without the phrase "as provided in Ce n'est qu'a l'article 18 que M, Johnson a
Article 43," the words "gpecial agreements" did . commence a se rendre compte que, sans le memnot have much sense. What are you referring to bre de phrase "ainsi qu'il est prevu a l'Article
there? Special. agreements are provided for only 43;', les mots "accords speciaux" ne veulent
in Article 43. Now, from the beginning, the pas.dire grand-chose. A quoi donc veut-on faire
representative of BelgitWl has constantly been allusion? Les "accords speciaux" ne sont prevus
repeating the phrase "as provided in Article 43,'~ qu'a l'Article 43. Or, des le debut, le repre~
~ order to make the meaning clear. ~at is the sentant .de la Belgique a, pour rendre sa pensee'
difficulty, antI that is why I was not happy about claire, tepete sans cesSe le m~mbre de phrase
the,United States amendmeI.t. I still believe that "ainsi qu'il est prevu a I'Article 43". Voila ou se-the text is clear enough as it is, but if anybody trouve la difficulte, . et voila pOurquoi l'amendesire to make it clearer still, I have no objection, dement des Etats-Unis ne me satisfaisait pas.
provided it can be done without entangling Je continue a estimerque la presente redaction
onself..
est suffisamment claire, mais si quelqu'un desire
l'ameliorer encore, je ne m'y opposeraipas, a
condition que l'on puisse y'arriver sans s'embrouiller.

tres

Mr. EL-KHoURI (Syria): I'see no reaSon for

~ these amendments. They are merely duplicatmg and confusing something which is very simple.
I think: our discussion should be facilitated by
rejecting all amendments to article 18, because
article 18, as it stands, is complete and clear

Itz_-

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (ttitduit de l'anglais):
Je ne vois pas l'utilite de'toils ces amendements.·
lis ont pour seul resultat de faire double· emploi
et ils embrouillent une chose qui est
simple.
Je crois que nous simplifierions nos debats en
eliminant tous les amendements a l'article 18,

tres

$

ita

£

ID80

entmgh to cover all the ideas' which were pre:sented. iJl these amendments.

carc~t article, danssa redaction actuelle, n'o:rnet
rien et exprime 'assez clairement t()utes les idees
contenues dans ces amendements.

In the -first place, the reference to Article 43
of the Charter is not at all necessary because this
eIltire report refers to Article 43. Furthermore,
previous artiCles of the report are also based on
Article 43. Therefore, what is the purpose of re• ferring to· something which is already quite clear?
'If it is intended to cover the phrase "on its call,"
Article 43 contains that, as has been mentioned
before, and it is not necessary to repeat It here.

Tout d'abord, il n'est nullement necessaire
de se referer a l'Article 43 de la Charte, car le
rapport tout entier se refere a cet Article. De
plus, des articles precedents· du rapport tepasent egalement sur cet Article. Pourquoi done
alors, faire allusion a que1que chose de tout ~
fait clair deja? Si c'est pour exprimer l'idee
contenue daJ1.S le membre· de phrase "sur son
invitation", 1'Article 43, comttle on 1'a deja
souligne, le .fait deJa, et il n'est pas necessaire
.de le repeter ici.

In the original text of article 18, for example,
Dans le texte initial de l'article. 18, par exemwe seethe words "only by the decision 0'£ the pIe, nous lisons les mots "ne seront utilisees . . .
Security Council." Does that not mean on its que· sur decision du Conseil de securite". Est-ee
call? The original text says that the armed forces que ce1a ne sigilifie pas "sur son invitation"? Le
can be employed "only by the decision of the texte initial dit que "les forces armees nepeu· Security Council." That provision also covers vent etre utilisees . . . que sur decision du Comeil
the phrase "on its call." It is notnecessary·tc . de securite". Cette disposition exprime egale· repeat that phrase here after it has b~en men- ment I'idee contenue dans le membre de phrase
"tioned on" numerous occasions in the previous "sur son invitation". n n'est donc pas neceiarticles.
saire de repeter ici ces mots, qui ont deja ete
meniionnes a de nombreuses reprises dans les
articlC$ precedents.
It is. the position of my ,delegation. that the
amendments which have been proposed are not
necessary. I consider article 18 in its original
text to be fully complete and sufficiently clear,
and I shall vote for it without any other amendment. '

Ma delegation estime que les amendements
proposes ne sont pas necessaires. Je trouve que
l'a..t1:icle 18, dans sa redaction initiale, ne laisse
absolument rien de cote et est suffisamment
clair; aussi voterai-je pour son adoption, a
l'exclusion de tout amendement.

The PRESIDENT' (translated from French):
The time has come for the Belgian representative
to give us his views on this exposition of his
amendment.

Le PRESIDENT: Il est temps que le representant de la Belgique nous donne son avis
sur cette exegese de son amendement.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): The purpose of the amendment
to article 18 submitfed by the Belgian delegation
is very simple. The idea is. to correct a contradic· tion and. a confusion in the article as at present
worded..

M. VAN UNGENHOVE (Belgique): Le but de
l'amendement presente par la delegation belge
a l'artic1e 18 est tres simple: il s'agit de corriger
une contradiction, une confusion, qui se trouve
dans la redaction actuelle de 1'article 18.

Where does this contradiction arise? It arises
frottl the opening words of the article: "The
armed forces made available to the Council... ?'
This, as we have agreed,· implies a previous decision by the Council; it also implies that the latter
has issued a call to the States to which tl;1ese
.. ~edforces Qelong. But in the rest of the.article
the future tense is used, whicrr~ggests that no
such call has yet been made. Therein lies the
· contradiction and it is to correct this, I repeat,
that our amendment is made.

D'ou resuIte cette contradiction? EIle resulte
du fait, que 1'article commence par ~esmots:
"Les forces armees mises a la disposition du
Conseil ..." Ceci, comme nous 1'avans reconnu,
implique une decision prealable du Conseil; ceci
implique done le fait .que .ce1ui-ci a adresse
une invitation aux Etats dont dependent ces
forces armees. "pr, dans la suite de l'artic1e, le
futur est employe, de sorte que l'on se trouve
dans la position ou cette invitation n'aurait pas
ete encore adressee; Voila quelle est la contradiction. Notre amendement, je le repete, consiste
a corriger celle-ci.

The Polish representative has just suggested a
simpler wording, which we have accepted. That
made by the United States representative is not
very different. We. would accept it too. But we
still believe that, if article 18 were kept in its
present form, it would mean adopting a text that
is a contradiction in terms.

Le represep.tant de la Pologne a suggere tout
a.1'heure une redaction plus simple. Naus l'avons
acceptee. CeIle quia ete suggeree par le r,epresentant des Etats-Unis n'est guere diff€rente.
Nous 1'acceptons egalement. Mais nous restons
convaincus que si on devait maintenir l'article
18 dans s~ forme actuelle, on adopterait un
texte comportant une contradiction.
.
.~

I• •

81

[

118

11111. I •

jlYJi. "1JIIIIJIltI.8tII1iU:JIHIilI I f

~

•

]"

WW7

&

1081

Colonel HODGS~N (Australia) :.I~ is clear that," " ·Le· c.olonel HODGS0N,
(Austra;lie) (traduit dJ
there is a grave difference of oplIDon as to the l'anglazs):. n· est 'manife
.exact meaning of article 18, and I. do not think desaccord sW' le. sens ste qu'il y a un. grave
we should make a decision either to accep tanno us ne devons, selon exact· de .I'article IS et
moi, decider ni en faveur
amendment or leave the a..-ti.cIe as it stands until d'un amendement,
ill en faveur dumai ntien de
we have it definitely in our minds. 1 was hoping I'articIe dans' son
.etat actuel, tant que nous
that the. President might make a suggestion that n'aurons pas definit
ivement compris le sens de
the Military Staff Committee itself should en- cet article. J'esperais
que le President proposedeavour in some way or another to give us some rait que le Comite d'etatmajor lui-meme s'efforadvice or assistance in accordance with i~ func- ~at, d'unem aniere
ou d'une autre, 'de nous
tion towards this Council.
donner un avis ou de nous venir en aide, conformement aux fonctions qu'il remplit a I'egard
de ce Conseil.
The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenc h):·
Le PRESIDENT: En ce
Personally I can see no contraction in article 18. vois pas de contradiction qui me c9nceme, je ne
dans1"articIe 18. Nous
We agreed that, if the armed forces are to made avons ete d'accord
pour considerer que, pour
available to the Security Counc il-and we under- que les forces soient' mises
a la disposition du
stand by this. "in case of dange r"-the re must be Conseil de securite
et
nous
entendons parla
a call by the latter. There is no contradiction in- "au moment du
danger" -'- il faut une invitayolved in thinking that a Security Council deci- tion de sa part.
n n'est pas contradictoire de
sion is needed to decide how these forces should penser qu'une decisio
n du' Conseil de securite est
be used. That is a different idea.'
neceSsaire, d'autre part:j pour arreter comment
ces forces seront utilisees : c'est la une idee
differente.
'
All things considered, I would be in favour
Je serai!! partisan, en fin de compte, de la'
of the wording proposed by the United States redaction qui avait ete proposee
representative. This amendment, if I am not sentant des. Etats-Unis; la modifi par le repre;;.
cation, si j'ai
'mistaken, consists of simply clarifying the first bien compris, consisterait
a
ajoute
rsimpl ement
line'of the text, l while the remainder would stand une precision a la premiere
ligne
du
texte1 ,en
as it is, that is: "The armed forces made. avail- maintenant le reste de
celui-ci: "Les forces
able to the Security Council, on its call, by Mem- armees mises, sur son invitat
ion,a .la disposition
. ber nations ... will be employed ... etc."
du Conseil de;securite par les Etats Membres
des Nations Unies ... ne seront utilisees ...", etc.
The Syrian repres~tative said that he preLe representant de la
ferred the original text. I believe that, if we pre£erait le texte origina Syrie a indique qu'il
merely add "on its call," we would be making a nous bomons a ajouter l. J e crois que si nous
"sur
addition similar to that made to. the previous faiSons la meme additio son invitation", nous .
n que celle a laquelle
article and would, in the main t leave the text as nous avons procede
pour I'article precedent, et
originally worded. I think that is the form.ac- nous laissons, pour
l'essentiel, le texte tel qu'il
cepted by the "Belgian rept·esentative.
etait. Je crois que c'est la forme que le representant de la Belgique a acceptee.
Now, at this stage, several different opinions
Maintenant, au point ou nous en sommes, une.
have been. voiced. The representative of the serie d'opinions
differentes ont eteexp rimees .
~oviet Union, supported by the Australian repreCelle du representant de rUnio n sovietique,
sentative, was in favour of either consulting the que vient d'appu
yer le re;presentantde I'AustraMilitary Staff Committee: or of referring the lie, tendait
a ce que I'on consultat le Comite
question back to it. You must now decide whether d'etat-major
ou a ce que la question £Ut renthe discussion we have just had has shed sufficient voyee a celui-c
i. n vous appartient d'apprecier
·light on the subject, or whether you think it si nous
nous estimons assez eclaires par la
necess~""Y to refer the question back to the Milidiscussion qui vient d'avoir lieu, ou si le renvoi
tary Staff Committee.
.
au Comite d'etat-major vous parait necessaire.
I would like to have your views on referring
Sur cette question du renvoi au Comite d'etatthe matter back to the Military Staff Committee. major,
j'aimerais avoir vos opinions.
Mr. LANGE (Polan d): I believe we should be
M. LANGE (Pologne) (t)Ylduit de l'anglais) :
a~le to settle this question here within fifteen
Je crois que nous pourrions regler cette question
nunutes.
ici meme, en l'espace d'un quart d'heure.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French ):
Le PRESIDENT: Pour que le texte soit tout
I~ order to make the text absolutely clear, it a fait clair, il suffira
it peut-et
nught perhaps be sufficient to settle one point seul point sur lequel reste encore re de regler un
une incertitude:
which is still not: clear; I am referring to the je fais allusion a la
question soulevee tout a
question just raised by the United Kingdom I'heure par le representant
du Royaume-Uni
rep~esentative regarding the expression "in whole au sujet
de I'expression "en totalite ou en paror In part." One way in which this expression tie". Une interpretation
de cette expression
could be interpreted would be as follows: the pourrait se concevoir
de la maniere suivante:
1 As reproduced in the mimeog raphed documer
it 8/886.
1 n s'agit id du texte roneotype du docume
nt 8/886.

~

..••...

&

.

.n

<

J.

- -

la

. i 44

1082

,

Se<mrity Council calls upon acert~numberof
forces but uses, at a. certain point and at a
given ,moment, only a part of the forces which
it had start~d to collect.

le Conseil de securite fait appel a _un certain
nombre "de forces et il n',!!tilise, a un point
donne, a un moment donne, G,u'unepartie des
forces qu'ilauraitcommence a rassembler.

If you agreed on this interpretation, we might
possibly be able, to decide, on this 'text at once,
which would only leave' us the United. States
representative's amendment to cOriSider, since this
amendment has beeQ. accepted by the Belgian
representative. If I am not mistaken, this is the
text on which I ~ould ask you to state your views.

Si VOllil admettiez cette interpretation, nous
pourrions peut-etre nouspron,oncer immediatement sur ce texte, pour lequel il ne notis reste- '
rait a examiner que l'amendement du representant des Etats-Unis, puisqut:: cet amendement
a ete accepte par le representant de la Belgique.
Sauf erreur, c'est sur ce texte qu'il conviendrait
que je vous demande devous prononcer.

'Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I feel it
would be difficult for us at this moment to talk
about any particular interpretation, since ,~ere
may be several interpretations., If we want to
decide on some interpretation, with opinions
varying as, they ,do, it would be better to ask the
Military Staff Committee to give ;their views on
the question under discussion.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du 7usse): n me
semble difficile qe parler en ce mpment d'une
interpretation que1conque, puisqu'il pou...--r:llt
tres bien y en avoir plusietirs. Si, en presence
de nos divergences de vues, nous voulions nous
entendre sur une interpretation, il vaudrait
mieux demander au Comite d'etat-major son
avis sur la question. "
.
'

Moreover, I feel 'that the addition of the words
"on its call" will evidently not be necesSary as it
<ioes hot alter the substance of the article agreed
upon by the Military Staff Committee.

D'autre part, bien que l'addition des mots
"sur l'invitation du Conseil de securite" ne me
paraisse pas nccessaire, j'estime qu'elle ne modifie pas, quant au fond, le texte de l'article
'
adopte par le Comite d'etat-major.

If this is the only amendment we ar.e going to
introduce in the, article agreed upon' by the
Military Staff Committee, we maybe able to
finish our discussion at today's meeting. If, however, ,we are to consider other amendments as
well, would it not be better to ask the Military
Staff Committee to re-draft these various amendments,and give us their version or variant of the
, amended text?

Si c'est la le seul amendement que nous apporterons au texte de l'article adopte par,le Comite
d'etat-major, nous pourrons peut~etre terminer
rapidement l'etude de ce, point au cours de la
seance d'aujourd'hui. Si, toutefois, nous devons
examiner les autres amendements qui ont ete
presentes, il vaudrait peut-etre mieux demander
au Comite d'etat-major de mettre au pqint ces
differentsamendements et de nous donner sa
version du texte amende.

The PRESIDENT' (translated from French):
I would now ask the United States representative
to give us the exact text of the a.mendment just
proposed by him.
'

Le PRESIJ)ENT: Je donne la parole au representant des Etats-Unis en le priant d'avoir l'obligeance de nous donner le texte exact de
l'amendement qu'il a propose tout a I'heure.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
A few, minutes ago, the President gave an interpretation with regard to what the Military Staff
Committee means by this article, which is also
the interpretation placed upon this article by my
'delegation and apparently by all the members of
the ,Council.

, M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): 11 y a quelques minutes, le
Pre.sident a fourni une interpretation du sens
donne a cet article par le Comite d'etat-major,
interpretation qui est egalement celle de ma
delegation, comme' elle est apparemment celle
de tous les membres du Conseil.

If there is any doubt about that, it is my suggestion that we should not send arti~le 18 back
to the Military Staff Committee, but, .;following
the precedent of our last meeting, that the members 'of the Military Staff Committee should, be
requested to give us their interpretation and their
, view as to the meaning of this article. If, after
we have received that reply and know what the,
,view of the Military Staff Committee definitely is,
this article as drafted does not seem to express
clearly that view ,and seems to contain some
ambiguity, we can then consider minor amend. ments to bring it into conformity with the reply
of th~. Military Staff Committee.

S'il demeure quelques' incertitudes a ce suj~t,
je propose que nous ne rerivoyions pas l'article
18, au Comite d:etat-major, mais que, suivant
le precedent cree a notre derniere seance, nous
demandions aux membres du Comite d'etatmajor de nous donner leur interpretation et
leur point de vue en ce qui concerne le sens
de cet article. Lorsque, grace a cette reponse,
nous saurons definitivement a quoi nous en
tenir sur le point de vue du Comite d'etat-major,
et si nous jugeons que l'article 18 ne traduit
pas clairement le point de vue que l'on noUS
aura presente, ou qu'il pourrait preter a ambiguite, nous pourronS essayer, dans ce cas, par
des amendements d'importance se~ondaire, de
rendre le libelle de l'article conforme a la reponse
du Comite d'etat-major.

·_:

-----.--,*'"

t.-IIIlQII_.A -4----U;1O~83;----·
0_ _
'. - - ...

I

.Je prefererais personnel1ement· que nollS pro-.
I should personally prefer that pr6cedure to
that of sending back this article, as such, to the cedions ainsi plutot que de renvoyer, cet article,
Military Staff Committee. I do not think we tel quel, au Comite' d'etat-major. J'estime que
should send any articles back to the Committee nous' ne .devrions renvoyer aucun article au
until we have exhausted every po~ibility of reach- Comite tant que nollS n'aurons pas epuisetoutes
ing a decision. I should therefore suggest that we lespossibilites de paivenir a une. decision.. Je
should request the interpretation and opinion of proposerai donc que nous sollicitions l'interpretation et l'opiniori du Comite sur cette question.
the ConUnittee on this matter.
L'amendementque j'ai propose tendait simpleThe amendment that i: suggested was merely
the addition of the words "on its call" at the end ment a intercaler dans l'article 18 les mots "sur
of the first line of the mimeographed text of .arti- son invitation", entre les mots "mises" et "a.
cle' 18; between "Security Council" and "by la disposition".
Member nations".
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I should certaillly support the idea of asking the (traduit de l'anglais): Je serais, hien entendu,
Military Staff Committee exactly what was in- partisan de demander au Comite d'etat-major
tended -by article 18. That there is some con- queUe est la significationexacte de l'article' 18.
siderable doubt is proved by the fact that, I am n y a certainement quelques incertitudes a ce .
told .the United Kingdom members of the Mili- sujet, puisque, a ce que j'ai su, les representarYStaff Committee considered that "the armed tants britanniques au Comite d'etat-majorestiforces made available" referred to in this article maient que l'expression "les forces armees mises
were' the whole of the overall pledged armed a la disposition", utiliseedans cet article, se
forces, whereas the United States members rapportait a la puissance d'ensemble de toutes
thcught differently. Therefore, I feel wemust be Ies forces armees que les Etats Membres s'enga~
clear, first of all, as to what the Military Staff gent a foumir, aIorsque lesrepresentants des
Etats-Unis pensaient differemment. C'estpourCommittee intended.
quoi nous devons, scIon moi, savoir avant tout
ce que le Comite d'etat-major .a voulu dire
exactement.
I believe that, when we receive the reply of the
]'estime que lorsque nous recevrons la reponse
Military Staff Committee, we should be very du Cpmite d'etat-major, nous devrons fair~ tres
careful, in drafting the one particular amendment attention au moment de rediger I'amendement
which is before us now, with particular reference que nollS considerons en ce moment, et particuto the phrase "the armed forces made available to , lierement en ce qui concerne la phrase "les forces
the Security Council on its call..." To me, in armees mises, sur son invitation, a la disposition
English the words "on its call". are compbtely du Conseil de securite . . ." Les mots on its call
ambiguous. It is not clear, by adding those words, (sur son invitation) me semblent en anglais
whether the call has been made or whether it is d'un langage extremement ambigu. En ajoutant
, the armed forces made available against a pos- ces mots,on ne precise pas si l'invitation a ete
sible call that might come from the Security effectivement faite; ou s'il s'agit de forces armees
Council.
qui sont mises a la disposition du Conseil de
securite en prevision d'une invitation eventuelle
du Conseil.
First of all, therefore, we have to know exactly
what is intended, and then we must be very
careful in drafting that amendment. We' cannot
draft it here and now, and we shall have to
cQnsider possible alternative drafts.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): On behalf of
my delegation,. I wish to make it cleat that we
did not propose that this article should be seri~
back to the Military Staff Committee. because,
judged on paSt progress, if we did that, we might
not see it again for a considerable time. Therefore, I support the views of the representatives
of the United States and the United Kingdom,
namely, that we should ask for an interpretation,
as we did the other day with reference to another
article, but not send back the article itseH to the
Military Staff Committee.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
~ir Alexander Cadogan thought that the addi··
tlOnal three words, which I suggested as an
amendment, were ambiguous. As I read them in

II1II••.

__

C'est pourquoi il nous faut, tout d'abord,
savoir exactement ce que l'on a voUlu dire, et
apporter ensuite beaucoup de soin a.la redaction
de cet amendement. Nous ne pouvons pas le
rediger id seance tenante; nous aurons a exami~
ner diveises variantes.
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
f'anglais): Je desire, au nom de ma delegation,
preciser que nous ne proposons pas de renvoyer
cet article au Comite d'etat-major. Si nous le
faisons, a en juger par ce qui s'est· deja produit,
nous risquons de ne pas le voir revenir d'id
tres longtemps. C'est pourquoi j'appuie le. point
de Vue des representants des Etats-Unis et du
Royaume-Uni. Nous devrions solliciter une interpretation, comme nous I'avons fait R'autre jour
apropos d'un autre article, et non pas renvoyer
l'article lui-meme au Comite d'etat-major.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerlque) (traduit de l'anglais): Sir Alexander Cadogan a
estime que les trois mots dont j'ai propose
l'addition dans mon amendement pretaient a

·-.·.·rj".-..
--ili:".··.·lIIIi·-.·."'iI"·iiL_-".·liif.-"..._-~1"o"'84".-.._----_.._-----..."lI

. . . . . . . . . ·.··.-...·,jiJ•.

coooexionwiththepresent text of the article,
I agree.thr-"1: they are ambiguous, simply asa
matter of :""'uglish. expression.

I therefore wish to clarify what the United
States delegation means by that phrase, by simply
changing it to ai a result of its call instead of
"on its call." I feel that there could be no doubt
with regard to the meaning of the phrase,In
other words, article 18 remaiils as it is. However,
at .the end of the first line, the words' "as a result
of its call" should be inserted, instead of "on its
call", as was previously suggested.

ambigtiite: Erdes confroIltantaveo le texteacfuel~~­
de l'article, je lui donne raison, simplement
d'ailleurs pour une question de terminologie
anglaise.
•
Aussi, pour preciser ce que la delegation des
Etats-Unis veut dire par ce membre de phrase,
je propose de remplacer les mots "sur son invitation" par les mots a la suite de son invitation.
J'estinle qu'avec cette petite modification le
sens du membre de phrase ~e peut preter a
equivoque. En d'autres termes, l'article 18
demeuretel qu'il est, mais apres le mot "mises",
a la prewiere ligne, on ajoutera les mots "a la
suite de son invitation". aulieu de "sur son
invitation" que j'avaisprecedemment' propose.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): I think there is in the
M. MuNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais):
situation' under discussion now an element that J'estime qu'il y a .dans la situation que nous
might contribute 'to explaining article 18 .and , examinons .maintenant un .element susceptible .
lead to its adoption in its present form. Until now, d'expliquer le sens' de l'article 18 et de nous
we .have been discussing the organization of the faire adopter cet article dans sa forme actuelle.
armed forces. In that case,' the Belgian amend- Jusqu'a present, nous avions discute pe l'organiment would apply. But now we are discussing the sation des forces armees. Dans ce cas, l'amenemployment of the armed 'forces) thus it is re~y dement beIge s'appliquerait. Mais nous discutons
the. forces made available which are in question maintenant de futilisation .des forces armees,
in article 18. It is not the forces organized by aussi est-ce bien des forcesmises a la dis~;. 'Sition
the special agreements which are in question, but du Conseil dont il s'agit dans l'artkle Ht n ne
the forces made available, because we are dealing peut etre question des forces organisees en vert"
now with the employment of the armed forces. des accords speciaux, mais uniquement des.
Therefore, I think article 18-and ,I want to ask forces mises a la disposition du Conseil, car ce
"bA+a+;'l:II'A- ·0£·-. -'Qolmwm
"~"h.eo&"'''''.a.w.a..,.,- ..a.n...
f'.& ....
0'\.LI,"'L
\;,ti::!
que nous examinons maintenant, c'est l'utilisa.~
with me-might be maintained as it stands in the tion des forces armees. C'est pourquoi j'estime
original text. We are now discussing the forces que l'article 18 - et je. desirerais savoir si le
made available, sothe Belgian amendment would representant de la Be1gique est d'accord avec
not apply to article 18.
moi -- pourrait etre maintenu daus sa redaction
initiale. Nous discutons 'maintenant des forces
mises a la difJposition du Conseil; ausSi l'amendement beIge ne s'applique-t-il pas a l'article 18.
ACtA
~

-.& ....

~-"'--

t..LV,""

-

- -.LI\.i

.1 -. Y... , ....

1.4 _--.eo.o:lloft
ll\" Q,5.L ....

Colonel HODGSON (AuStralia) : It seems tome
Le colonel HODGSON (AustraIie) (traduit de
that we cannot clarify and resolve this question l'anglais): Je pense que nous ne pouvons pas
now. Whereas at one time I was prepared to preciser ni resoudre cette question maintenant.
vote for this article as it stood, I am not now, Alors qu'3o ~ moment donne j'etais dispose
.because it is clear that the doubt which exists at a voter pour cet article dans sa redaction origipresent is exactly that which my delegation raised nale, je ne le puis plus maintenant, car il est
with regmd to article 5. In other words, does evident que l'incertitude qui existe presentement
article 18 refer to the overall force or to the force est celle-I3o meme que ma delegation a eprouvee
for a particular task, following the call of the a propos de l'article 5. En d'a:utres termes,
Security"Coundl? Thatis the real question which l'article 18 fait-il allusion a la puissance d'ensemhas to be resolved, and, until we resolve. it, we ble des forces, ou' aux forces destinees a une
shall not know where we stand.
tache particuliere a la suite d'une invitation
du Conseil de securite? Telle est la vraie question
qu'il faut resoudre, et tant que nous ne l'aurons
pas fait, nous ne saurons pas a quoi nous en
tenir.

,j

Le PRESIDENT: Si vaus le permettez, je vouThe PRESIDENT (translated from French):
drais
indiquer comment, a mon avis, semble se
With your permission I should like to sum up the
poser la question maintenant.
question as .I understand it.
Un certain nombre d'entre vous avaient
What some of you had in mind was L, ,1 to
refer article 18 back to the Military Staff C. ,ID- envisage, non pas que nous renvoyions l'article 18
mittee, but to ask the latter to explain its mean- ·au Comite d'etat-major, mais que nous demaning. I ha.ve the feeling that we are very nearly dions 3o' celui-ci une explication sur le seJ;lS de .
ready-ourselves to give a clear interpretation of cet article. J'ai l'impression que nous sommes
tres pres d'en donner nous-memes une inter. ,this article.
.
pretation claire.
\"

.

The representative of the Soviet Union, who
suggested, consulti."1g the Military Staff Commit-

Le representant de I'Union sovietique, qui
avait propose que l'on interrogeatle Gomite...,j

•

1085

tee has nevertheless stated that he would not be
infavour of this, if the only amendment were the
one just proposed by the United States representative. HI have followed the latter's observations
carefully he has himself said that we had
reached,'he thought, a clear interpretation of·the
text of this article.

d'etat-major, avait cependant indique qU'il, ne
seraitpas d'avis d'agir, de la sorte si la seule
modification proposee etait celle qu'a introduite
tout a. 1'1' .rre le representant des Etats-Unis.
Ce dernier, si j'ai ,bien suivi les observations
qu'il a presentees, a lui-meme indique qu'il lui
semblait qUL ')us etions arrives a. une interpretation claire du texte de cet article.

There are thus still two views' on the meaning
of thistext: that of the United ~gdom represe~tative and that of the Australian representative.
Naturally, if the meaning of this text is still
doubtful, it would be well to ask for the Military
Staff Committee's views, but I feel that the observations just made by the Brazilian representative
have clarified the text. We are discussing the
chapter which deals with the employment of
armed forces. The reference therefore can only
be to the ~ed forces' already available to the
Security Council'. The question is to decide how
these forces are to be employed.
,

Deux observations subsistent donc concemant
le sens du texte: celle qu'apresentee le representant du Royaume-Uni et celle du representant
'
de l'Australie.

In the circumstances the Braziliart representative's suggestion to retain the text as it stands ,at
present might be accepted, but I think the text
could still be improved, without in any way altering its meaning, by introducing the clarification
we had agreed to make, as expressed in the
proposal just made by Mr. Johnson.

Dans cesconditions on pourrait accepter la
saggesti<>n du representant du Bresil, quiproposait
de laisser le texte tel qu'il est;mais" a. ,mon avis,
on ameIiorerait tout de meme ce texte, sans en
changer aucunement le sens, en y introduisant
la precision que nous avions decide d'y mettre,

Bien entendu, s'il reste un doute sur le sens
du texte,il serait sage de demander l'avis du
Comite d'etat-major, mais il me semble que les
observations faites par le representant du Bresil,
tout a. l'heure) rendent le texte clair. Nous disClltions le chapitre qui traite de l'utilisation des
forces armees. n s'agit donc, de toute mat:llere,
de forces qui sont deja. a. la disposition du Conseil
de securite. n s'agit de determiner comment ces
forces seront utilisees.

et qni estexp~.me~: daIlSla propositionfaite
tout ~ l'heure par M. Johnson.

En defInitive, il me semble, apres cette dis=
To sum up, I believe, after this dissussion that
the text of article 18 is clear and that the debate cussion,que le texte de l'article 18 est un texte
we have just had should result in our making' clair, et que le debat qui' vient d'avoir lieu
the simple addition suggested by the United devrait nous conduire, comme nous en avons
States representative, as we agreed to do in the decide pour les articles precederriment examines,
case of the preceding articles. If I am not mi.o;;- a. la simple addition proposee par le representant
taken, this addition was accepted by the Belgian des Etats-Unis et acceptee, si j'ai bien compris,
representative.
par le representant de la Belgique.
Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): The Belgian delegation's only
Concern is to clarify as much as possible not
only this particular article but also the others.
The United States representative's amendment
clarifies the text, for it makes it abundantly clear
that tWo distinct decisions must be taken before
armed forces can be employed:
1. The call;
2. A separate decision of the Security Council
to employ the armed forces in whole or in part.

I feel that the clarification thus introduced
makes the article' much clearer than it was, as
originally drafted.
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I do not believe
that this,interpretation of article 18 sho~1d again
be referred to the'Military Staff Committee" as
t4e article is clear enough and the Committee
agreed on it. I ,am afraid that, if article 18 were
to. be r~ferred back to the Military Staff Com~ttee, ItS members would be given a chance to
disagree on the interpretation. We had better take
llillb:ext as it stands. The, Committee agreed on it,

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): La preoccupation de la delegation beIge, a. l'egard
de cet'article comme
l'egard desautres,' est
simplement d'y app0rter le maximum de clarte.

a

L'amendement presente par le representant
des Etats-Unis clarifie le texte; en effet, il fait
clairement apparaitre que, pour que de.'J forces
armees puissent ctre utilisees, il fautnecessaire';
ment deux decisions distinctes.' n faut:
1. L'invitation;
2. Une decision distinctedu Conseil de
securite relative, a. l'utilisation partielle ou totale
des forces armees.
La precision qu'apporte cet amendement
rend, je crois, l'article beaucoupplus clair qu'il
ne l'etait dans sa redaction, primitive.
M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduitde l'anglais): Je n'estime pas que cette interpretation
de l'article 18 doive etre encore soumise au
Comite d'etat-major, car l'article est assez clair
et le Comite s'est mis d'accord son sujet. Je
crains que sinous renvoyons l'article 18 au
Comite d'etat-major, nous ne donnions a.ses
membres une nouve1le occasion de desaccord
au sujet de son interpretation., Nops ferions mieux

a

1086

q

arid 've are glad they agreed on it~ If We Send'
article 18 back to the Military Staff Committee
and ask the Committee to give an interpretation,
I do not think.it would agree on an interpreta"
tion. Then, we would fall into other difficulties.

d'accepter le textetelqu'U estredige.LeComire=
s'etait mis d'accord a cesujet, et nous nous en
felicitons. Si nous renvoyons l'article 18 au
Comite'd'etat-major et lui demandons de nom
en donner une, interpretation, je ne crois pas
qu'il arrive a se met"..re d'accoI:d. Et alors nons
naus trouverons en presence de nouvelles diffi.
cultes.

I consider the text clear as stated. "The armed

mea."1S the overall forces. The next idea is that
those forces shall be' employed by the Security
Council "in whole or in part." I do not see that
this needs any new interpretation.
'

J'estime que, dans sa redaction actuelle, le
texte ,est clair, L'expression: "Les forces armees
mises a- la .disposition du Conseil de securitel!
signifie la puissance d'ensemble des forces. L'idee,
qui suit est que ces forces seront utilisees par le
Consei1 de securite "en totalite ou en partie".
Je ne trouve pas que cette phrase exige une nou·
velle interpretation.
'

If the Council sends article '18 back to the
Military Staff Committee, such action will open
the way to unfavourable results.

!Jais si le Conseil renvoie l'article 18 au
Comite d'etat-major, nous nous exposerons ades
consequences facheuses.

forc~ made available to' the Security Council"

Mr. GRO~YKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociapublics) (tra741ated from Russian): It is very listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): n est tres
difficlllt here either to agree or disagree 'with the difficile, ici, soit de. se separer du representant
Belgian representative in his attemptto forecast de la Belgique, soit de se cleclarer d'accord avec
how many decisions the Security CounPl will lui 10rsqu'il s'eff~rce de determiner d'avance,le
take in order to use the armed forces envisaged nombre de deciSions que le Conseil de securite
in, particUlar casC;Sby the special agreements. devra prendre pour employer les forces armees
Would it require one or two decisions? It is hard prevues par les accords specia~ dans chaqlle
to answer that question at this stage. I cannot cas particulier. Prendta-t-il une ou deux deci·
see,iorexample, now we can at pres-ent l'Cach a sions? 11 est fOft dhi'ficile, it l'heure ~ctue11e,dc'·
definite conclusion that the Security Council mtJst repondre a cette question. En ce qui me
take two decisions : one decision to call for armed concerne, je ne vois pas, par exemple, pour
forces and a second decision to employ them. It queUes raisons nous pourrions, des maintenant,
is not clear why two such separate decisions , conclure que le Conseil de securite devra prendre
should have' to be considered and taken by the deux decisions, rune d'inviter les Etats Membres
,Security Council. In any ca..e this is a question a mettre des forces a sa disposition, l'autre
which requires further discussion; and' it is im- concernant l'emploi de ces force.s. On ne voit
possible to"agree at present on any interpretation, pas tres bien pourquoi le Conseil de securite
such as that suggested by the Belgian representa- devrait examiner et adopter dttux decisions'
tive.
distinctes. Quoi qu'il en sait, c'est la une,qutStion
qui exige d'Stre debattue plus a fond; pour le
moment il est impossible de tom,ber'd'accord sur
"une ihteq>retation, sur, c~lle que nous a proposee
le representant de la Belgique, par exemple.
I consider that the original variant agreed
upon by the Military Staff Committee conveyed
sufficiently dearly the fundamental idea which
the Military Staff CoII!ffiittee wished to express
in article 18.
'

Il me semble que le texte primitif adopte par
le Comite d'etat~major exprimait d'une fa~on
suffisamment <;laire l'idee fondamentaleque le
Comite d'etat-major voulait exprimer a .rarti·
de 18.

In this connexion the remark made by the
A ce propos, il y a lieu de. retenir egalement
Brazilian representative that the entire chapter la remarque faite ici par le representant du
refers to the employment of the ~ed forces Bresil, lorsqu'il,. a declare que tout ce, chapitre
should be noted. This is important, particularly se rapportait ala .question de l'emploi des forces
from the point ofview of assessing the amend- armees. Cette remarque a son importar:::e,
ment submitted by the United States representa- 'surtout lorsqu'on veut porter un jugement sur
tive. This amendment hardly serves to clear up l'arnendement propose par le representant des
the text~ particularly when it is borne in mit,ld Etats-Unis. Cet amendement necontribue guere
that the United States delegation, for example, a la clarte du texte: et d'autant molls si ron
takes a special view on the point of interpretation songe que la delegation' des Etats-Unis, pal'
of the meaning of this article-f.. view which exemple" a des vues particulieres sur son int~­
differs from that taken by the Soviet representa- pretatio~ - vues qui different du se~s qu'attn·
tives on the Military Staff Committee and, if I buent a cet article. lesrepresentants sovietiqu~
have understood correctly, also from the assess- au Comite d'etat-major, et,' si j'ai bien co~prJS,
ment and interpretation given by the United qui different egalement de l'interpretation qu'~
donne ia deIegationdu Royaume-Uni au se1Il
Kingdom representatives.
du Comite d'etat-major.

1087
Sidonc nous nollS mettons d'accord stir des
Therefore, I feel it would be -still worse if we
were to agree on the wording, but differed on mots tout en attribuant des sens differents a
the interpretation of the article. If we interpret I'article en question, la situation, a mon avis,
this article differently, it would be better to refer n'en sera que pire. Si hous divergeons dans
it back to the Military Staff. Committee and ask l'interpretation de l'article, il vaudrait mieux
it fOf its views on the matter. I woul4 even lenvoyer la question au Comite d'etat-major en
venture to suggest that the texts of the article be le priant de nous faire part de ses considerations.
referred to it at the same time. I trust that J'oserais meme proposer qu'on lui transmette
nothing so unfortunate will occur as the Austra- en meme temps le texte de l'article. J'espere
lian representative apparently _has in mind, and qU'il ne se produira ri~n de facheu:"<, comme
that the article will not be mislaid by the Military semble le craindre le representant de-}'Australie,
et que le texte ne sera pas egare par le Comite
Staff Committee.
d'etat~major.

Sir ALEXANDER CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
I only wanted to say that the revised amendment
put forward by the representative of, the United
States overcomes the difficulty which I saw in
the addition of the words· "on its call." The
revised phrase "as a result of its call" is, I think,
perfectly clear. I do not think there would be
any ambiguity there. Therefore, I think the article would not be misunderstood in that form. It
would be quite a good article, although it would
be expressing something rather different from
what the' United Kingdom member of the Military Staff Committee had in mind.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Je veux simplement dire
qu'en revisant son amendement, le representant
des Eta"s-Unis a ecarte les difficultes que je
prevoyais par suite de l'ad,jition des mots. "sur
son invitation". L'expression "a la suite de son
invitation" est, se10n moi, tout a fait claire. Je
ne pense pas qu'il puisse y avoir la la moindre
ambiguite. Aussi suis-je d'avis que, sous cette
forme,' cet article ne risque pas de pr@ter a
maIentendus. J'estime que ce serait la un texte
tout a fait satisfaisant, encore qu'il expiime
une idee differant quelque peu des vuesentretenues par le representant britannique au Comite
d'etat-major.

Ido not .know how Vital that is, but perhaps
Je ne sais aquel point rela est irnport~nt; mais
it would be well to see whether we can obtain I peut-@tre serait-il bon,avant d'approuver le
agreement in the Military Staff Committee as to projet, d'essayer d'obtenir du Comite d'etatexactly what it had in mind-if it can agree- major qu'il se mette d'accord - s'il le peut - '
before we actually approve the draft. If a conclu- sur ce qu'il voulait exactement dire. Si nous
sion is reached that this is the intentiop, I consider nous apercevQns ,que telle ~t bien son intention,
that the wording last put forward by-Mr. John- j'estime que la redaction presentee en dern.ier
son would certainly express the idea clearly lieu par M. Johnson exprime l'idee, sansaucun
enough.
doute, avec suffisamment ,de clarte.
,The PRESIDENT (translated from French):,
Speaking, if I may, as representative of FRANCE,
I would like to say that I feel rather hesitant
about referring questions back to the Milita.:y
Staff Committee or even asking it for an interpretation which I consider we should supply
ourselves-since we tun the risk of complicating
the work of another organ and we know that it
is not always easy to reach an agreement. I must
nevertheless add that, if there is any doubt in the
mind of any delegation-and that holds for the
United. Kingdom delegation - I .feel. we are
bound! ~ regard to that delegation, to agree that
the Military Staff Committee should be asked for
their interpretation of the text. I, therefore, suppo~, though reluct~tly, the proposal to ask the
Military Staff Comnuttee for its views.

Le PRESIDENT: Parlan~, si vous le pennettez,
comme representant de la FRANCE" je voudrais
dire que, si je suis assez reticent quant a la
procedure qui consiste a renvoyer des questions
au Comite d'etat-major, ou m@me a lui demander une interpretation que nous devrions, II!e
semble-t-il, doriner nous-m@mes -- car :ilous
risquons de compliquer la tache d'un - autre
organisme, et nous savons que l'accord n'est
pas toujours facile arealiser - je dois cependant
ajouter que,s'il subsiste un doute _dans l'esprit
d'une delegation, et c'est le cas de la delegation
britannique, je crois que nous sommes tenus a
l'egard du representant du Royaume-Uni
d'admettre, en effet, qu'il convient d'inviter le
Comite d'etat-major a donner son interpretation
du texte. J'appuie done - , avec regret, mais
j'appuie - la proposition de demander l'avis
du Comite d'etat-major.

But the representatives were not all unanimous
about consulting the Military Staff Committee.
Contrary views and objections have been voiced,
and have not been withdrawn. I must therefore
put to the vote the decision to consult the Military
St~ Committe~. Naturally, the question of refe~g the text back to the Military Staff Comuuttee for re-examination does not arise' we
would simply ask that Committee for its htter-

Mais tous les representants n'ont pas emis la
m@me opinion en ce qui concerne la consultation
du Comite d'etat-major. Des avis contraires,
des objections ont ete formules,. qui n'ont pas
ete retires. Je crois donc devoir mettre aux voix
la decision de demander l'avis du Comite d'etatmajor. II est bien entendu qu'il ne s'agit pas
de renvoyer le texte au Comite d'etat-major
pour un nouvel examen, mais simplement de

1IIb_........~

1088

pretanon of the meaning of the text it has already
adopted.

.

.

~

demander a. ce Comite son interpretation du sens
du texte qu'il a deja adopte.

Le colonel HODGS()N (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (AuStralia): I should like ','
to raise a point of ,order, and it is an importan( l'anglais): Je desire soulever une question
point of principle. I)oes the fact that you are' d'ordre, qui met en cause un principe importaIlt.
asking for a v;ote indicate ,that this Council CaIl- En nous demandan~ de voter, avez-vous voulu
not refer any question whatever to the Military dire que ce Conseil ne petit renvoyer de question
Staff Committee without taking a vote? For au Comite d'etat-major sans avoir au prealable
example, 'if .the representatives of Australia or procede a un vote? Par exemple, si les repre.
Belgium want to ask a simple question of the sentants de l'Australie et de la Belgique veulent
Military Staff Committee, or if we ourselves re- poser une simple question, au Comite d'etat.
quest· their advice and assistance on a particular major, ou si nous-memes, lui demandons de
question, do we have to take a vote every time? nous eclairer et de nol.loS venir en aide sur un
I thinf· that is an important point because we sujet particuller, devons-nous chaque fois prosee it. in a different light from other members. ceder a un vote? J'estime qu'il importe d'eIucider
We should prefer a ruling on it by the President. ce point, car nous le voyons sous un jour different'
des autres membres. Nous prefererions que le
President prenne une decision a ce sujet.
Mr. HSIA (China): 1 also have a point of , M. HSIA (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais): Je
order. I should prefer that the President should desire cgalement soulever une question d'ordre.
give a ruling on this question, in the sense sug- Je prefererais que le President plit ~the decision
gested by the' representative of Australia. If we sur cette .questi~n, comme l'a suggere le reprewere to take a vote, I would find myself in a sentant de l'Australie. Si nous devons voter, je.
difficult position. As far, as I am, con.cemed, the me trouverai dans une position difficile. En ce
whole article is very clear, and 1 see ito need to qui me conceme, I'ensemble de l'article me
refer it back to the Military Staff Committee.
parait extremement clair, et je ne vois pas la
necessitede le .renvoyer au Comite d'eta~-major.
. Should I vote against or in.favour of referring
the article to' the Committee? H it is possible, I
should like the President to give a ruling on the
questio:n. ,

Dois-je voter pour ou contre le renvoi de
l'articie au Comite? Je voudrais que ie President
plit, si possible, tine decision en la matiere.

M. GROMYKO '( Union des Republiques socia~
Mr•. GROYMKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re- .
publics) (translated from Russian): Several listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Plusieurs ]
members .of the Council h,ave suggested that we representants au sein du Conseil ont propose
ask the Military Staff Committee for their views que l'on demandat I'avis du C(,mite d'etat·
on this ql,lestion. The only way to avoid voting is major sur cette question. On ne Peut evit~i le---as follows : the President can ask members vote que si I'on adopte le procede suivant: le
whether'they have any qbjections to the proposal. President peut demander aux representants s'lls
If there are no objections, the proposal is deemed eJ.event des objections contre cette proposition.
to be accepted, and the Security Council. will S'ils n'en eIevent pas, cela signifie que la propothen ask the Mihtary Staff Committee for its sition est adoptee et que le Conseil de securite
opinion. If there is objection to the proposal, demandera l'aviS du Comite d'etat-majot. Au
then the practice, as Jat as I know, is to decide cas ou il y aurait des objections, le seul moyen
the question by taking a vote. If there are any de trancher la question serait, ce me semple,
other methods I would be glad to hear of them. celui que nous employoDs d'habitude: la mise
aux voix. S'il ~te encore d'autres methodes,
je voudrais qu'on me les fit connaitre.
The PRESIDENT (translated from, French) :
Le PRESIDENT: Je considere qu'il appartient
I consider that the 'President has the right, if au President d~ poser eventuellement des quesnecessary, to put questions to the Military Staff tions au Comite d'etat-major, dans la mesure
Committee, so long as he is interpx:eting the views' Oll il interprete la pensee de ses collegues. Lorsof his colleagues. If any objections are raised, as que des objections se sont fait jour - et tel est
in the present case, I think ,the ,President is bound le cas - il t:n~ ,semble que le President est, tenu
de prendre l'avis du Conseil tout entier.
to ask for the. views of the Council as a whole.
Colonel ;HODGSON (Australia:): That" procedure is perfectly acceptable-, to my delegation,
and ,it is in harmony with the suggestion made
by the Soviet representative.

Le colonel HODGSON (Austi'alie) (traduit' de
l'anglais): Ma deIegation.trouve que cette fa~on
de proceder est parfaitement acceptable et
conforme a la proposition faite par' le representant sovietique.

Mr~ GROMYKO (Umon of Soviet Socialist Re-

M. GR0MYKO (Union des Republiques'socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du r~s~e): 11 ~~ ,I
semble que re n'es< pas la propOSlti<m que~
faite. J'ai p~Ie de la procedure du vot~ et Jal ,

publics) (translated from Russian):, I do not
think that was my proposal; 1 was talking about
the method of voting and mentioned that the

p-~-~

1089

Australian representative was not anxious to have
a vote taken on this q?-estion. I do ~o~ kno~
why; that is the. Australian ~epresentative s .bUSlness. That was why I reJ:¥lde~the PresIdent
that there was a method whereby we c0n!-d perhaps avoid taking a vote, naI1!el-y:, by asking the
representativeS on the Council.whether or not
they had any objection to the proposal to ask the
Military Staff Oommittee for its opinion. If no
objection is raised, the proposal to ask for the
Military Staff Committee's opinion would be
accepted and would become a. Council decision.
If this proposal is not endorsed, the only alternative is to take a vote. I have already said that
I know of noothe~ way.

fait remarquer que le representant de rA1.lstralie·
ne desirait pas que la question fUt mise aux
voix. Je ne sais pas queIIefI etaient ses raisons,
c'est Ul. une question qui le regarde. C'est pourquoi j'ai rappeleau President qu'il 'y a une '
methode qui permettrait peut-etre d'eviter le
vote. Au cas ou il n'y a,urait pas d'objections, la
proposition serait adoptee, et' constituerait une
decision du Conseil. En revanche, s'il existait 1es
objections, nous ne disposerions plus que d'un
seul moyen de trancher la question:' le vote.
ai deja: dit que je ne connaissais pas d~autre
niethode.
'

Naturally, in dealings between different organs,'
we should appJy to the Military Staff Committee
in our capacity as the Security Council. Otherwise, if each of us applies' to the ¥ilitary Staff
Committee, the, Committtee will not know how
to act. Of course the Security Council will comniunicate with the Military Staff Committee
throug-h its President. The President, acting on
behalf of-the Council, after consultation with the
Council and on the Oouncil's decision, will give
the necessary instructions to the Military Staff
Committee.

Bien entendu, puisqu'il s'agit de relations
entre differents organes, c'est en notre qualite
de Conseil de securite que. nous devons nous
adresser au Comite d'etat-major. En effet,si
chacun de nous s'adressait directement au Comite
d'etat-major, ceIui-ci ne saurait 'plus que faire.
C'est, bien entendu, par I'intermediaire du ,President .que le Conseil de securite commumque
avec le Comite d'etat-major. Le President,
agissant au nom du Conseil desecurite et apres
I'avoir consulte, donne, sur decision du Comeil,
des ~ttuctions au Comite d'etat-major.

I

r

Le PRESIDENT: Je crois inutiIe de prolonger
The PRESIDENT (translated from' French) :
I see no point in continuing this discussion, I cette discussion. J'ai indique la regIe qui me
have stated what I thought was the best rule. In paraissait la meilleure. Dans le cas present, je
this case I shall ask those of my colleagues who , vais demander a ceux de .noscollegues qui ont
have just raised objections whether they still abide formuIe tout a I'heure des objections s'ils les
by them. If these objections are maintained, I maintiennent. Si eIIes sont ~aintenues, je mettrai
shall put the question to the vote. If they are not la 'question aux voix. Si eIIes ne sont pas mainmaintained, I shall conclude that the question tenues, .je considererai que la question' doit etre
must be referred to the Military Staff Committee. posee au Comite d'etat-major.

Are there any objections?

Subsiste-t-il des objections?

Mr. EL - KHOURI (Syria): - Objections are
maintained unless they are openly withdrawn.
These objections have not been withdrawn. That
means they are maintained.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais): Toute objection .qui n'est pas expres;.
sement retiree est maintenue. Les objections
n'ont pas ete retirees. Elles sont done maintenues.,

The PRESIDENT (translated from French)':
I asked whether they had been withdrawn in
order to learn by inference whether they were still
maintained.

Le PRESIDENT': J'ai demande si elles etaient
retirees, pour savoir; par voie de consequence,
si elles etaient maintenues.

I shall now put to the vote the question
'whether we are to consult the Military Staff
Cornmllttee.
'

A vote' was taken by show of h~nds and it was
decided by eight votes. with three abstentions to
consult the Military Staff Committee.
Votes lor:
Belgium
Brazil
Colombia
France
Poland
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Kingdom
United States of America

1IIm.---..-.

Je v~ mettre aux voix' la qu~tion de 'savoir
si nous interrogeons le Comite d'etat-major.

Le vote a lieu a main levee, et il est decide,
par huit voix, avec trois abstentions, de consulter
le, Comite d'etat-major.

V otent pour:

\ ,

BeIgique
Bresil
Colombie
France
Pologne
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

q

1090
Abstentions:
Australia
China
Syria -

S'absti_ennent:
Allstralie
Chine
Syrie _

Colonel HODGSON (Australia.): On behalf of
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
lny delegation, I wish to make it clear that, under l'anglais): Je desire, au nom de ma deIegation
the relevant portions of the Charter, the Military preciser qu'aux termes de la Charte, le Comit~
Staff Committee is to assist and advise this Coun-. . d'etat-majorest charge d'assister et de conseiller
cil. In other words, we say that a member,. par- ce Conseil. En d'autres termes, nous estimons
ticular!y a non-permanent member, should at que 1'0n devrait, par comtoisie ou par devoir
least be given the courtesy or have the light, if ~utoriser un Etat membre, surt~u~ si ce n'est p~
it so desires, to ask for interpretation, explanation, ID .membre permanent, a solliclter une interor assistanCf~.
.
pretation, une explication ou une aide.·

.

If the qllestion comes to a vote, to which we
Si nous devons
. mettre la question aux voix,
object ID principle, it means that we do not have et par prmClpe nous nous y oppooons, cela
the right to obtain the benefit of that advice. As signifie que nous n'avons pas le 'droit de benea matter_of fact, we think we should have the .ficier de cet avis. En realite, nous estimonsque
right to'consult the Milita.rY, Staff Committee. If nobs devrions avoir le droit de consulter le
a vote is taken, it mean.'l that that right can be Comite d'etat-major. Si nous procCdons a un
overruled. We should then not have the right to vote, cela signifie que ce droit peut etre annuM.
put even a simple questien, if there should hap~ Nous n'aurons meme pas alors le droit de poser
pen to be objection to that question.
.
une simple question, si jamais que1qu'un venait
..
a objecter a cette question.

.As a matter of courtesy and principle~ we

Par courtoisie et par principe, nous ne devrions
pas, selon nous, proceder a un vote. Le droit
ask a question should be recognized as a matter de poser une question devrait etre considere
of .col.irs~.· There should be no objection,. particu- ~omme allant de soi.-Personne ne devrait s'oppolarly on the part of a permanent member, to a ser, et un Etat membrepermanent moins que
request for interpretation or further information tout autre, ace que-la majorite des membres
by a majority of the members· of the Security du Conseil, ou meme un seul /membre, sollicite
.
Council, or even by any one. member. .
une interpretation ou de plus amples renseignements.

think a vpteshould not be taken. The right to

That is why I wish to state for the record that,
although I was completely in. favour of consulting the Military Staff Committee, I actually had
to abstain from voting. I did so because of the
principle involved that no vote should be taken.

Voila pourquoi je desire que ron enregistre
que, tout en etant tout a fait d'accord pour que
nous consultions le Comite d'etat-major, j'aidu,
en fait, m'abstenir de voter. Si j'ai agi ainsi,
c'est en raison du principe en jeu, qui exige, a
monsens, que l'on ne procede pas a un vote.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I abstained from
voting" but not for the reasons expressed by
the representative of Australia. When we deal
with a request for an explanation on the part of
the Security Council asa whole, a vote should
be taken, because some members may feel that
it is necessary to obtain an explanation while
otheI'S may consider that the subject is clear.
However, I take the same position as the representative of Australia, on the ether. question
- which he raised.· Any member of the Security
Council, particularly a non-permanent m€mber,
should have a full right,at any time, to present
a question in writing to the Presid~ntof the
Security Council, and that question should be
.referred to the Military Staff Committee. The
Military Staff Committee would then be expected
to give a reply to that question. In such a case,
no vote is. necessary, and no further consultation
with the Council is required. I am referring to a
.request by a member for an explanation of a
. point regarding which that member is uncertain.
The ~ilitary Staff Committee would certainly be
expected, not only as a point of courtesy, but also
asa point of duty, to reply to that question and
to give the requested explanation.

M. EL-KHOURI .(Syrie) (traduit de I'anglais): Je me suis abstenu de voter, mais non
pour les raisons donnees par le representant de .
l'Australie. Quand il s'agit d'une demande d'explication emanant du Conseil de securite pris dans
son ensemble, il faut proceder a un vote, parce
que certains membres peuvent estimer necessaite
d'obtenir une explication, alors_ que d'autres
peuvent trouver le sujet clair. Toutefois, fadopte
la meme attitude que le representant de l'Aus- .
tralie sur l'autre point qu'il a souleve. Tout
membre du Conseil de securite, et particulie.
rement un Etat membre non permanent, doit
avoir a tout moment le droit de presenter une
question ,par ecrit au President du -Conseil de
securite, et cette question doit etre transmise au
Comite d'etat-major. Le Comite d'etat-major
devrait alors y repondre. Dans ce cas, il ne serait
pas necessaire de· voter, ni de proceder a de
nouvelles discussion8 au sein du Conseil. Je
fais allusion a une demande d'explication d'un
membre sur un point qui lui parait ambigu.
On peut certainemert s'attendre que le Comite
-d'etat-major, non pas seulement par courtoisie,
mais par devoir, reponde a cette question et
dOnile l'explication demandee.

......

t _. b a
I"'!
_-------:l~
--~-_a---:--Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia J: If I have understood'
M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit· de l'anglais) :

the ruling of the President correctly, I think it is
perfectly satisfactory ahd clear that if a membe r
requires any explanation, he can apply to ,the
Military. Staff Committee, throug h the mediu m
of the President of the Security Council, unless
one of the members of the Council raises an
objection, in which case the question is put to
the vote. Does the President consider that to be
a correct interpr etation of his rulip,g?
The PRESIDENT: (translated from Frencn) :
That is my interpr etation , always assuming that
we are referring to questions raised in the Security
Council. I reserve the question as to whethe r a
member of the Security Council can apply to the
President directly, outside Council meetings, with
an individual request to put a question to the
Military Staff Committee. There is nothin g in our
rules of procedure which covers such a case.
However;· I do not think that I have to settle
.tQis question at the momen t or that I am entitled
to do so, since the case. does not actually· arise.

Si je I'ai bien comprise, je trouve la decision du
President tout a fait satisfaisante et claire: au
cas ou un membr e desire une explication, il
peut s'~dresser au Comite d'etat- major par
l'intermediaire du President du Conseil de
securite, amoins qu'un autre membr e du Conseil
n'eIeve une objection, auque1 cas la question
est mise aux voix. Le President estime-t-il que
j'ai bien compri$ sa decision?
Le, PRESIDENT: C'est, en effet, l'interp retatio n
que j'adme ts, etant entend u qu'il s'agit de questions soulevees au sein du Conseil de securite.
Je reserve la question de savoir si un membr e
quelco nque du Conseil de secUrite pourra it
s'adresser directement au Preside nt· en dehorS
des reunions du Conseil et ·lui deman der individuellement de saisir d'ooe question le Comite
~'etat-major; il n'y a rien, dans notre reglement.
interieur, qui s'appli que a ce cas. Mais je ne
crois pas que je sois appeIe actuellement a trancher la question, ni que j'aie le droit de le faire,
puisque le cas ne se pose pas effectivement.
Could we now quickly consider the last two
J e souhaiterais que nous puissions mainte nant
articles to which the Belgian delegation has pro~ passer a l'exam en rapide
des deux demier s artiposed an amend ment in, case the Militar y Staff cles que la delegation beIge
propose d'amen der,
Committee should have to be asked a question pour le cas OU, aJeur sujet,
une question devrait
aboutt hem also?
encore etre posee au Comite d'etat- major.
I would like now to hear your views on article
Je voudrais vous deman der mainte nant votre
22, as atnend ed by the Belgian deiegation. The avis 'sur l'article 22, te1
qu'il a ete amend e par la
article would read as follows when amend ed:
delegation beIge; il se lit comme suit:
"The degree of readiness of the armed forces
"Le degre de prepar
which shall be made available, at .its call, to the qui doivent etre mises, ation des forces armees
Security Council by individual Memb er nations disposition du Consei sur son invitation, a la
l de securite par des Memof the United Nations is fixed by the Security bres des Nations
Unies est fixe par le Conseil
Council, on the advice of the Militar y Staff Com- de securite sur avis
du Comite d'etat- major, a
mittee, as a result of the negotiations in conclud- la suite des negoci
ations D].enees avec les Etats
ing the special agreements with those Memb er Membres en
vue, de la conclusion des accords
nations under Article 43 of the Charte r."
speciaux prevus a l'Article 43 de la Charte ." .
If there are no objections, this amend ment will
Si aucune objection n'est formulee, je consibe considered as adopted.
dererai l'amen demen t comm e adopte.
Article 22, as amended by tht; Belgian delegaL'article 22, avec l'amen demen t de la deUtion, was adopted unanimously.
gation belge, est adopM l'unanimiU.
The PRESIDENT' (translated from French ):
Le PRESIDENT: Nous alions examiner, mainWe will now take al'iicle 36, which was amend ed tenant, l'article 36 qui
a ete amend e comme
as follows:
suit:
"The armed forces envisaged in the special.
"Les forces armees designees dam les accords
agreements shall remain under the exclUsive com-· speciaux demeureront
placees sous le comma nmand of, the respective contrib uting nations, clement exclusif des.
Etats Memb res qui les ont
except when, having been made available to the fournies, sauf lorsque
, ayant ete mises la dispoSecuritY.. Council, on its call, they will operate sition du Conseil de
securiM, sur SO1/, invitation,
under its authority."
elles
operer
ont
sous
son
autoriM."
\
If there are no objections, I will conside,r
Si aucune objection n'est formulee, je consiarticle 36 adopte d as amended.
dererai cet article 36, ainsi amend e, comme
adopte.
. Article 36, as amended by the Belgian deleg(lL'article 36, avec l'amendement de la aeLetzon, was adopted unanimously.
gation belge, est adopM a l'unanimiM.
T,he PRESIDENT (translated from French ):
Le PRESIDENT: Le Conseil se reunira demain
The Council will meet again tomorr ow afternoon apres-midi et
contin uera l'exam en du rappor t
to continue consideration of the Militar y Staff du Comite
d'etat- major.
Comtnittee's report.
,

a

a

,

I

The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

La seance est levee a 18 h. 15.

.

SALES AGENTS OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSrrAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS"UNIES
Argentina-Argentine
..,iitorial Sudamericana
S.A.'
AIsina 500
BUENOS AIREs

Australia-Atlstralie
H; A. Goddard Pi.y. Ltd.

255a George Street
SYDNEY

Belgium-BelgiiJue
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse
'
14-22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

Bolivia-'Bolivie
Libreria Cientffica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Canada
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TOROJ.'lTO

Chile-Chili
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

China-Chine
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

Costa Rica-Costa-Rica
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE

Cuba
La Casa Belga
Renc~ de Smedt

O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA,

Czechoslovakia
T checoslovaiJuie
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

Denmark-Danemark
Einar Munskgaard .
Norregade 6
KJOBENHAVN

Dominican Republic .
RepubliiJue 'l)ominicaine

~~-~

LiJjreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO
.

.

Ecuador-EiJuateur

Mufioz Hermanos y Cia
Nueve de Octnbre 703
Casilla 1 0 - 2 4 '
GUAYAQtJlL

Egypt-'Egypte
Librairie "La Renaissance
d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO

FinIand-Finlande
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

France
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SouHlot
PARIS, ve

Greece--Grece
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

Guatemala
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

Haiti-Haiti
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

India-lnde
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

Iran
Bangahe Piaderow
731 .shah Avenue
TEHERAN

Iraq-Irak
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

Lebanon-Liban
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

Netherlands-:-Pays-Bas
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
S'GRAVENHAGE

New Zealand
N ouvelle-Zelande
Gordon & Gotch
Waring Taylor Street
WELUNGTON

Norway-Norvege
Norsk Bokimport AjS
Edv. Storms Gate 1
OSLO

Philippines
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN

Sweden-Suede
AB C. E. Fritzes Kungl
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

Switzerland-Suisse
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAtJSANNE,GENEVE, VEVEY
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

Syria-Syrie
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

Union of South Africa
Union Sud-Africaine
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik, Sts.
JOHANNESBURG

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
H.M. Stationery Office
p.a. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHEsTER, CARDIFF,
BELFAST and BRISTOL

United States of America
Etats-Unis d!AmeriiJue
International Documents
Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavie
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska UI. 36
BEOGRAD

4Iiii
