A /69/PV.103

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

103rd plenary meeting

Friday, 11 September 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly (A/69/1007)
Draft resolution
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda item
117 and agenda item 118 at its 55th plenary meeting, on
18 November 2014.
The draft resolution before us today, as contained in
paragraph 68 of document A/69/1007, is the outcome of a
lengthy and intensive negotiation process. I commend all
Member States for their commitment to the negotiation
process and for the spirit of compromise and flexibility
exhibited by delegations throughout the negotiations. I
pay tribute to the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, Ambassador Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent
Representative of Croatia, and Ambassador Wilfried
Emvula, Permanent Representative of Namibia, for
their steadfast leadership on this critical issue.
The revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly has been one of the key priorities for the
sixty-ninth session. This work is an important aspect of
the broader efforts to strengthen and reform the United
Nations, and the draft resolution contains significant
steps in that direction. The draft underscores the

central position of the General Assembly as the chief
deliberative policymaking and representative organ
of the United Nations. It strengthens the role and the
authority of the Assembly, encourages improvement
in its working methods and calls for strengthening the
institutional memory of the Office of the President of
the General Assembly.
I commend the consensual agreement reached on
the need to ensure transparency in the selection and
appointment of the next Secretary-General. The draft
resolution stresses the need to observe the principles of
inclusiveness and openness in the process of selecting
the next Secretary-General, and invites Member States
to consider presenting candidates based on the need for
gender and geographical balance.
The draft resolution calls for my successor and the
President of the Security Council to issue a joint letter
to Member States soliciting candidates for the position
of Secretary-General and to further circulate the
names of the candidates submitted for consideration.
The General Assembly will then conduct informal
meetings with candidates, further contributing to
transparency in the selection process. It recognizes that
the implementation of Assembly resolutions is critical
to the body’s effectiveness and efficiency. I encourage
all Member States to take an active role in following
up on implementation to maximize the Organization’s
capacity to address issues under its three pillars,
namely, peace and security, development, and human
rights.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-27752 (E)

*1527752*

A/69/PV.103

As we mark 70 years of the existence of the United
Nations, we look back at the important milestones
achieved during this session. This draft resolution
is an important contribution to strengthening our
Organization. I thank all members for their valuable
contributions.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution entitled “Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly”, which is contained in paragraph
68 of the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/321).
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.
We welcome the adoption today of resolution
69/321, on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly. We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s plenary meeting and for your
engagement in the Assembly’s revitalization process.
We would also like to thank the co-Chairs of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly, Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak and
Mr. Wilfried Emvula, and their teams, who ably led the
negotiation process. We would also like to thank Mr. Ion
Botnaru and Mr. Georg Zeiner, of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management, and
other colleagues in the Secretariat for their useful
involvement. And we would like to highlight the
constructive atmosphere that prevailed throughout the
negotiations and to thank all the negotiating partners
for their engagement in revitalizing the Assembly.
The resolution we have just adopted includes
significant innovations and would not have been possible
without the flexibility shown by all the States Members
of the United Nations engaged in the negotiations. It
can be seen as a milestone in the enhancement of the
transparency and inclusivity of the selection process
for the next Secretary-General. In that regard, the
introduction of informal dialogues and meetings with
the candidates for the position of Secretary-General is
particularly noteworthy. Significant progress has also

2/29

11/09/2015

been made in other areas, such as the working methods
of the General Assembly and its Main Committees.
On 22 June, the Council of the European Union
adopted its priorities for the seventieth session of
the General Assembly. They recognize that the
revitalization of the Assembly is a key component in
the strengthening of the United Nations as a whole, and
it is with that in mind that I wish to signal our readiness
to remain constructively engaged in that process.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. The cross-regional ACT
group consists of 27 small and mid-size countries
working together to improve the working methods of
the Security Council. We welcome the adoption today
by consensus of resolution 69/321, and would like to
thank the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
the Ambassadors of Croatia and Namibia, for their
excellent work and dedication, and all our colleagues
for the constructive spirit they displayed during the
negotiations.
The ACT group would like to offer a few
comments on the cluster that dealt with the selection
and appointment of the next Secretary-General, as
addressed in the resolution.
We are pleased that the Ad Hoc Working Group
achieved a consensus agreement on ensuring that the
selection and appointment will be carried out in a clear
and structured manner, by first starting the process
with a joint letter from the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council containing a
description of the entire process, and as a next step,
by circulating to all Member States, on an ongoing
basis, the names of the candidates for the position of
Secretary-General. In our view, the decision to conduct
informal dialogues and meetings with candidates
contributes greatly to the improvement of the whole
selection process.
In view of the importance of ensuring that the
best possible candidate is appointed to fill the post
of Secretary-General, the ACT group applauds the
inclusion of clear and precise qualifications and
criteria in paragraph 39 of the resolution. Together
with the aforementioned procedural developments, that
is clearly a strong sign of the increased transparency
of the selection and appointment process for the next
Secretary-General. The ACT group welcomes and

15-27752

11/09/2015

strongly supports the resolution’s provision inviting
Member States to consider submitting the candidatures
of women for the position of Secretary-General. We are
also glad to see that the resolution reaffirms the role
of the President of the General Assembly in actively
supporting the process of selecting and appointing the
Secretary-General and in monitoring and reviewing the
Assembly’s implementation of adopted resolutions. The
ACT group also echoes paragraph 44 of the resolution
in affirming its readiness to continue discussing all the
issues relating to the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General in all their aspects within the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly during its seventieth session.
More specifically, we very much hope for a thorough
discussion at the next session of the duration of the
Secretary-General’s term of office and the option of a
single, non-renewable term of seven years, while also
taking into account the need to implement provisions
from previous resolutions.
In conclusion, the ACT group would like to
emphasize the importance of implementing the
provisions of the resolution we have adopted today,
and in that regard we hope for fruitful and close
cooperation between the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the adoption today by
consensus of this landmark resolution 69/321. I would
like to thank my Namibian and Croatian colleagues for
all their efforts as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly in shepherding through this important
agreement.
I align myself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union on behalf of its member
States.
On my first day as British Ambassador to the United
Nations, I set out three principles that I thought should
guide the selection of the next Secretary-General: a
clear timeline, a transparent selection process and an
opportunity open to all, no matter what their gender.
It is therefore with great personal and professional
satisfaction that I see we have made important steps
today towards realizing those principles, particularly
the first and second. Our welcome consensus moves us
closer to realizing a more predictable and transparent
process, and so we have started the race to find a person

A/69/PV.103

fit for one of the most important jobs in the world — a
person who will guide us through the most challenging
threats to our peace and security; a person who will
oversee the most ambitious development agenda in our
history; a person who truly is one for 7 billion.
We have taken three important steps towards
realizing that goal. First, we have agreed to a joint
letter from the Presidents of the General Assembly and
the Security Council soliciting candidates for the post
of Secretary-General. In doing so, for the first time in
United Nations history we have agreed to establish a
clear starting point and description for the selection
and appointment process for this vital role. Secondly,
we have agreed to maintain a public, consolidated
list of candidates, held jointly by the Presidents of
the Assembly and the Security Council. The days of
smoke-filled rooms and of rumours and speculation on
the runners and riders for the job are over. Through our
consensus today we have brought overdue transparency
to an archaic and opaque practice. And finally, we
have pledged to hold candidates up to genuine scrutiny
through informal dialogues with them that are open
to all Members. We all now have the chance to test
the calibre of those who put themselves forward,
to understand their motivation and ambition and to
challenge, question and cajole them in their bid for this
highest of offices.
It is disappointing, however, that there was strong
resistance to the participation of civil society in these
meetings. As I said in my statement to the Ad Hoc
Working Group in April, the United Kingdom wants
to see a process that is open to all Member States, but
also to observers and to civil society. That is why we
are open to organizing an Arria Formula meeting with
candidates that really is open to all.
There is always more to be done, and we have only
just begun. A predictable and transparent process will
fail without the broadest possible range of credible
candidates. That must mean expressions of interest
from the broadest possible range of men and women. I
have said it before, and I will proudly say it again, that
the United Kingdom believes that, other things being
equal, it is high time for a woman to lead the United
Nations. It is therefore incumbent upon us all to ensure
that we have the broadest range of women competing
for the role. We will never find the best candidate if
we exclude half of the world’s population. Let us all
encourage the world’s leading women to answer the call
and apply for the role.

15-277523/29

A/69/PV.103

Let me conclude by again thanking you,
Mr. President, for all of your efforts to ensure
consensus on today’s resolution, and in a fitting way
to herald in the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations. I also want to thank the many groups outside
the Hall — the advocates, the civil society groups and
the many others — who pushed us along this path. In
doing so we have together brought greater transparency
to such an important task ahead of us.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
As speakers before me have done, I would also like
to thank you, Mr. President, for your great efforts to
ensure that we could today adopt resolution 69/321 by
consensus. I also thank our colleagues the Ambassador
of Croatia and the Ambassador of Namibia for their
dedicated work to make this a success.
No doubt, this has been a historic General Assembly
session. Member States worked throughout many long
months of negotiations so that we could have a United
Nations able to respond to the major challenges of the
current world — and we did so through consensus. That
is something interesting and positive about this year.
After hard, gruelling battles we succeeded in agreeing
the Sustainable Development Goals, which our Heads
of State will adopt as Agenda 2030. And there are also
promising signs about a climate agreement in Paris at
the end of the year. Strengthening the United Nations is
crucial to ensuring that the ambitious agenda we have
set for ourselves goes beyond aspirations to become
a reality over the next 15 years. Effective, inclusive
and transparent work by the General Assembly is
essential to that end, as you more than anyone else
know, Mr. President, as you wrap up your year-long
presidency.
In April, when Colombia proposed some changes to
the draft resolution pertaining to the established process
for the nomination and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral, we set out five key points. The first was to
re-establish the active role assigned to the General
Assembly via its President by the Charter of the United
Nations. The second was to democratize the selection
process and to begin the process as early as possible
and in an open and transparent manner. The third was
to ensure that the permanent members of the Security
Council, in a spirit of openness and transparency,
present their candidates so that the Assembly could
play its role in the appointment. The fourth was that the
Assembly should publicly hear from the candidates so
that all Member States could make sufficiently informed

4/29

11/09/2015

decisions — and that, as has been said here, constitutes
historic progress. And the fifth, which I cannot fail to
mention, is the promise held out by resolution 69/321 so
that, for the first time ever, the United Nations can elect
a woman to the post of Secretary-General.
I think that with that transcendent step with regard
to the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral all Members are at last basing the eligibility
of women on their professional and personal capacities.
The time has come to consider selecting a woman for the
post of Secretary-General. In that regard, the consensus
adoption of today’s resolution on the revitalization of
the work of the General Assembly is clearly a step in
the right direction. I again thank the co-facilitators and
you yourself, Mr. President.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Estonia on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
Allow me to make some remarks in my national
capacity.
First, we appreciate the leadership and commitment
of the Ambassadors of Croatia and Namibia, as well
as the constructive work of all delegations. We are
especially grateful to members of civil society, which
played a crucial role in this process. Costa Rica is greatly
satisfied with the adoption by consensus, under agenda
item 118, of resolution 69/321, on the revitalization of
the work of the General Assembly.
From the beginning of the negotiations, Costa Rica
participated actively in the process because it believes
that to strengthen the leadership of the United Nations
as the cornerstone of global governance requires first
choosing the best candidate to occupy the post of
Secretary-General from 1 January 2016. Since 1946,
the process of the selection of who occupies the most
important place in the international community has
been characterized as being opaque and undemocratic.
Costa Rica is determined to change that.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, my country, along with Estonia,
leads the efforts to establish a transparent, democratic
and inclusive process that is consistent — as it currently
is not — with similar processes at the highest level.
We aim to further strengthen the relationship between
the General Assembly and the Security Council, as a
decision on the appointment of the Secretary-General

15-27752

11/09/2015

is up to not only the five permanent members of the
Council, but the entire membership.
Costa Rica is proud to have succeeded in including
in the resolution an invitation to Member States to put
forward women candidates for the post of SecretaryGeneral. That political message is very clear in the
resolution. Let us hope that it indeed is, for the time has
come for a woman to be the next Secretary-General.
We are also encouraged that from this moment
on, and for the first time in history, we will have not
only an opportunity to learn the names of candidates
and their records, but the ability to interact with the
candidates themselves.
I understand that changes in the United Nations
do not occur as fast as we would like. Today we are
taking very important steps, but there are still crucial
other steps to be taken. Despite the achievements of
this year, Costa Rica will continue to work with the
same enthusiasm and determination to generate the
necessary political momentum for the Security Council
to present the General Assembly with not one but two
or more candidates, so that there can be an election and
not a mere appointment process.
With a similar hope that we will generate more
substantial changes in the short term, we will continue
advocating to make the term of office for a single period
of seven years in order to ensure the independence of
the post. Re-election is not the best formula to ensure
the determination and leadership we need right now
for humankind. In these times of crisis, when so many
lives hang in the balance, when instead of closing our
eyes and our borders we should be opening them and
acting with courage, our actions and decisions make a
difference.

A/69/PV.103

Permanent Missions in the context of the effectiveness
of the General Assembly, and invites the President
to conduct an informal meeting of the Assembly
to consider ways and means to further enhance
coordination between Permanent Missions and the
Secretariat. The resolution also opens the way forward
so that the Secretariat can make Member States aware
of limitations that impede the proper implementation
of resolutions regarding the Secretariat. The resolution
urges the President and the Chairs of the Main
Committees to continue to increase their consultations
with Member States in order to improve the way in
which the work of the Main Committees is conducted.
And the resolution reiterates the importance of the
Assembly meeting the opening date of its general
debate in accordance with the procedures it laid down
for itself.
The resolution also requests the Secretary-General
to provide information as to gender balance and the
regional origin of executive heads and the Senior
Management Group of the Organization — an issue of
particular importance for my delegation.
The resolution also reiterates the need to provide
the Office of the President of the General Assembly
with the human resources necessary to preserve its
institutional memory.

Mr. Luque Márquez (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Ecuador would first like to express
its heartfelt thanks for the efforts of the Permanent
Representatives of Croatia and Namibia, Ambassador
Vladimir Drobjnak and Ambassador Wilfried Emvula,
and their teams for deftly and with great patience
guiding us to the outcome of our work, that is, the
consensus adoption of resolution 69/321. We should
also thank the staff of the Secretariat who supported
this year’s meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.

There is no gainsaying that, for various reasons,
the election of the Secretary-General was the most
interesting theme in the debate this year. In addition to
referring to the imperative need to implement rule 141 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, elements
have been introduced advocating transparency in the
process, such as the coordinated action of the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Security Council at
the time of asking that nominations for candidates be
put forward, and also ensuring that Member States on
the list are kept informed of what is happening. As the
resolution provides for informal meetings between the
General Assembly and the candidates, my delegation
would like to highlight the invitation in paragraph 38
that States consider nominating women to the post of
Secretary-General. It is certainly high time for that.
Indeed, we are lagging behind what has happened in
many countries around the world that have had leaders
of State or Government. It is time that we had a woman
leading the United Nations as Secretary-General.

There is no doubt that we have made significant
progress. The resolution recognizes the work of

Those important transparency measures obviously
have to be accompanied by others that affirm the

15-277525/29

A/69/PV.103

active role, pursuant to Article 98 of the Charter of the
United Nations, that the General Assembly must play
when it comes to appointing the Secretary-General.
For my delegation, the provisions of paragraph 44
are particularly important in that regard, namely, that
over the next session we continue our discussions
and continue to take decisions on issues such as, for
example, the number of recommendations that it
would be desirable for the Security Council to put to
the Assembly, or the term of the Secretary-General’s
mandate. We are committed to holding conversations
and debating and discussing those issues in order to
arrive at decisions that can render more democratic the
process of the appointment of the Secretary-General,
or, better still, of the next woman Secretary-General.
During the current session of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, a goal of the delegation of Ecuador was
the reaffirmation of the rights and prerogatives of the
General Assembly pursuant to the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. That makes it the most
representative body of the Organization, where all
States are represented on an equal footing. Our purpose
over the next year will be the same. We still have a long
way to go.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the
adoption by consensus of this important resolution
69/321, on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly.
This year’s resolution introduces important
changes to the process of selection and appointment
of the Secretary-General, especially with regard to its
transparency. The process will now be initiated by a
joint letter of the Presidents of the General Assembly
and the Security Council addressed to all Member
States and soliciting candidates for the position of
Secretary-General. The names of individuals submitted
for consideration will be circulated on an ongoing basis.
The General Assembly will conduct informal dialogues
or meetings with the candidates for the position.
More objective criteria have been set for the qualities
expected of a Secretary-General. Member States have
also been invited to consider putting forward women
as candidates for the position. Those are all significant
achievements. We were able to use a narrow window of
opportunity to ensure that the next process of selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General, expected to
happen next year, will be more transparent.

6/29

11/09/2015

In that regard, we would like to thank the co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly, Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak of Croatia and Ambassador Wilfried
Emvula of Namibia, for their excellent work.
During the negotiation of the document just
adopted, Brazil also defended other proposals that,
unfortunately, were not included in this consensual
resolution. Important questions remain to be addressed.
One is how to ensure a more active role for the General
Assembly in nominating the Secretary-General,
according to article 97 of the Charter of the United
Nations, so as not to merely rubber-stamp a Security
Council decision. Another is the possibility of the
Security Council sending more than one name for
consideration by the General Assembly. Moreover,
although supported by a substantial number of
delegations, language including a suggestion to discuss
the duration of the appointment and the renewability of
the term of office of the Secretary-General could not
be included in this resolution for the sake of consensus.
Those are some of the questions that need to
continue to be discussed. The process of the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General is of the
utmost importance for the Organization. Brazil
reiterates its commitment to improve that process in
order to make it more inclusive, pluralistic and in tune
with an increasingly multipolar world.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation thanks and commends the co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly, Ambassador Vladimir
Drobnjak of Croatia and Ambassador Wilfried Emvula
of Namibia, for their important leadership and efforts
in stewarding the group’s proceedings.
My delegation has great expectations concerning
resolution 69/321, which we have just adopted. It is
our sincere hope that all provisions in the resolution
will be implemented. In the resolution, we reaffirm
the central position of the General Assembly as the
chief deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations, as well as its role and
authority in matters of concern to the international
community. The resolution expresses the resolve that
the role of the General Assembly will be strengthened
in the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral and other executive heads, and that there
will be enhanced transparency and accountability in

15-27752

11/09/2015

the relevant processes. We also emphasize the need
to continue strengthening the institutional memory of
the Office of the President of the General Assembly
through appropriate support in staff and resources.
This resolution is indeed very important, not
least because numerous new elements pertaining to
strengthening the Assembly have been highlighted.
Indonesia congratulates all delegations that worked
tirelessly to make it substantive and forward-looking.
At the same time, we would like to underscore the
imperative of political will by our Member States in
ensuring that the Assembly is fully supported and
enabled to perform its role as mandated by the Charter
of the United Nations.
As we commemorate the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations, we can all be proud of the
achievements of the Assembly and its bodies in their
various spheres. Yet we also know that much more needs
to be done to overcome its shortcomings. Therefore,
with the adoption of the resolution today, let us also
pledge that we will all bring to bear our respective
political capital and fully discharge our responsibilities
to ensure that the General Assembly becomes a robust
pulpit for the international community in order to
make the world more peaceful, safe and prosperous for
everyone.
Finally, Indonesia would like to reiterate that it will
continue to play its role actively in the Ad Hoc Working
Group, as well as in other forums, with the aim of
revitalizing the General Assembly.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of Belarus would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia, His
Excellency Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak and His Excellency
Mr. Wilfried Emvula, respectively, as well as their
hard-working colleagues. They were reasoned and
firm and actively sought compromise without prejudice
to impartiality. They also took a serious analytical
approach to the negotiations — all of which allowed us
to achieve a result that seemed improbable only a few
months ago.
We would also like to note the important
contribution by Non-Aligned Movement delegations
in achieving a positive result in the negotiations. We
thank the Algerian delegation and the coordinator
of the Non-Aligned Movement on this issue for their
consistency and the principled stands that they took in
developing and promoting the position of the Movement

A/69/PV.103

in very difficult negotiations on revitalizing the General
Assembly.
We are cautiously optimistic about resolution
69/321. Undoubtedly, the adoption of this resolution by
consensus, against the backdrop of great interest in the
subject and rather critical discussions, inspires hope.
At the same time, we are convinced that ensuring any
change in the Organization does not lie in the text of
the resolutions — the problem of the non-fulfilment
of resolutions is well known to everyone here. The
necessary prerequisite for any change is practical
cooperation, based not only on a will to convince
partners — when we write — but also and, above all,
on our ability to listen to others. Time and future events
in the Organization will show whether we have really
managed to reach an agreement.
Belarus welcomes the inclusion in the text of the
resolution of proposals to democratize the process of
nominating and appointing the Secretary-General. The
need for secret votes when appointing the SecretaryGeneral — in close compliance with the General
Assembly’s rules — and the establishment of gender and
geographical balance when selecting candidates to that
duty are also important. We assume that that balance
cannot be established at a moment’s notice, but has to
be done gradually. We also assume that participation in
this process by all Member States, with each one acting
according to its capabilities, will allow us to strengthen
the Organization in general, without going beyond
the remit of the Charter of the United Nations. That is
also the goal served by steps to optimize the working
methods of the General Assembly and its cooperation
with other United Nations bodies.
Over the past several months, the process in which
we have been participants and witnesses has evidently
yielded much more than just this direct result, that is,
the document we have adopted today. It has also shown
that, after 70 years of the United Nations, Member
States have not lost the ability to at least sometimes go
beyond the principled setting out of positions. They can
simply sit and listen to one another and understand the
wishes and expectations of others. That is the wonder of
empathy, and our ability to move towards that miracle
is what will determine the future of the Organization.
Mr. Normand (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf
of the European Union.

15-277527/29

A/69/PV.103

We congratulate all Member States on the flexibility
and constructive spirit that made possible this important
outcome. I especially would like to congratulate the
Ambassador of Croatia, Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak, and
the Ambassador of Namibia, Mr. Wilfried Emvula,
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly and
co-facilitators of the discussion, as well as their teams,
for their commitment, which helped reach consensus on
resolution 69/321. This resolution is important — even
historic — because for the first time all Member States
have agreed to strengthen transparency of the selection
process of the Secretary-General. Specifically, the
relevant innovations include the following aspects.
The joint letter by the President of the Security
Council and the President of the General Assembly will
issue a call for nominations. A list of candidates is to
be published at regular intervals. Informal meetings
are to take place between candidates for the post of
Secretary-General and Member States. There is also an
acknowledgement of the need to take gender into account
in the choice of the top officials of the Organization
and of the Secretary-General. And, lastly, States are
invited to consider a set of criteria upon a candidate’s
presentation — including multilingualism. As it is for
many other Member States, the latter is an important
point for us. Those are major innovations that meet a
legitimate aspiration to achieve greater transparency in
the appointment of the Secretary General. We welcome
that result, which encompasses the changes that we
called for.
I would also like to stress an essential element that
made possible consensus on the text, that is, that the
result respects the broad institutional balance among
the United Nations bodies as established in the Charter
of the United Nations. Article 97 of the Charter, which
stipulates that the “Secretary-General shall be appointed
by the General Assembly upon the recommendation
of the Security Council”, is not compromised by this
outcome in the resolution.
I would also like to underscore how important it is
that we have reached consensus on the adoption of this
resolution and that we have been able to avoid the risk
of a vote, which could have plunged the United Nations
into an institutional crisis. This result shows that, by
demonstrating a spirit of compromise, we are able to
move forward together to achieve progress in our shared
Organization by respecting the rules that regulate the

8/29

11/09/2015

relationship among the organs of the United Nations
and ensure their functioning.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Assembly of
the support and commitment of France to implementing
the results of this resolution in the General Assembly
and the Security Council.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to make a brief
concluding statement on behalf of the two co-Chairs.
Resolution 69/321, which we have just adopted, is
an important, far-reaching document that will be put to
practical use very soon. It reflects the common position
of all Member States, which strengthens its substance
and reach. It meets the respective interests of Member
States. But we can certainly go a step further and say
with confidence that this resolution is above all in the
best interests of the Organization. Allow me to make
two brief particular points.
First, this resolution is a result of the long, tireless
work of many Member States and their willingness to
engage in a thorough, substantive debate on numerous
crucial issues on the subject of the revitalization of the
General Assembly, in particular those related to the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General. It
was the willingness on all sides to compromise, as well
as the common desire not to miss the opportunity on
the eve of the process of selecting the new SecretaryGeneral, that made this resolution possible. We worked
on this resolution for many months, and the final results
clearly show how much we can accomplish if we act and
work together. The co-Chairs wholeheartedly thank all
delegations for that.
Secondly, throughout our debate and exchange of
views, both formal and informal, we touched upon many
aspects of the pivotal issue of revitalizing the General
Assembly. As the resolution before us demonstrates,
some issues were successfully addressed and were the
subject of appropriate, effective solutions. On the other
hand, some issues were put on hold to be addressed
properly during the seventieth session of the General
Assembly and beyond. To put it simply, we have
accomplished a lot, but our work on the revitalization
of the General Assembly is not done yet.
Our debates were rich in substance and creative and
included new ideas and proposals, thus contributing to
the quality of this resolution. The crux of our debates is
reflected in the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly

15-27752

11/09/2015

(A/69/1007), which remains an important point of
departure for some aspects of our work in the future.
In conclusion, allow me once again, on behalf of
the Permanent Representative of Namibia, my friend
Ambassador Wilfried Emvula, and myself, to express
our gratitude to all colleagues for their substantive and
highly professional cooperation. We warmly thank
colleagues from the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management, especially Mr. Georg
Zeiner, and we thank in particular the President of the
General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Sam Kutesa, for
entrusting us with co-chairmanship and supporting us
firmly throughout the process. We thank all delegations.

A/69/PV.103

adopted the Declaration on the Denuclearization of the
South Atlantic. Those documents, in addition to the
resolutions adopted in the General Assembly, firmly
demonstrate the peaceful will and cooperative spirit of
the members of the Zone.
At this session, we are introducing a draft resolution
that sets out issues that are important for the Zone, as
well as the actions taken since Uruguay assumed the
presidency at the seventh Ministerial Meeting, held in
Montevideo in January 2013, where the Montevideo
Declaration and the Plan of Action were adopted. Those
documents are still relevant and are currently being
implemented.

The President: I should like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Drobnjak of Croatia and
Ambassador Emvula of Namibia, co-Chairs of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly, who so ably conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations of the Working
Group. I am sure members of the Assembly will join me
in extending to them our sincere appreciation.

Great efforts have been made, and the existing
cooperation network among the 24 States parties to the
Zone has been strengthened in many different areas.
There is more to be done, and we are aware of that.
However, that is precisely the purpose of this mechanism:
to continue working for the benefit of member States
and their peoples and to foster international peace and
cooperation.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 118?

We hope that the eighth Ministerial Meeting of
the Zone will be held in Cabo Verde in the near future
and that we will pass on to Cabo Verde the privilege of
leading the Zone for the next two years.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 34
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/973 and
A/69/973/Add.1)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.89)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.89.
Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for the delegation of Uruguay, which holds the
presidency of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the
South Atlantic, to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.89
to the General Assembly.
We welcome the report (A/69/973) of the SecretaryGeneral and its addendum (A/69/973/Add.1) on the
activities undertaken by the Zone.
We recall that, through resolution 41/11, of 1986,
the South Atlantic Ocean was declared a Zone of peace
and cooperation, while the third Ministerial Meeting
of the Zone, held in Brasilia in September 1994,

Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): It has been more than
30 years since Brazil took part in the establishment of
the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic
by the General Assembly. Then as now, Brazil, together
with South American and African partner countries,
sought to bring about the consolidation of the South
Atlantic Ocean as a zone of peace, free from nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
Since its inception, the Zone of Peace and
Cooperation of the South Atlantic has been consolidating
those original goals. It has also been faced with the
challenges posed by current global issues that are of
interest to developing countries, such as sustainable
development, South-South cooperation, disarmament
issues and the fight against poverty.
Seven ministerial meetings of the Zone of Peace
and Cooperation of the South Atlantic have since 1984
resulted in the establishment of a set of principles
for the activities of the regional arrangement. The
most recent ministerial meeting of the Zone, held in
Montevideo on 15 and 16 January 2013, enabled its
member States to renew their commitments and pursue

15-277529/29

A/69/PV.103

their efforts towards deepening cooperation in areas
such as global governance, development, economic
and financial issues, disarmament, peace and security,
defence, sustainable development and climate change,
oceans and marine resources, and international crime.
Moreover, concrete cooperation initiatives were
provided for in the Montevideo Plan of Action, adopted
at that meeting, in the following areas: mapping and
exploration of the seabed, protection and conservation
of the marine environment and marine scientific
research, air and maritime transportation, maritime
safety and security, public security and transnational
organized crime, as well as capacity-building.
These ambitious commitments and mandates
adopted by our ministers reflect the increasing
economic, political and strategic importance of the
South Atlantic region for its coastal States in the context
of current global, political and economic realities. We
hope that our joint endeavour will continue to increase
mutual exchanges between the African and South
American peoples, who are bound by strong historical
ties and cultural heritage.
Allow me to underscore the commitment of the
States members of the Zone to avoid the militarization
of the South Atlantic by reinforcing further cooperation
aimed at fostering peace and development. These are
the values that we seek to reaffirm through the draft
resolution that is before the General Assembly today.
In concluding, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Government of Cabo Verde, which
has so kindly offered to host the next ministerial
meeting of the Zone. I wish the Government of Cabo
Verde all the best for its presidency and encourage
States members of the Zone to actively participate in
the upcoming ministerial meeting. I also wish to extend
sincere thanks to the Government of Uruguay for the
excellent work it has done so far during its presidency
of the zone.
Mr. Mazzeo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina is proud to be a sponsor of draft resolution
A/69/L.89, which has just been introduced by Uruguay,
owing to our firm belief in the importance of the Zone
of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic, which
was established in 1986 at the initiative of Brazil,
with the support of my country. My country’s active
participation in the Zone of Peace and Cooperation
reflects its commitment to the universal values of

10/29

11/09/2015

international peace and security and to the sustainable
development of the southern hemisphere.
We pay tribute to the leadership and the outstanding
work done by the Government of Uruguay as President
pro tempore of the Zone since 2013 and in particular
convey our gratitude to the Government of Cabo Verde
for offering to host the next ministerial meeting of the
zone at a date to be decided later.
The Montevideo Declaration, adopted in 2013 at
the seventh ministerial meeting of the Zone, reflected
the convergence of views of the members of the zone
regarding certain issues that are extremely sensitive,
such as the need to continue to work to put a swift
and unconditional end to colonialism in all its forms
and manifestations. On that occasion, the members
of the Zone expressed their concern at the continuing
situations that negatively affect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of certain States members of the
Zone. We support their endeavours in promoting the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
quest for negotiated solutions to the territorial conflicts
affecting them.
The particular importance of the status of this Zone
lies in the fact that it is not just an area of peace and
cooperation but also a zone free of nuclear weapons,
the result of an effort that flowed from the very ideal
of peace and security that led to the birth of the United
Nations itself, as well as the various regional and
subregional organizations to which the various States of
the zone belong. Here Argentina believes that although
some countries are not members of the Zone, they are
adopting a responsible attitude that is respectful of the
goals of peace and security and of the commitments
undertaken with respect to the ban on weapons of mass
destruction that the zone imposed upon itself.
The Montevideo Plan of Action set out specific
cooperation measures, in recognition of the many
potential sectors for South-South cooperation. Thus
the establishment of a Working Group on peacekeeping
operations, pursuant to the Montevideo Plan of Action
in 2013, is of great importance in that it provides an
opportunity for deepening cooperation among the States
members of the zone. Argentina therefore proposes to
organize and host the first meeting of the Group, taking
that opportunity to extend discussions to the full scope
of issues related to cooperation in the area of defence.
Aware of its responsibilities in the area of search
and rescue in the South Atlantic, Argentina has begun

15-27752

11/09/2015

the process of joining the Medium-altitude Earth Orbit
Search and Rescue programme of the Cospas-Sarsat
satellite system through the establishment of two
new earth stations on Argentine territory, which will
significantly improve distress-alert reception times in
the South Atlantic.
We are committed to protecting and preserving the
marine environment and living marine resources, and
marine science. The Republic of Argentina launched
the Pampa Azul initiative in order to contribute to
broadening scientific knowledge as the basis for
conservation policies and the management of natural
resources, and encouraging technological innovations
applicable to the sustainable exploitation of natural
resources.
In conclusion, we are grateful for the support that
this regional initiative will receive, which reflects the
active commitment of both coasts of the South Atlantic
to social and economic development, strict respect for
human rights, international law and international peace
and security.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.89, entitled “Zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/69/L.89: Brazil and Sweden.
The President: May take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.89?
Draft resolution A/69/L.89 was adopted (resolution
69/322).
The President: May I take it that is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 34?
It was so decided.

A/69/PV.103

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I shall now invite the attention of
the General Assembly to draft resolution A/69/L.88,
circulated under agenda item 68, entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights”.
The President: Members will recall that at its
77th plenary meeting, on 29 December 2014, the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
68. In order for the Assembly to consider agenda item
68, it will be necessary to reopen its consideration. May
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
reopen consideration of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 68
to the Third Committee. In order to enable us to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 68
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 68 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution (A/69/L.88)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia, who will introduce the draft
resolution.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): It is with pride,
honour and a sense of duty that Armenia presents
draft resolution A/69/L.88, entitled “International
Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims
of the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of
This Crime”, on behalf of its 84 sponsors, to which
Armenia is deeply grateful. It is the result of intensive
consultations among the membership that have been
concluded successfully in order to secure full consensus
on the text. We appreciate the broad membership’s
engagement in the negotiations and the constructive
spirit that has been displayed throughout the process.
Today’s draft resolution follows another initiated
earlier by Armenia and adopted by the Human Rights

15-2775211/29

A/69/PV.103

Council in March. In paragraph 22 of its resolution, the
Human Rights Council recommended that the General
Assembly proclaim this International Day, and I am
glad that we intend to heed its proposal.
Millions of human lives have been lost as a result
of the most horrendous crime — genocide — that
humankind has, to its shame, demonstrated the capacity
to commit. In its pivotal paragraph 1, today’s draft
resolution proposes to designate 9 December as an
international day of commemoration and dignity of
the victims of genocide and as a day for a collective
reflection on the millions of human faiths, hopes and
aspirations that have been shattered by despicable
brutality, violence and hatred.
On 9 December 1948, the United Nations adopted
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide. Decades of deep analysis
of the phenomenon of that crime and its root causes
and consequences, carried out by a remarkable
lawyer, Raphael Lemkin, resulted in empowering
the international community with an important legal
instrument for preventing and punishing genocide.
The fact that in the decades since its adoption the
international community has encountered repeated
recurrences of genocide underscores how vital it is that
we continue to take forceful collective action to prevent
this scourge.
Ironically, as early as 1985, exactly 30 years ago, a
United Nations human rights body, the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities, in a landmark document known as the
Whitaker report, initiated the idea of establishing an
impartial international body concerned with preventing
genocide. Shamefully, that and other recommendations
of the report did not materialize at the time. The
initiative fell on deaf ears, because apparently the
immediate pressures of the day were a deterrent to an
in-depth examination of the impending risks of the
recurrence of genocide. Less than 10 years later, the
international community witnessed its resurgence.
It took the international community a long time to
reflect on what former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
termed complicity with evil before tangible, albeit
perhaps still modest mechanisms to prevent genocide
were put in place. Together with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
and the joint Office he shares with the Special Adviser

12/29

11/09/2015

on the Responsibility to Protect, takes centre stage in
the area of preventing genocide within the vast human
rights protection system. Their commendable efforts
have alerted us to the critical priority of early warning
and early action in denying potential perpetrators the
opportunity to commit this ultimate crime. But the fact
is that we must make a major contribution to changing
the culture of our Organization from one of reaction
to one of prevention. We believe this International Day
will serve as an important platform for prevention by
way of commemoration.
The memory of the victims of genocide should
help us to transcend our collective sorrow, compassion
and guilt and turn it into determination to act together
in order to free the world once and for all from this
dehumanizing crime. The United Nations, through
its members and throughout its entire system, must
demonstrate its ability to lead us towards that objective.
Besides tools and structures, what it needs most is will.
“Never again” should have to be uttered only once. To
quote the Whitaker report, “It has been rightly said that
those who do not learn from history are condemned to
repeat it”.
Mr. Mnisi (Swaziland), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
To the victims of our past inaction, the International
Day will restore dignity. The denial of the sanctity of
life to millions is the ultimate injustice. That denial of
justice haunts generations of survivors, and we speak
from experience. It shatters faith in accountability.
It undermines the fight against impunity, which is as
essential as genuine reconciliation. As ever, we are
all collectively responsible for putting together the
building blocks of a clear system designed to deny the
capability for committing the crime of genocide to its
potential perpetrators. It is the most appropriate way to
pay tribute to the memories of its victims.
We call on all Member States to adopt this draft
resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.88, entitled
“International Day of Commemoration and Dignity
of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the
Prevention of This Crime”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

15-27752

11/09/2015

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/69/L.88, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra, Austria, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, the Central African
Republic, Colombia, Cyprus, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Lebanon, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.88?
Draft resolution A/69/L.88 was adopted (resolution
69/323).
The Acting President: Before I give the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
representatives from their seats.
Mr. Sana (Rwanda): Rwanda, as a country that
experienced one of the worst genocides — namely, the
genocide against the Tutsi, during which Hutu and other
victims were also killed — attaches great importance
to honouring the victims in dignity. Resolution 69/323,
which was just adopted, has the merit of reminding the
international community of its obligation to do so.
However, we believe that, in addition to an
international day, commemoration has to be undertaken
case by case, with the international community providing
a specific date for each country that has experienced
genocide. That is why Rwanda has decided to dissociate
itself from the resolution. Our position does not mean
that we are against setting an international date, but is
intended to stress that victims should be given names,
that each genocide should be called by its name, and
that dates of commemoration should be set taking into
account a specific day for each country.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I wish to express my
appreciation and felicitations to the delegation of

A/69/PV.103

Armenia for taking this important initiative. I also thank
the President of the General Assembly, the Secretariat
and all delegations for their widespread support for the
consensus that led to the adoption of resolution 69/323
today.
For my delegation, this resolution is a logical
culmination of a process that began when India, Cuba
and Panama co-sponsored, in response to the advocacy
of Raphael Lemkin, one of the first resolutions of the
General Assembly — resolution 96 (I), of 11 December
1946, which mandated the drafting of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. India is a party to the Convention on Genocide
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, both
of 1948. We strongly endorse the principles of the
prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide.
In view of the rights bestowed by the Convention and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we believe
that the legal obligations to refrain from genocide are
recognized as erga omnes. India has therefore extended
its full support and co-sponsored today’s resolution.
It is worth recalling that the catalyst for the General
Assembly resolution calling for the Convention on
Genocide was the horrendous genocide that occurred
in Europe during the Second World War. “Never again”
has been a yardstick for the international community
since the United Nations was founded 70 years ago.
However, on the ground, it is regrettable that crimes
of genocide have not been prevented, especially on the
continents of Asia and Africa, during the past seven
decades.
This year, we mark the tenth anniversary of the
World Summit of 2005, when the establishment of
an empowered 47-member United Nations Human
Rights Council was agreed to by all of us. We are glad
that 170 Member States voted in favour of resolution
60/251, creating the Human Rights Council, which
is a democratically elected and transparent body
representing all the regions of our Organization. On this
occasion, we call for making the Human Rights Council
more responsive, in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, in providing early
warning of situations where populations face the threat
of genocide, so that the international community can
act in time to ensure “never again”.
The International Day that we have established
through this resolution will give us the opportunity to
commemorate the victims of genocide, and also express

15-2775213/29

A/69/PV.103

solidarity with the survivors of genocide. By recalling
our moral and legal rejection of the crime of genocide,
we will be able to strengthen our collective resolve
to ensure that this pernicious act remains outside the
pale of civilized human behaviour. Today, through the
adoption of resolution 69/323 by consensus, India joins
all the other States Members of the United Nations
in reaffirming our belief in the Charter of the United
Nations, in the dignity and worth of the human person,
and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations
large and small.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): I, too, wish to congratulate
the delegation of Armenia for a job well done.
The Sudan welcomes the adoption of resolution
69/323, entitled “International Day of Commemoration
and Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide
and of the Prevention of This Crime”. The Government
of the Republic of the Sudan will observe the Day
specified in the resolution for commemoration, which
will definitely be an opportune and solemn occasion
to recall acts of genocide committed in Europe during
the Second World War and other parts of the world.
Particularly, and as it primarily concerns the events in
our continent of Africa, the Rwandan genocide of 1994
will be memorialized and the report of the Organization
of African Union (OAU) International Panel of Eminent
Personalities to Investigate the 1994 Genocide in
Rwanda and Surrounding Events, submitted to the
OAU Summit in Togo in July 2000, will be circulated,
studied and reviewed in my country.
Regrettably, at the turn of this century and the
dawn of the third millennium, a disturbing trend to use
the universally agreed principle of the prevention of
genocide for political ends can be discerned. This is the
most serious threat that the international determination
to fight genocide could face after the adoption of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide of 1948. It could be, by all
accounts, the greatest disservice to the fight against
and prevention of genocide ever since.
To vindicate this argument, I would cite the
allegations and accusations against our Government
and our nation of committing genocide in the western
region of the country, Darfur, since 2003. In all
objectivity, I will briefly confine myself to citing the
testimony repeated worldwide, indicating that the
events in Darfur before the conclusion of a peaceful
settlement to the conflict in Abuja in 2006 and Doha

14/29

11/09/2015

in 2011 did not constitute genocide. I stress that I do so
to caution against offending the dignity of the victims
of genocide, especially in Europe during the Second
World War, in Africa in 1994 and perhaps elsewhere.
First, in June 2004, the then-Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, said of the situation in Darfur, “I
cannot call the killings a genocide”.
Second, the International Commission of Inquiry
on Darfur answered, “The Government of the Sudan
has not pursued a policy of genocide directly or through
the militias under its control”.
Third, in July 2004, the African Union Peace
and Security Council stated, “Even though the crisis
in Darfur is grave, the situation cannot be defined as
genocide”.
Fourth, in December 2004, the then Organization
of African Unity Chairman, Nigerian President
Olusegun Obasanjo, stated, “Now, what I know of the
Sudan does not fit in all respects to that definition of
genocide”. Previously, on 23 September 2004, at a
press conference at United Nations Headquarters, in
New York, President Obasango stated, “That does not
amount to genocide from our reckoning. It amounts, of
course, to conflict. It amounts to violence”.
Fifth, in August 2004, the European Union factfinding mission in Darfur concluded that, “although
there was widespread violence in Darfur, there was no
evidence of genocide”. A spokesman for the mission
stated, “We are not in the situation of genocide there”.
Sixth, in May 2004 the Arab League commission
of inquiry to Darfur took the position that events in
Darfur were neither genocide nor ethnic cleansing.
Seventh, regarding individuals and non-governmental
organizations, during a visit to Darfur in 2007 former
United States President Jimmy Carter said, “There
is a legal definition of genocide and Darfur does not
meet that standard”. In 2004, Médecins Sans Frontières
(MSF) said regarding Darfur,
“By screaming the crime of all crimes,
mixing military with humanitarianism to justify
intervention, words do have concrete implication
and offensive political interests”.
Médecins Sans Frontières cautions that to continue
with its job would entail “distancing ourselves from
propaganda and resisting this era of confusion”. In
2004, then-MSF-France President Jean-Hervé Bradol

15-27752

11/09/2015

A/69/PV.103

stated that claims of genocide in Darfur were “obvious
political opportunism”. It was that organization which
asserted that incidents of genocide had taken place in
Rwanda in 1994 and accordingly won a Nobel Peace
Prize in 1999.

step towards determining the truth. Denial of the
established facts is an insult to the victims. Denial does
not make those facts go away. It does not change the
past, and it certainly does not erase the memory of the
people of Azerbaijan.

I conclude with the words of Mr. David Hoile that
the misuse of the term of genocide is very regrettable.
He said:

We believe that by putting forward this resolution,
its main sponsor will come to terms with its modern
history and recognize its responsibility for Khojaly.
Only by unearthing the truth and recognizing the
responsibility to bring all perpetrators to justice will
we be able to move towards recognition and make our
collective promise of “never again” a reality.

“Crying wolf on genocide in Darfur can only
but denigrate the memory of the reality of the
Holocaust in Europe during the Second World War
[and] encourage Holocaust deniers”.
That misuse is, hopefully, what the present resolution
intends to suppress. Again, while we caution against
twisting this shared objective of prevention by
memorialization, we confirm our support for the
present resolution that has just been adopted.
Mr. Jabrayilov (Azerbaijan): Our delegation is
taking the floor to explain its position on resolution
69/323, entitled “International Day of Commemoration
and Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide
and of the Prevention of This Crime”.
Remembrance and commemoration of the victims of
genocide deeply resonate with the people of Azerbaijan.
It reminds us of a dark stage of our recent history that
took place in Khojaly. Since 1992, each February we
commemorate the anniversary of the atrocious crimes
committed against the civilian population of the town
of Khojaly, situated in the Nagorno Karabakh region of
the Republic of Azerbaijan.
On the night of 25 and 26 February 1992, the town
of Khojaly was brutally seized. The attack and capture
of the town involved the extermination of hundreds
of Azerbaijanis, including women, children and the
elderly. Thousands of civilians were maimed and taken
hostage; many of them remain missing. The town was
razed to the ground. The level of brutality in Khojaly
was shocking. Atrocities included scalping, beheading,
the bayoneting of pregnant women and the mutilation
of bodies.
The facts confirmed that the international
slaughter of civilians in Khojaly was directed at
their mass extermination only because they were
Azerbaijanis. The agony of our people continues every
day, undimmed by the passage of time. The people of
Azerbaijan have been waiting for justice for 23 years.
The continuous commemoration is also an important

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I give the floor to the representative of Chile to
make a statement.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
shall be brief. I wish to emphasize the significance of
the initiative put forward by the delegation of Armenia,
which Chile co-sponsored, to designate the International
Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of
the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This
Crime, which we trust will contribute to our goal.
Genocide arises in split societies where there are
perceptions and feelings of exclusion that fuel actions
against particular groups and create conditions conducive
to their commission. The strengthening of the rule of
law, inclusive development and respect for diversity and
human rights is an effective way of addressing the deep
roots of many conflicts and preventing the commission
of the crime of genocide. Prevention must be a central
aspect of the responsibilities of the international
community, particularly on the part of the Security
Council, which must efficiently use the early-warning
mechanisms available. In that regard, we welcome the
Rights Up Front initiative of the Secretary-General
and the work of the Office of the Special Adviser for
the Prevention of Genocide and the Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect, as well as the prevention
role played by regional and subregional organizations,
local and religious leaders, women, young people, civil
society and the media. I wish to emphasize here the role
being carried out by the Latin American Network for
Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention.
The responsibility to protect civilians against
massive and general abuses of human rights resides
first and primarily with the State, but the international

15-2775215/29

A/69/PV.103

community can help in those efforts and act when
Member States — either voluntarily or for reasons of
complete inability — do not meet those obligations, in
conformity with the responsibility to protect defined in
the 2005 World Summit outcome document (resolution
60/1). With that vision of support for capacity-building,
Chile has organized regional and international seminars
with the Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect
in Chile — such as the fifth annual meeting of the
Global Network of R2P Focal Points on the need to
protect, organized with Spain in July.
Faced with the crime of genocide, we must have
international mechanisms and/or tribunals that can
ensure accountability and prevent impunity. In that
regard, we must stress the role of the International
Criminal Court, which — let us remember — requires
the full cooperation of States with the Court so that it
may carry out its functions effectively.
Chile regrets the exercise of the right of veto by
permanent members of the Security Council in matters
pertaining to genocide, and we call on them once again
to refrain from using veto in cases of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, and to support
the proposal made by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, to which Chile belongs, with
respect to a code of conduct for the restriction of the
use of the right of veto in such situations. That would
represent a concrete way of paying tribute to the
victims of that crime, which is universally abhorred,
and of achieving a world free of the threat and scourge
of genocide.
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the
right of reply.
May I remind members that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, statements in
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Resolution 69/323,
which was introduced by Armenia, is about
dignity — something that was missing from the
statement made by the representative of Azerbaijan.
In his statements, I believe that he neeeds to recall
the genocide committed against the Armenians in
Baku, Sumgait and many other places in Azerbaijan.
We will therefore disregard the allegation made by

16/29

11/09/2015

the representative of Azerbaijan and call on him to
demonstrate dignity and refrain from the trivialization
of genocide.
Mr. Jabrayilov (Azerbaijan): I apologize for
taking the floor a second time and would like to note
the following.
Apart from considerable information emanating
from the law-enforcement agencies of Azerbaijan, the
responsibility of Armenia, including that of its political
and military leadership and subordinate local armed
groups, for the crimes committed in Khojaly has been
reported, recognized and documented by numerous
mass media organizations, human rights organizations,
independent sources and eyewitnesses of the tragedy.
Above all, the Republic of Armenia’s responsibility for
the crimes in Khojaly has been admitted by Armenia
itself — by its high-ranking officials and the country’s
public sources. The following quotation from an
interview with the President of Armenia, Mr. Sarkisian,
with British journalist Thomas de Waal leaves no doubt
as to the identity of the perpetrator of the crimes of
Khojaly:
“Before Khojaly, the Azerbaijanis thought that
they were joking with us; they thought that the
Armenians were people who could not raise their
hand against the civilian population. We were able
to break that stereotype.”
In conclusion, it is extremely disappointing that,
while initiating resolution 69/323 and speaking about
the responsibility for and importance of remembrance,
Armenia continues to deny its responsibility for
Khojaly.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
our consideration of agenda item 68.
Agenda item 122
Multilingualism
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/282)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.86)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.86.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I have the
pleasure, on behalf of the sponsoring States, to introduce

15-27752

11/09/2015

draft resolution A/69/L.86, on
submitted under agenda item 122.

A/69/PV.103

multilingualism,

Access to information has always been a fundamental
pillar of the United Nations. As we prepare to celebrate
the seventieth anniversary of our Organization, that
pillar is even more important in a context that is marked
more than ever by the development of information and
communication technologies. In that context, it is more
necessary than ever before for the United Nations to
take linguistic diversity into account so as to ensure
that its message is heard by all the peoples of the world.
Accordingly, the draft resolution recalls the high
priority of multilingualism in building a world that
conforms to the ideals on which the Organization was
founded — a world that strives tirelessly for peace,
justice and freedom. That goal should be a catalyst
for us to promote and strengthen parity among the six
official languages while highlighting the importance of
non-official languages.
From that perspective, the text underscores the
responsibilities of the various departments and services
of the Secretariat in the promotion and implementation
of multilingualism. It also welcomes the appointment
of a Coordinator for Multilingualism by the SecretaryGeneral. It calls on the services and departments of the
Secretariat to fully support the work of the Coordinator
and on the Secretary-General to submit a report on that
work.
To that end, the draft resolution notes the
fundamental role that the Department of Public
Information plays and underscores the importance
of ensuring that all United Nations documents be
published and accessible in the six official languages,
including through the Organization’s websites. In
that regard, the draft resolution notes with concern
the disparity among the official languages as well as
among the non-official languages, as brought to light
by the Secretariat’s technical review. In that regard, the
text urges the Secretary-General to take the necessary
steps to correct those disparities.
Another challenge that is no less important or
deserving of our attention is the conservation of the
audio-visual archives that record the 70-year history
of the United Nations. We welcome the completion of
their inventory. The draft resolution underscores the
importance of their being digitized in order to avoid
their deterioration.

The draft resolution’s text also recalls the provisions
concerning mobility that were introduced a year ago to
take language skills into account.
Multilingualism is also important to the quest
for world peace, and the draft resolution notes the
submission to the Secretary-General of the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(A/70/95), which was established for that purpose, as
well as the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(A/69/968).
All of the aforementioned demonstrates the
importance of multilingualism to achieving the
objectives of the United Nations and how essential it
is that we promote its implementation. It is a matter
of equal dignity for all cultures and the effectiveness
of the sacrosanct principle of the legal equality of all
States and to the democratization of global governance.
I can assure the Assembly that today’s draft resolution
will be adopted by consensus and sponsored by a
significant number of countries, as has been the case
in previous years.
Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Spanish in the United Nations, in
our first address to the plenary of the General Assembly
since the Group was established on 16 September 2013.
Our group recognizes the growing interest of the
Spanish-speaking peoples in the work of the United
Nations. That has had an impact on the activities of
the Organization through its increased and sustained
consultations and discussions among Spanish speakers
all over the world. That is what has led us to recognize
that language groups can have a direct effect on the
activities of the United Nations. One of our main goals,
therefore, has been to promote cooperation between
the United Nations and the Group of Friends, bringing
together the countries that share the Spanish language,
so that we can promote the ideals, principles and
purposes of the United Nations as well as their peoples’
general welfare.
Our Group has also been particularly interested in
strengthening its ties to other language groups within
the United Nations, because we believe in diversity’s
richness and because multilingualism is the principle
that unites us all. That is why we support efforts to fully
implement the principle of multilingualism in the United
Nations, and we consider it encouraging that the General

15-2775217/29

A/69/PV.103

Assembly is reaffirming its importance with today’s
draft resolution (A/69/L.86). Once again, we reiterate
our full commitment to achieving multilingualism
at the United Nations, through the essential parity of
use of the six official languages, equally and without
discrimination. The Group of Friends of Spanish firmly
believes that it will help to promote the mission of the
United Nations and strengthen international support for
its activities with the greatest possible transparency.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/69/L.86.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly
and
Conference
Management):
In
connection with draft resolution A/69/L.86, entitled
“Multilingualism”, I wish to put on record the following
statements of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
General Assembly’s rules of procedure.
In paragraph 41 of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would reiterate the need to fully implement
and observe rule 55 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, which provides that during the
sessions of the General Assembly the Journal of the
United Nations shall be published in languages of the
Assembly from within existing resources. The current
interpretation and practice with respect to rule 55 is
that the Journal is published in the six languages of
the Assembly during the main parts of the General
Assembly, from September to December, while during
the remainder of the year the Journal is issued in
English and French only.
Accordingly, if the General Assembly decides
to continue with the current practice reflected in
paragraph 41, adoption of the draft resolution would
not require additional resources under the programme
budget.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.86, entitled
“Multilingualism”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of draft

18/29

11/09/2015

resolution A/69/L.86, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Colombia, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Georgia, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Iraq, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Mali, Monaco, Morocco, Niger, Peru, the
Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia and
Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.86?
Draft resolution A/69/L.86 was adopted (resolution
69/324).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the francophone ambassadors, I would like to express
the Group’s satisfaction at the orderly negotiating
process facilitated by the delegation of Senegal, which
allowed consensus to be reached on resolution 69/324.
The Group of Francophone Ambassadors is pleased
to see the unanimous adoption of resolution 69/324.
In this regard, I should like to thank the Senegalese
delegation for having facilitated negotiations on the
text and all of the delegations that participated in the
negotiations, which made constructive contributions to
enhancing the draft and strengthening its provisions,
thereby consolidating multilingualism within the
United Nations.
The resolution is an additional means for us to
consolidate multilingualism by giving it pride of place
among the efforts of the United Nations aimed at
preserving cultural diversity through the promotion of
the use of languages on an equal footing in the work of
the Organization. The preservation of multilingualism
within our organizations serves, among other purposes,
to facilitate international communication and to ensure
the broad and inclusive participation of States and
stakeholders in multilateral actions.
The resolution that we have adopted today
reinforces language that recognizes the key role

15-27752

11/09/2015

that multilingualism plays in realizing the three
pillars of the United Nations, namely, peacekeeping,
development and human rights. In this respect, we hope
that the implementation of the resolution will lead to the
enshrinement of the principle of the equality of the six
official languages of the United Nations and strengthen
multilingualism in the texts dealt with and issued by the
United Nations and in key documents published on the
website and the various United Nations publications.
Finally, my delegation reiterates that the
francophone Ambassadors are ready to cooperate with
the United Nations and its bodies to implement the
resolution and will continue to work to promote the
principle of cultural and linguistic diversity.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 122?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/69/L.91)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take action on the draft resolution entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015 and beyond”, issued as
document A/69/L.91.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
considered, in a joint debate, agenda item 62 and its
sub-items (a) and (b), and agenda item 12, at its 26th
and 27th plenary meetings, on 17 October 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.91.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I am pleased, in our capacity
as Chair of the African Leaders Malaria Alliance
(ALMA) Steering Committee, to introduce, on behalf
of the African Group, draft resolution A/69/L.91,
entitled “Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015 and beyond”.
Over the past 15 years the world has seen tremendous
progress on malaria control and prevention. Indeed, the
number of children who die from malaria has fallen

A/69/PV.103

by more than 50 per cent, and the United Nations
estimates that 6.2 million lives have been saved as a
result of malaria interventions between 2000 and 2015.
Fifty-five of the world’s 99 countries affected are on
track to cut malaria incidence by at least 75 per cent by
the end of 2015. Nowhere has the progress been more
remarkable than on the African continent. The World
Health Organization reports that nine countries are
on track to reduce malaria incidence by 75 per cent,
and three additional countries are projected to achieve
reductions of between 50 and 75 per cent by the end of
2015. The result is that 3.9 million child deaths have
been averted in Africa.
African countries and their partners have
mobilized hundreds of millions of dollars to scale up
malaria-control interventions, including long-lasting
insecticidal nets, indoor residual spraying, rapid
diagnostic tests and artemisin-based combination
therapies. Despite the success of this unprecedented
scaling up of anti-malaria interventions, much work
remains to be done, and many countries in Africa
continue to experience sub-optimal progress towards
national and international targets.
As we turn to the Sustainable Development Goals
in aggressive pursuit of malaria elimination, we must
address weak health-care systems and inequitable access
to health services, ramp up domestic and international
financing, and deal with insecticide resistance. Tools
such as the Alma 2030 Scorecard towards malaria
elimination, launched earlier this year, are essential in
tracking progress towards malaria elimination.
The aforementioned draft resolution, adopted on an
annual basis, is critical because it provides a rallying
message and guideposts to keep partners such as the
African Development Bank, the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa, the World Bank,
the Department for International Development, the
President’s Malaria Initiative and others to ensure that
we build sustainable funding plans and ensure quality
financial management, including priority-setting and
accountability for results.
This year’s draft resolution is consistent with the
purposes and missions of resolution 68/308, adopted
last year, while highlighting substantial and technical
updates and new developments in the area. The new
components are as follows.

15-2775219/29

A/69/PV.103

First, the draft resolution recognizes the
beginning of the Sustainable Development Goal era
in the movement towards malaria elimination, further
recognizing, in this connection, the need for additional
funding for malaria interventions and for research into
and development of preventive diagnostic and control
tools from the international community.
Second, it welcomes the World Health
Organization’s global technical strategy for malaria,
adopted by the World Health Assembly in May, and the
Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016-2030
plan of the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, launched
at the third International Conference on Financing for
Development, which together provide the framework
to achieve a reduction in global malaria incidence and
mortality rates by at least 90 per cent by 2030, which is
in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.
Third, it reaffirms the declaration of Alma-Ata,
which was adopted at the International Conference
on Primary Health Care, held in Alma-Ata from 6 to
12 September 1978.
Fourth, it acknowledges the progress made in Latin
America in reducing the incidence of malaria, the
progress made in parts of Africa in reversing the high
burden of malaria and the success achieved in meeting
the 2015 goals on malaria control set by the World
Health Assembly, the Roll Back Malaria Partnership,
the Abuja Declaration on Roll Back Malaria in Africa
and target 6.C of Millennium Development Goal 6.
Fifth, it expresses great regret at the high number of
people still without access to medicines and underscores
that improving access to medicine could save millions
of lives every year.
Sixth, it stresses the importance of improving
community-based systems in the control of malaria,
bearing in mind that families are often the starting
point for effective health care for a child with fever.
Seventh, it calls upon Member States to promote
access to medicines and emphasizes that access to
affordable and quality medicines and medical care in the
event of sickness, as well as the prevention, treatment
and control of disease, are central for the realization
of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health.
Eighth, it recognizes the importance of innovation
in addressing the challenges of eliminating malaria,
including the role of the World Intellectual Property

20/29

11/09/2015

Organization (WIPO), in particular WIPO’s research
platform.
Lastly, it encourages the sharing across regions
of knowledge and experience and lessons learned
with regard to the control and elimination of malaria,
particularly among the African, Asian and Latin
American regions.
Before I conclude, I would like to express my deepest
appreciation to the facilitators of the draft resolution
for their hard work and leadership in bringing it into
its final form. I would also like to thank all Member
States that were involved in the negotiation process for
their active participation and support. I look forward to
the adoption of this draft solution by consensus, as in
previous years.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.91, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015 and beyond”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/69/L.91, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Canada, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, India, Japan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Serbia, Slovenia, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of
America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.91?
Draft resolution A/69/L.91 was adopted (resolution
69/325).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Forés Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The text just adopted is of the greatest importance for

15-27752

11/09/2015

the international community, especially for the peoples
of Africa. On that continent, around 584,000 lives have
been lost this year alone due to malaria. Most of these
deaths occur among the continent’s children, where
every minute a child dies because of the disease even
though it is preventable and curable.
Cuba joined the consensus on resolution 69/325,
taking into account those factors as well as others
of great interest set out in the resolution, out of the
necessity of cooperating to confront malaria and
support the countries facing it, which as developing
countries do not have sufficient human, financial and
medical resources to eradicate this disease, let alone
the difficulty of gaining access to the international
drug market for drugs or simply the gaps in health
technology and infrastructure.
However, we would like to say, with respect
to paragraph 40 of the resolution, which refers to
initiatives on aid effectiveness — the Paris Declaration
on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action
and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation — that those are not universally accepted
agreements under the auspices of the United Nations.
We believe that this is an attempt by developed
countries to impose their vision on how to provide
official development assistance to the countries of the
South, thus obviating their historic responsibility to the
developing world.
We reject attempts to legitimize or impose
agreements reached by only a few countries. However,
Cuba has always reiterated its willingness to rely
on the principles and commitments set out in the
aforementioned documents through an open and
transparent process at the Organization and on an equal
footing with all States Members of the United Nations.
For these reasons, Cuba declares that the part of
paragraph 40 previously referred to is not consensus
language, and we dissociate ourselves from it. We
request that this statement be included in record of this
meeting.
Ms. Argüello González (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 69/325. The issue of health is of paramount
importance to our delegation as well as for our African
brothers, especially with respect to a disease that
can be prevented and cured and in whose complete
eradication we can all play an important role. As stated

A/69/PV.103

previously, Nicaragua decided to join the consensus on
the resolution.
However, we would like to be clear and on the
record that our delegation did not support paragraph
40, with explicit regard to references to the documents
on aid effectiveness, namely, the Paris Declaration
on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action
and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation, since this language is not that of
consensus. For that reason, we cannot accept it. We
therefore dissociate ourselves from it and ask that our
statement be included in the record of this meeting.
Ms. González (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): Venezuela welcomes the adoption
of resolution 69/325, entitled “Consolidating gains and
accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in
developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2015
and beyond”.
In countries where malaria is endemic, there has
been a significant increase in efforts to prevent it and
adequately respond to it, which has led to a decline
in the number of malaria-caused deaths from 2000 to
2015 of approximately 47 per cent at the global level
and 54 per cent in the African region. Venezuela, aware
that preventive efforts must continue and that the gains
made to date must be consolidated, joined the consensus
on the adoption of the resolution.
However, we wish to make a statement on operative
paragraph 40, particularly concerning the reference
made to the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the
Accra Agenda for Action and the Busan Partnership
for Effective Development Cooperation. Venezuela
wishes to state here once again its position of principle
regarding the aforementioned documents and express
its disagreement with the fact that they were included
in the resolution.
These documents were adopted in forums external
to the United Nations system, with the goal of avoiding
the obligatory aspect with regard to the goals and
financing outlined in the area of cooperation. The
inclusion of and reference to these in the resolution
and in other documents adopted by the United Nations
represent an attempt to impose illegitimate agreements
that have not been agreed by consensus by the States
Members of the United Nations.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela therefore
dissociates itself from the references to the Paris

15-2775221/29

A/69/PV.103

Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda
for Action and the Busan Partnership for Effective
Development Cooperation in the resolution that we have
adopted today. We ask that this statement be included
in the record of the meeting.
Mr. Cadena (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
all aspire to see malaria eradicated throughout the
world. The Government of the Republic of Ecuador
therefore has designed and implemented policies and
programmes that have cut by more than 99 per cent the
number of cases of malaria among our people over the
past 10 years.
Having read the report prepared by the World
Health Organization on malaria in 2014, Ecuador
acknowledges the major progress achieved in reducing
the global mortality rate from malaria by 47 per cent
between 2000 and 2013. This contrasts with the deaths
of more than 584,000 people in 2013, 90 per cent of
them from the African continent, including 410,000
African boys and girls.
Ecuador joined the consensus on this resolution
in recognition the importance of control activities
and their positive impact on reducing mortality and
morbidity, particularly infant and maternal, in our
region and throughout the world; the need to fight
even more vigorously against malaria in countries
with a high incidence of the disease; and to recognize
how tenuous are the advances made in in combating
malaria, as they depend on appropriate and timely
investment and resources in order to sustainably carry
out programmes.
Ecuador, which is at present in the pre-elimination
stage, deems it vital to continue and make progress in
activities aimed at the control and eradication of the
disease. On average, over the past three years more than
84 per cent of funding for malaria-control programmes
was provided by the Government. We believe that
greater funding participation from other sources would
contribute to the sustainability of effective action to
eradicate malaria in our country.
However, Ecuador believes that it is appropriate
to express its view that the reference to the Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda
for Action and the Busan Partnership for Effective
Development Cooperation in paragraph 40 of the
resolution is inappropriate, as these are not documents
agreed within the framework of the United Nations,
unlike the reference to the Nairobi outcome document

22/29

11/09/2015

of the High-level United Nations Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation. Therefore Ecuador deems that the
reference to these three documents, agreed beyond
the fold of the United Nations, does not constitutes
consensus language, and we dissociate ourselves from
its inclusion in this paragraph.
Ecuador asks that this statement be included in full
in the record of this meeting.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I now invite the attention
of the General Assembly to draft resolution A/69/L.77,
entitled “Venue of annual sessions of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Development Programme/
United Nations Population Fund/United Nations Office
for Project Services”.
Members will recall that at its 75th plenary meeting,
on 19 December 2014, the General Assembly concluded
its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda 24. In order
for the Assembly to consider sub-item (a) of agenda
item 24, it will be necessary to reopen its consideration.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 24?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 24 (continued)
Operational activities for development
(a) Operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/69/L.77)
The President: Members will also recall that at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a) of
agenda item 24 to the Second Committee.

15-27752

11/09/2015

To enable the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the document, may I take it that the
Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (a) of agenda
item 24 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/69/L.77, entitled “Venue of annual
sessions of the Executive Board of the United Nations
Development Programme/United Nations Population
Fund/United Nations Office for Project Services”.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.77 on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): On behalf of the
members of the Group of 77 and China, I am honoured
to introduce the Group’s draft resolution, entitled
“Venue of annual sessions of the Executive Board of
the United Nations Development Programme/United
Nations Population Fund/United Nations Office for
Project Services” (A/69/L.77). The Group of 77 and
China would like to reiterate its long-standing position
that the Executive Board’s annual sessions should take
place only in New York, rather than alternating between
New York and Geneva, so as to broaden developing
countries’ participation in the decision-making process
of its deliberations. The Group has therefore prepared
a draft resolution aimed at resolving the issue, which is
currently under the General Assembly’s consideration.
The Group’s principled position on finally resolving
this matter is informed by the following considerations,
among others. The first is that holding Executive
Board sessions in New York will represent significant
cost savings for the core resources of the United
Nations Development Programme, which could then
be utilized for programming activities of the United
Nations development system. Secondly, it represents
the recognition that in the past, the participation of
developing countries in the Executive Board sessions
of the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations
Office for Project Services held in Geneva has been
lower than in New York, which supports the Group
of 77 and China’s argument for the holding of such
meetings at the latter venue, which is also that of the
Headquarters of the United Nations.

A/69/PV.103

We should therefore not lose this useful opportunity
to reach finality on a long-overdue issue. If we are
really serious about leaving no one behind, this is the
only possible route to take. It would not be prudent at
this stage to attempt to address the matter by coming
up with any stopgap measures. We therefore need a
positive decision by the General Assembly on this issue.
The Group would like to note with appreciation the
role of the Government of the Swiss Confederation in
facilitating the hosting of alternative annual sessions of
the Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population Fund
and the United Nations Office for Project Services at
the United Nations Office in Geneva. We believe we
will continue to count on Switzerland’s support in
development cooperation matters. That will be critical
as we move towards adoption of the 2030 agenda for
sustainable development and prepare for the upcoming
quadrennial comprehensive policy review negotiations.
Let us all strive for a strong and revitalized United
Nations development system. Taking a positive decision
on the draft resolution under consideration today will
be an important step in that regard.
The Group of 77 and China would like to bring
the Assembly up to date on the original draft text. The
updates and changes that have been made to it are the
result of extensive rounds of consultations with our
partners, and reflect our commitment to meeting on the
middle ground that we all strive for.
The eighth preambular paragraph should read,
“Recognizing that the participation of
developing countries in the sessions of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population Fund
and the United Nations Office for Project Services
held in Geneva has been less than those held in
New York”.
The ninth preambular paragraph should read,
“Noting the larger presence of missions from
developing countries in New York”.
The tenth preambular paragraph should read,
“Recognizing that the primary focus of the
United Nations development system continues to
be developing countries”.
The eleventh preambular paragraph should read,

15-2775223/29

A/69/PV.103

“Recognizing also the financial burden that
the current system of alternating Executive Board
sessions between New York and Geneva places on
both developing countries and the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Office for
Project Services”.
The twelfth preambular paragraph should read,
“Noting that holding Executive Board sessions
in New York would present significant cost
savings to the core resources of the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Office
for Project Services that could then by utilized
for programming activities of the United Nations
development system”.
The thirteenth preambular paragraph should read,
“Noting with appreciation the role of the
Government of the Swiss Confederation in
facilitating the hosting of alternative annual
sessions of the Executive Board of the United
Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Population Fund and the United Nations
Office for Project Services at the United Nations
Office in Geneva”.
Paragraph 1 should read,
“Decides that all annual sessions of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population
Fund and the United Nations Office for Project
Services will henceforth be held at United Nations
Headquarters in New York”.
And lastly, paragraph 2 should read,
“Encourages the Executive Board of the United
Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Population Fund and the United Nations
Office for Project Services to further discuss and
continue existing arrangements to facilitate the
participation of least-developed countries and
landlocked developing countries in the annual
sessions to be held in New York”.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/69/L.77, as orally revised. Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote
before the vote, I should like to remind delegations

24/29

11/09/2015

that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the member States of
the European Union in order to explain our position on
the draft resolution contained in document A/69/L.77,
entitled “Venue of annual sessions of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Development Programme/
United Nations Population Fund/United Nations Office
for Project Services”, as orally revised.
The European Union is fully committed to
making the United Nations system more effective
and acknowledges the importance of the issue under
discussion in the draft resolution. We realize that the
question of the venue for the annual sessions of the
Executive Board is part of a broader discussion that
is currently under way within the framework of the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review of the United
Nations system’s development activities for 2016.
The European Union would like to see this broader
discussion of governance issues approached in an
integrated rather than an isolated manner. We still do
not understand why a topic that is a part of the broader
context of governance has been removed from that
context at this stage.
The European Union also believes that the
Executive Board itself should have been the one
to take a decision on the issue, and we regret that it
was not in a position to do so. In our view, it is also
regrettable that the discussions on the draft resolution
began only a week before the closing of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly. At the last meeting
of the Joint Executive Board, a solution to the problem
under discussion was almost reached, but owing to time
constraints, a decision could not be taken. In order to
reach a consensus on today’s draft resolution, and in a
spirit of compromise, the European Union is ready to
take part in negotiations on the issue. We would have
preferred it, however, if the deliberations on the issue
had taken into consideration what was discussed by
the Executive Board in order to arrive at a temporary
solution to the question of the venue for its 2016 session.
We are sorry that that proved impossible.
For those reasons, the member States of the
European Union are not in a position to support this
draft resolution.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The
discussion on the venue of the annual sessions of the

15-27752

11/09/2015

Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme/United Nations Population Fund/United
Nations Office for Project Services alternating between
New York and Geneva is not new. In that regard, the
secretariat of the Executive Board prepared a note in
December 2014 on the advantages and disadvantages of
alternating between New York and Geneva. As reflected
in the Board’s note, a request for additional information
was made. The Executive Board was, however, not able
to provide the information that had been requested.
Nevertheless, during the annual session in June this
year, a decision was negotiated, and consensus was
almost reached, but in the end not achieved owing to
time constraints.
During those discussions Switzerland participated
in a constructive manner and demonstrated flexibility
in supporting the apparent consensus. That is also why,
in draft resolution A/69/L.77, which is before us today,
we have asked for the incorporation of amendments
based on that consensus, as proposed by the delegation
of the United States of America. I remind everyone
that this proposal for consensus would mean holding
the annual session of the Council in 2016 in New York
instead of Geneva, as an exception. We would then take
an informed decision with regard to alternation as part
of the broader discussions on governance that will take
place during the dialogue in the Economic and Social
Council on the longer-term positioning of the United
Nations development system.
We would like to make three important comments
on the process that has brought us here today.
First, we are in favour of respecting institutional
procedures. The General Assembly should examine
the question of alternating the venues on the basis of
a proposal drawn up by a decision of the Executive
Board of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS, and approved
by a resolution of the Economic and Social Council.
An approach to good governance implies that the
organizations concerned be consulted and be able to
provide their recommendations. In the current case,
neither the Executive Board nor the Economic and
Social Council have issued a decision on the matter.
Secondly, we believe that such a decision should
be based on substantive information. To that end,
we have asked for an analysis of the advantages and
disadvantages of alternating the venues, but the
information provided by the Secretariat remains clearly
insufficient for that purpose. In fact, the difference in

A/69/PV.103

cost between holding the meetings in New York and in
Geneva was not demonstrated.
Finally, we are convinced that the considerations
of governance should be dealt with jointly, and not in
isolation. The issue of alternation falls under governance
and the functioning of the Council. Several aspects
of governance will be discussed during the Council’s
dialogue on the longer-term positioning of the United
Nations development system. We think that it is simply
premature to take a decision at this stage, given that
many questions remain open, and that is particularly so
in the context of the future implementation of the new
sustainable development agenda from now until 2030.
On that basis, Switzerland will vote against the
draft resolution proposed by the Group of 77 and China.
We regret that the texts proposed based on the draft
consensus from June were not taken into account.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.77, entitled “Venue of annual
sessions of the Executive Board of the United Nations
Development Programme/United Nations Population
Fund/United Nations Office for Project Services”, as
orally revised.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar,
Malawi,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,

15-2775225/29

A/69/PV.103

Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Austria, Canada, France, Germany,
Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Switzerland, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Armenia, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine
Draft resolution A/69/L.77, as orally revised, was
adopted by 103 votes to 11, with 38 abstentions
(resolution 69/326).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to the speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): My
delegation deeply regrets that resolution 69/326 came
to a vote. It was not necessary. The United States of
America voted against the resolution for reasons of
principle, procedure and substance. Let me be very
clear, the United States has no objection whatsoever to
the legitimate concerns of our Group of 77 colleagues
about the costs of holding the Executive Board annual
session in Geneva every other year. In fact, we share
those concerns. We support moving the annual session
to New York in June 2016. And we support making that
change permanent in the context of the quadrennial
omprehensive policy feview. Let me repeat, we support
moving the annual session to New York in June 2016,
and we support making that change permanent in the
context of the review. But it needs to be done in a way

26/29

11/09/2015

that supports the United Nations system and the role
of its organs, its agencies, its executive boards and
its long-established procedures. It is therefore doubly
unfortunate that a reasonable compromise, which
was supported by many delegations and would have
achieved the desired outcome in a way that addressed
procedural concerns, was rejected.
My delegation firmly believes, and has consistently
stated, that the subject of the venue of the Executive
Board meetings, like other critical topics affecting
the United Nations development system, including its
functions, its funding practices, governance structures,
partnership approaches, organizational arrangements,
capacity and impact, should be debated and decided
permanently by Member States in the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review to take place in the fall of
2016. That way, all Member States will benefit from the
ongoing substantive discussions on those interrelated
issues in the dialogue of the Economic and Social
Council on the longer-term positioning of the United
Nations development system. And every country’s
concerns can be heard and addressed in a balanced and
strategic manner.
We are also concerned that resolution 69/326,
adopted today, makes no reference whatsoever to
the Executive Boards, or to the Economic and Social
Council for that matter, and that the General Assembly
did not wait to take the views of those bodies into
account prior to adopting the resolution adopted today,
thereby disregarding the oversight role of those two
critical bodies. We also note that the final paragraph of
the resolution appears to contradict the stated purpose
of the resolution, namely, to direct any cost savings from
travel to United Nations development programmes — a
goal that my cost-conscious delegation supports.
My delegation has engaged constructively on this
issue, both in the Executive Board and in deliberations
on the resolution. We have consistently worked to
identify a path towards consensus. In the light of the
significant consensus we all worked so long and hard to
reach in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which all of our leaders will endorse in just two weeks,
we deeply regret the failure to reach consensus on
this resolution. As we embark upon building a global
partnership for development — which by its nature
will require good faith, cooperation and win-win
outcomes — we can do better than this.

15-27752

11/09/2015

Mr. Henderson (Australia): Australia has some
sympathy with the issues raised in the substantive
proposals to reconsider the venue of the annual
sessions of the Executive Board of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP)/United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA)/United Nations Office
for Project Services (UNOPS). We believe that that
discussion should take into account the range of related
issues, and we are prepared to work with Member
States to address those issues through the appropriate
channels.
We are deeply concerned, however, that resolution
69/326 was not endorsed through the Executive Board
decision-making processes and was introduced in the
General Assembly without sufficient time to build
consensus. Australia greatly values the consensusbased decision-making that has been the long-standing
approach of the UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS Executive
Board. Presenting a resolution on Board matters
that does not enjoy consensus undermines the vital
governance roles played by the Executive Board and
sets a dangerous precedent for how we resolve important
decisions about the governance and operations of
UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS. We would not want to see
such an approach taken again.
Mr. Vestrheim (Norway): Like previous speakers,
we regret that there was no real willingness to reach
consensus in the matter before us. While we have
sympathy with the desire to reconsider the venue
of the annual sessions of the Executive Board, we
believe that the issue should have been considered as
part of the Economic and Social Council dialogues
and the upcoming auadrennial omprehensive policy
feview discussions. We also believe that resolution
69/326 procedurally undermines the authority of the
Executive Board, as it brings in issues for the General
Assembly’s consideration without previous decisions
by the Executive Board. That is all the more worrisome
inasmuch as the resolution has budgetary implications
that are of concern for the Organization.
We underline the importance of ensuring a wellfunctioning Executive Board in order to enable Member
States to trust the organizations with their contributions.
We equally emphasize the importance of respecting the
principle of consensus in the governance of the United
Nations funds and programmes, which are entirely
funded by voluntary contributions. We are all well aware
of the critical level of core funding — for example, to
the United Nations Development Programme. Only by

A/69/PV.103

aways seeking consensus will we be able to mobilize
the necessary funding.
Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, we have much
sympathy for the legitimate concerns raised by the
Group of 77 and China. However, Japan deeply regrets
that resolution 69/326 was put to a vote. We place great
importance on the effective functioning of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP)/United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)/United Nations
Office for Project Services (UNOPS) Executive Board.
We respect its established practices and its rules of
procedure. During the informal negotiations on the
venue of the annual sessions of the Executive Board
held at the previous annual session in June, Japan
served as the facilitator, with the hope of reaching
consensus among Member States. We came very close
to a consensus, but unfortunately, we did not come to
one by the end of the June session. It is our view that the
issue of the venue of the annual sessions should have
been discussed and decided by the Board itself. It is
also our view that the decision of the Board should have
been recommended to the General Assembly through
the Economic and Social Council. It is therefore
regrettable that such a non-consenusal resolution was
submitted at this session of the General Assembly in
spite of the efforts we had made to achieve consensus
at the previous Board session in June.
Additionally, as was explained by many other
delegations, the issue of the venue of the Executive
Board session should have been discussed in a holistic
manner, not in an isolated manner, in the context of the
governance of the United Nations development system.
We deeply regret that we were obliged to vote against
the resolution in order to express our disappointment
with the way it was pushed forward without adequately
listening to and accommodating other views and
opinions.
As the former facilitator in the Executive Board,
we feel that this issue could have been discussed in
other forums, such as the Economic and Social Council
dialogue on the longer-term positioning of the United
Nations development system. We also feel that we
would have been able to come up with other innovative
options.
Lastly, I would like to stress that the procedure
used in this vote is not helpful to confidence-building
among the Member States of the Executive Board of
the UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS, although we are

15-2775227/29

A/69/PV.103

committed to working with the Member States in
the coming Executive Board meetings of those three
organizations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I shall now give the floor to speakers who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Ms. Naeem (Maldives): The Maldives would like to
make a this general statement on behalf of the Alliance
of Small Island States following the adoption of
resolution 69/326, entitled “Venue of annual sessions of
the Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme/United Nations Population Fund/United
Nations Office for Project Services”.
As co-sponsors, we fully subscribe to the
resolution. Many of our members cannot afford to
maintain Permanent Missions in Geneva, and we are
therefore vastly underrepresented in all of the Geneva
processes. Holding all meetings in New York would
certainly enhance our access to, and participation in,
those meetings, which are of crucial importance to the
sustainable development of small island developing
countries. Given the existing practices and within
the relevant mandates of the Assembly, we urge that
our limitations also be fully taken into account in the
further consideration of existing arrangements, so
as to facilitate our participation in Executive Board
meetings, as outlined in paragraph 2 of the resolution
just adopted.
Mr. Gupta (India): We would like to begin by first
complimenting the facilitator of resolution 69/326,
the delegation of South Africa, for having so ably
spearheaded the process of consultations over the
past month since 21 July, when the draft resolution
was submitted. My delegation would like to take this
opportunity put in perspective the process, the history,
the facts and rationale of how the process evolved and
reached this stage.

11/09/2015

last year to the Executive Board of the United Nations
Development Programme to bring this matter to the
consideration of all Board members. However, no action
or response followed for nearly a year. Even at the June
Board meeting this year, when the matter was not
included in the agenda our delegation tried to engage
constructively so as to get a resolution of the matter.
However, middle ground could not be found owing to
issues based on differences in perspectives, which led
to the current situation. Since then, the Group of 77
and China, including my delegation, held at least four
rounds of informal consultations with our partners on
the subject, including yesterday, wherein every attempt
was made to incorporate the updates and suggestions so
as to further strengthen the resolution and take views
on board.
In terms of the concerns that have been raised,
which pertain, first, to this being a governance issue,
we have consistently said that the issue of holding
meetings in a particular place was decided through a
stand-alone General Assembly resolution in the first
place, and not through the relevant resolution of the
Advisory Committee of Permanent Representatives and
Other Representatives Designated by Members of the
Commission. Therefore, that mandate of the General
Assembly needs to be respected.
We have also said that we have already spent nearly
one and a half years on this subject, and therefore we
have allowed enough time to discuss all the pros and
cons of the subject meaningfully and to consider all
sides.
We also believed that this particular step would
be a meaningful step for the entire United Nations
development system in pursuit of cost savings and
would be extremely beneficial for developing countries,
as the savings could be used for programming activities
in developing countries.

It was last year at the June session in Geneva that
the issue was first raised by my delegation, as well as
by the Group of 77, that there has been inadequate
representation of developing countries when such
sessions were held in Geneva. As a matter of fact,
merely six countries from developing groups were able
to go from New York to attend those sessions.

Our delegation and the Group of 77 reached out and
held extensive consultations at all stages and tried to
reach middle ground on the resolution. We were hoping
for a consensus solution and made all possible efforts in
that regard. A result was reached today, and we hope that
it will help further to focus the activities of the United
Nations Development Programme in prioritizing its
programmes and projects towards developing countries
where the need is most felt.

Upon the conclusion of the sessions in Geneva, the
Group of 77 made a considered submission in July of

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on the list.

28/29

15-27752

11/09/2015

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 24 and of agenda item 24 as a whole?

A/69/PV.103

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

15-2775229/29
