S/2020/1195

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 December 2020
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and 2533 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the seventieth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018),
paragraph 8 of resolution 2504 (2020), and paragraph 3 of resolution 2533 (2020), in
the last of which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a report at
least every 60 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
regarding their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the months of October
and November 2020.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
The number of confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases continued to
rise sharply, amid continued reports of widespread shortages in personal protective
equipment. While testing capacity increased in some areas, overall testing capacity
remained inadequate, making the extent of the outbreak in the country difficult to
discern.
2.
The economic crisis continued to deepen humanitarian needs across the country,
with new surges in bread and fuel prices of particular concern. Subsidized bread and
fuel prices doubled over the reporting period and the price of a standard reference
food basket in October was higher than at any point since price monitoring by the
World Food Programme (WFP) began in the Syrian Arab Republic in 2013.

20-16348 (E)

151220

*2016348*

S/2020/1195

3.
The onset of winter weather brought rainfall and flooding that damaged
hundreds of tents in displacement sites in Idlib Governorate and western Aleppo
Governorate. As weather conditions deteriorate, concern is high for more than
2.2 million internally displaced persons across the country who lack adequate shelter,
as well as for other vulnerable communities, including those living in elevated areas,
and those who lack basics such as fuel for heating, blankets, warm clothes and shoes.
4.
In the north-west, the ceasefire in the Idlib de-escalation area largely continued
to hold, albeit with a gradual increase in the number of violations. Communities
continued to endure increasing hostilities, including air- and ground-based strikes, as
well as attacks using improvised explosive devices. Intensifying hostilities along the
lines of control in southern Idlib Governorate and western Aleppo Governorate
impacted the delivery of assistance, with aid distribution for 12,000 people in Idlib
and Ariha subdistricts delayed due to insecurity. At least three humanitarian workers
were killed and at least five were injured in the north-west.
5.
In the north-east, mutual cross-line attacks reportedly increased, notably along
the south-eastern contact lines of the Operation Peace Spring area. Multiple parties
continued to suffer attacks by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) cells, while
counter-ISIL operations continued.
6.
The south-west saw continued popular unrest and tensions. Violence remained
at an elevated level, including assassinations, attacks using improvised explosive
devices and small arms fire, in addition to kidnapping attempts and local clashes. A
large number of arrests of fighters reconciled from former armed opposit ion groups
were reported, as well as the releases of several detainees.
7.
In the western part of the country, wildfires in Ladhiqiyah, Tartus and Homs
Governorates in October affected an estimated 200,000 people and destroyed
thousands of hectares of agricultural lands.
8.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) verified 80 incidents, in which at least 73 civilians, including 15 children,
were killed, and at least 214 civilians, including 68 children, were injured as a result
of the conduct of hostilities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
9.
Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies continued throughout the
country. The humanitarian response continued to reach 7.4 million people every
month on average across the Syrian Arab Republic.

Humanitarian update
3.
Reported cases of COVID-19 in the Syrian Arab Republic more than quadrupled
over the reporting period, reaching almost 31,000 cases as at 30 November. Of these,
some 7,900 were reported by the Syrian Ministry of Health, some 16,000 were
reported in the north-west and some 7,000 were reported in the north-east. Testing
capacity increased in some areas, with 550 samples per day being tested by
laboratories in government areas, with the capacity to test 1,400 samples per day in
the north-west, and 400 per day in the north-east. Overall testing capacity nonetheless
remained inadequate, making the extent of the outbreak in the country difficult to
discern. However, it is likely that the actual number of cases far exceeds the official
figures. Increasing transmission rates continued to be reported among health-care
workers, amid continued reports of widespread shortages in personal protective
equipment.
4.
The economic crisis continued to deepen humanitarian needs across the country,
with new surges in bread and fuel prices of particular concern. The value of the Syrian

2/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

pound on the informal market declined steadily until late November, reaching over
LS 2,900 against the United States dollar in late November and closing at around
LS 2,600 at the end of the reporting period. The prices of many essential goods rose
more sharply than in previous months. The price of subsidized bread doubled from
September to October, while the weight per subsidized bundle was reduced by 15 per
cent. The market price of bread increased by 26 per cent over the same period. The
price of a standard reference food basket increased by 5 per cent from September to
October, reaching LS 88,138. This represents a year-on-year increase of 247 per cent,
and a higher level than at any point since price monitoring by WFP b egan in the Syrian
Arab Republic in 2013. Monitoring data for October indicated an increase in
inadequate food consumption, with 49 per cent of households reporting poor and
borderline food consumption.
5.
Rising fuel prices were of particular concern with the onset of winter weather.
The price of subsidized diesel fuel rose by 120 per cent during the reporting period.
Displaced families are particularly vulnerable to deteriorating weather conditions, as
are communities in elevated areas, such as in parts of Rif Dimashq. A third of the
6.7 million internally displaced people in the Syrian Arab Republic lack adequate
shelter. Geographically, poor shelter conditions are most prevalent in Idlib, Aleppo
and Rif Dimashq Governorates, in Raqqah city and generally in camps in the northeast and north-west. In November, rainfall and flooding damaged almost 400 tents in
10 displacement sites in Idlib Governorate and western Aleppo Governorate.
6.
In the north-west, the ceasefire in the Idlib de-escalation area largely continued
to hold, albeit with a gradual increase in the number of violations. Mutual artillery
shelling across contact lines took place on a nearly daily basis, while sporadic
airstrikes continued. Ground-based clashes remained local, limited and intermittent.
On 4 November, multiple incidents of airstrikes and shelling in different parts of Idlib
killed at least 7 civilians, including 4 children, and injured at least 14 civilians,
including 3 children, in a single day. Among those killed were t wo aid workers on
their way to a UNICEF-supported child-friendly space. Two schools were also
reportedly damaged as a result of shelling that day.
7.
Insecurity also continued in the Afrin and I‘zaz to Jarabulus areas. On 6 October,
a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in Bab city is reported to have killed at
least 18 civilians, including 5 children, and injured at least 62, including 11 children.
Among the injured were three non-governmental organization (NGO) staff working
in the local COVID-19 referral system. On 15 October, two Syrian aid workers and
their driver, travelling from a project site in Salqin city, were reported to have been
injured by shrapnel from a drone attack on another car travelling in the area. One of
the aid workers has since died of her injuries. On 24 November, separate bombings
in Bab and Afrin reportedly killed at least six civilians and injured more than 40.
8.
In northern Aleppo, shortages of potable and agricultural water supply
continued to be reported in Bab city and surrounding areas, affecting some 185,000
people. The channelling of electricity from Turkish electrical providers in late
November enabled an increase in water pumping from local wells; however, overall
supply remains vastly inadequate to meet demand in the area. Since water supply
through the Ayn al-Bayda pumping station ceased in February 2017, the population
has been reliant on alternative sources, which have been assessed as insufficient and
unsafe. Bab has been among the top four subdistricts reporti ng waterborne diseases
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2017. The United Nations
continued to advocate for a resumption of water supply from the Ayn al -Bayda
pumping station.
9.
In the western part of the country, wildfires in Ladhiqiyah, Tartus and Homs
Governorates in October affected an estimated 200,000 people by destroying or
20-16348

3/19

S/2020/1195

damaging homes and assets and agricultural lands, cutting power and water supply,
and by limiting access to services. An estimated 9,000 hectares of agricultural and
forested land were destroyed in the fires between 9 and 11 October. Across the
country, more than 35,000 hectares of agricultural land are estimated to have burned
in 2020, with a long-term impact on food production anticipated.
10. In the north-east, an increase in reports of mutual cross-line attacks was
recorded, notably along the south-eastern contact lines of the Operation Peace Spring
area between Tall Abyad and Ra’s al-Ayn. Multiple parties continued to suffer attacks
by ISIL cells, which resulted in dozens of casualties. In more than one instance, oil
truck convoys were taken away by ISIL and the drivers executed. Multiple parties
continued counter-ISIL operations.
11. Relocations of displaced persons to Tala’i‘ camp near Hasakah City continued.
As at 25 November, over 6,800 people had been relocated from schools used as
collective shelters in Hasakah Governorate to Tala’i‘ camp. Humanitarian
organizations continued to raise concerns regarding these relocations, including as to
their voluntary nature. Technical teams were provided access to Uluk water station,
and water supply continued without major interruption.
12. Over 100 schools in Hasakah that were closed by local authorities in A ugust
remained shuttered, even as other schools in the Governorate reopened, following a
six-month closure owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. The continued closures
impacted some 10,000 students. The United Nations continued to advocate the
restoration of students’ access to accredited education at schools of their choosing,
while supporting interim measures, including the provision of printed self -learning
materials and enabling attendance at schools in other areas. Country -wide, only 50
per cent of schools are functional, and 2.1 million children are out of school.
13. Some 63,800 people remained at Hawl camp, 94 per cent of whom are women
and children and 53 per cent of whom are children under the age of 12. Over 1,300
people departed Hawl camp in October and November, mostly to areas of origin
within the Syrian Arab Republic. Reports were received of some families not being
permitted to leave on account of missing identity documents. Security incidents
continued to be recorded, including search and arrest c ampaigns and threats against
humanitarian staff and outreach volunteers. Humanitarian organizations continued to
advocate with camp authorities for improved safety for residents and humanitarian
workers. Movement of residents from Hawl to Roj camp continued and humanitarian
organizations continued to raise concerns regarding the potential separation of
children from their parents during such movements. Hawl remained at risk of a wider
COVID-19 outbreak, with 13 cases confirmed among camp residents, includin g
3 fatalities. Sustainable solutions continued to be sought for those living in camp and
camp-like settings in the north-east.
14. The south-west saw continued popular unrest and tensions. Violence remained
at an elevated level, and included assassinations, attacks using improvised explosive
devices and small arms fire, in addition to kidnapping attempts and local clashes. A
large number of arrests of fighters reconciled from former armed opposition groups
were reported, as well as releases of several detainees.
15. The United Nations remained without access to the 12,000 people living at
Rukban. Alongside efforts to support voluntary departures, the United Nations
continued to advocate for immediate humanitarian assistance to reach those
remaining at the camp. A United Nations inter-agency assessment mission visited the
Wahah transit centre on 4 November as part of ongoing efforts to facilitate departures
for those wishing to leave Rukban.

4/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

Update on overall developments
16. The Special Envoy for Syria convened the fourth session of the Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned Constitutional Committee in Geneva on 30 November for one week.
He did so after facilitating agreement by the Co-Chairs nominated by the Syrian
Government and the opposition Syrian Negotiation Commission that the fourth and
fifth sessions would entail discussions on national foundations and principles and
constitutional principles, respectively. The Co-Chairs further agreed that the fifth
meeting would be convened in January 2021, COVID-19 precautions permitting.
17. During his visit to Damascus in late October, the Special Envoy had substantial
discussions on the upcoming Constitutional Committee sessions and ways to develop
a wider political process in accordance with Security Council resolut ion 2254 (2015).
In the lead-up to the fourth and fifth sessions, and in his capacity as facilitator of the
process, the Special Envoy conducted extensive consultations with international and
regional interlocutors, including in the lead-up to the sessions of the Constitutional
Committee to urge constructive international diplomacy with regard to the Syrian
Arab Republic. He also briefed members of the middle third component of the small
body of the Constitutional Committee and the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board.
Protection
18. Civilians across the Syrian Arab Republic continued to suffer the direct and
indirect consequences of armed conflict and violence. Civilians were killed and
injured as a result of shelling and intermittent airstrikes, fighting between and within
various armed groups, shootings, attacks carried out with various types of improvised
explosive devices, including vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices, and as a
result of explosive remnants of war, including unexploded ordnance. Some
improvised explosive device attacks were carried out inside residential areas and local
markets, appearing either to target civilians or to be heedless of their impact on
civilians.
19. OHCHR verified 80 incidents in which at least 73 civilians, including 6 women
and 15 children, were killed, and at least 214 civilians, including 19 women and 68
children, were injured as a result of the conduct of hostilities across the Syrian Arab
Republic, including shelling, airstrikes, improvised explosive devices and explosive
remnants of war, armed clashes and targeted killings at the hands of various parties
to the conflict or by unidentified perpetrators. The majority of civilian deaths (60 per
cent) were attributed to shelling and improvised explosive device attacks. In the light
of the patterns observed and the large number of incidents and civilians killed and
injured in markets and residential areas, it appears that parties to the conflict have
failed to respect the key principles under international humanitarian law of
distinguishing civilians from fighters and civilian objects from military objectives; of
refraining from indiscriminate attacks; of respecting proportionality in attack; and of
taking constant care to spare civilians and civilian objects in the conduct of military
operations.
20. Tens of thousands of civilians reportedly remain missing or arbitrarily detained,
with the vast majority held in government facilities. Both pro -government forces and
armed groups continued to arbitrarily detain individuals in areas under their eff ective
control. In the majority of cases documented by OHCHR, detainees were denied
information about the reasons for their detention and other due process rights, while
their families were denied information concerning their whereabouts or their fate,
raising concerns that, in some cases, such detentions may constitute enforced
disappearance. In areas under the control of the Government, OHCHR continued to
document cases of detainees dying while in custody, allegedly owing to natural
causes. In many such cases, individuals appear to have been subjected to enforced
20-16348

5/19

S/2020/1195

disappearance, and the fact that they were detained by the Government did not
become known until their deaths were acknowledged. The bodies of the deceased are
rarely returned to their families, who are also denied the opportunity to question the
official causes of death or to know the whereabouts of the bodies. OHCHR has also
documented cases of detainees and abductees dying while in the custody of non -State
armed groups, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham and the Syrian Democratic Forces.
21. In Dar‘a, OHCHR continued to document targeted killings of civilians and
reconciled former members of armed opposition groups. The majority of such attacks
have been carried out by unidentified perpetrators. Targeted kill ings have also been
carried out in areas in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, by unidentified perpetrators, except
for some claimed by ISIL.
22. Non-State armed groups in the north-western, northern and eastern parts of the
country continued to systematically target civilians, including those perceived as
being affiliated with opposing parties or alleged to be critical of those in control of
the territory, including through killings, the arbitrary deprivation of liberty, torture,
ill-treatment and kidnappings. Parties to the conflict continued to impose rules and
codes of conduct on civilians living in areas under their control that are fundamentally
contrary to human rights, including the rights to life, liberty and security of person,
to freedom of movement and to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
association.
23. Parties to the conflict continued to target some humanitarian and health -care
services and personnel in addition to media professionals, including through attacks
with improvised explosive devices and abductions. Some health-care facilities and
their personnel have been directly attacked. Under international humanitarian law,
parties to the conflict must protect civilians and civilian objects, including
humanitarian relief personnel and objects used for humanitarian relief operations.
Medical personnel, units and transports exclusively assigned to medical duties must
be respected and protected under international humanitarian law.
24. UNICEF recorded two incidents of hostilities causing damage to educational
facilities during the reporting period:
(a) On 4 November, Zakariya Saadu school was impacted by ground-based
shelling on Ariha city centre, Idlib Governorate, causing damage to walls and
classroom furniture, as well as to the playground and fence of the school;
(b) On 4 November, Al Hikmah school in Al Hikmah Education complex,
Kafraya, Ma‘arratmisrin, Idlib Governorate, was hit by ground -based shelling,
resulting in damage to walls and furniture of the school.
25. The Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care of the World Health
Organization (WHO) reported one incident affecting health care. Additional incidents
are yet to be verified as part of the WHO surveillance system. A total of 25 attacks
affecting health care were recorded since the beginning of the year, resulting in at
least 13 deaths and 41 injuries to health-care workers and patients. Such incidents
continue to strain an already weakened health system, the vulnerabilities of which
have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
26. Although the scale and scope of explosive contamination across the Syrian Arab
Republic has yet to be fully determined, approximately one explosive incident every
10 minutes was recorded between January 2019 and March 2020.

6/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

Humanitarian response
27. Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic. The humanitarian operation of the United Nations and its
partners reached 7.4 million people on average per month. Assistance included WFP
food assistance for 4.5 million people in October and 4.3 million people in November,
in all 14 Governorates. UNHCR continued its support to 128 community and satellite
centres, as well as 120 mobile units, with 2,714 community outreach volunteers
providing a range of protection, livelihood support services and other services.
28. The United Nations continued to support the COVID-19 response across the
country, prioritizing containment of the virus by: enhancing surveillance and
diagnostics capacity and procuring vital medical supplies and equipment; supporting
clinical readiness; and protecting the delivery of essential health -care services.
Testing capacity was increased in the north-west, with two new laboratories set up in
Jarabulus and Afrin, in addition to the existing laboratory in Idlib city. Staff training
and procurement of additional testing kits is ongoing. As a result of these efforts,
daily testing capacity increased from 200 to 1,400 tests per day.
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
October and November 2020

Organization

Average number
of people
reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

33 200

International Organization for Migration

70 800

Mine Action Service

10 700

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund

363 600
1 582 200

United Nations Development Programme

389 900

United Nations Population Fund

451 800

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

142 500

World Food Programme

4 455 000

29. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian operations reached at least
4 million people on average per month. Assistance provided by United Nations
agencies included WFP delivery of food assistance for 3.2 million people in October
and 3 million people in November. It also included cash distributions to 285,000
Palestinian refugees through United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in November. In eastern and western Ghutah, a
Mine Action Service explosive ordnance assessment, under way since August,
surveyed 68 hectares of land, 63 per cent of which was identified as contaminated,
with 272 items of explosive ordnance located and marked. Risk education teams
trained by the Mine Action Service delivered awareness sessions to more than 10,000
civilians, promoting safe behaviours in communities most affected by explosive
ordnance contamination. In Hawl camp, UNICEF resumed educational activities in
phases 4 and 5 of the camp and commenced rehabilitation of its centre in phase 3.
Rehabilitation of the camp reception area by UNHCR was nearing completion.
Winterization distributions were completed in all formal camps apart from the
“Annex” section of Hawl camp, where distributions will be completed by
mid-December.
20-16348

7/19

S/2020/1195

30. In the north-west, humanitarian assistance delivered cross-border through the
Bab al-Hawa crossing included WFP delivery of food assistance for 1.4 million
people in October and 1.4 million people in November. It also included UNFPA health
assistance to over 34,000 people and IOM shelter and non-food item assistance to
almost 20,000 people. In Aleppo and Idlib Governorates, FAO supported over 7,000
small-scale dairy farmer households through a Lumpy Skin Disease vaccination
campaign and 3,000 small-scale livestock keepers with an enterotoxaemia
vaccination campaign.
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: October and
November 2020 (monthly average)
(Thousands)

1,147

101
Nutrition

283
68

6

Non-food Education
items/shelter

25
Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Food

Health

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district: October and November 2020 (monthly average)

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Governorate

District

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/shelter

Aleppo

Afrin

–

36 250

–

–

–

–

Aleppo

Bab

–

–

–

5 000

–

5 000

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

113 365

–

5 000

–

5 000

Aleppo

Jarabulus

–

–

–

1 200

–

–

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

–

42 250

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Harim

–

882 000

276 153

15 238

–

–

Idlib

Idlib

5 700

73 500

7 000

41 200

10 500

15 000

31. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and Refugee Migration Monitoring,
which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access
32. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Principled humanitarian action depends
8/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

on the ability to independently assess needs and deliver assistance, and to monitor
and evaluate impact independently, including by engaging regularly and directly with
affected people. The access landscape in the country is complex, with different
geographical areas and different types of services requiring different operating
modalities. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are in -country, with more
than 600 deployed in humanitarian hubs outside Damascus, in Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr,
Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus. A further 3,860 UNRWA
staff are deployed across the country. Decentralized presence contributes to greater
access and proximity to affected populations. Throughout the Syrian Arab Republic,
aid is distributed and implemented primarily by national actors, including NGOs and
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
Access limitations related to the pandemic
33. Border crossings remained impacted as the Syrian Arab Republic and
neighbouring countries continued implementation of COVID -19-related
precautionary measures. Most land borders into the Syrian Arab Republic remained
closed, with some limited exemptions from Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, including
commercial and relief shipments and the movement of humanitarian and international
organization personnel. International commercial passenger flights resumed at
Damascus International Airport as of 1 October. Access through crossing points inside
the Syrian Arab Republic also remained restricted, with exceptions for humanitarian
and commercial cargo, humanitarian personnel, students and medical cases. Domestic
cargo and passenger flights continued to operate, includin g the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service.
Access in government-controlled areas
34. In government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to access, owing to administrative and security approvals, included
Shaffuniyah, Mayda‘a and Kafr Batna in Eastern Ghutah, and Bayt Jinn and Mazra‘at
Bayt Jinn in western Rif Dimashq. In the southern part of the country, insecurity and
administrative restrictions continued to prevent sustained access to areas formerly
controlled by non-State armed groups, particularly in Dar‘a al-Balad neighbourhood
in Dar‘a city, in Karak al-Sharqi in Dar‘a Governorate and in parts of western Dar‘a
and Qunaytirah.
35. United Nations personnel and third-party contractors continued to mobilize to
field locations alongside national NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to conduct
assessment and monitoring, as well as logistics and administrative support missions.
In October and November, 1,940 regular programmatic movements took place with
programme or blanket approvals, a 7 per cent decrease on the August to September
reporting period, when 2,092 such movements took place (see table 3). 1 Monitoring
missions, mostly conducted by third-party monitors, constituted the bulk of all
conducted missions, at approximately 60 per cent of the total. Of these regular
programme movements, 32 per cent were conducted in the north-eastern governorates
of Hasakah, Raqqah, and Dayr al-Zawr. Another 13 per cent were conducted in the
southern governorates of Suwayda’, Dar‘a and Qunaytirah (see figure II).

__________________
1

20-16348

United Nations staff and third-party contractors operating at humanitarian hubs outside of
Damascus obtain “blanket approvals” to carry out movements as part of their regular
programming. These enable regular access and reduce bureaucratic requirements.
9/19

S/2020/1195

Table 3
Total number of missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals*
from within the Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third
parties/facilitators, by type: October and November 2020
Blanket
approval

Programme
approval

Total
number

Assessment missions

12

4

16

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

686

–

686

1 163

–

1 163

75

–

75

1 936

4

1 940

Type of mission

Monitoring missions
Security, logistics and administrative support missions
Total

* Missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals do not require specific approval
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Figure II
Total number of missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals
from within the Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third
parties/facilitators, by governorate: October and November 2020
400
350
300
250
200
352
150
100
50
0

304
217

189

177

173

144

105

96

63

53

36

18

13

36. For missions requiring specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
United Nations submitted 387 new requests, of which 66 per cent were approved. This
represents an improvement of two percentage points on the previous reporting period,
when 64 per cent of 278 requested missions were approved, and is 11 percentage
points higher than the average approval rate since December 2019 (53 per cent
average approval rate).
37. Humanitarian access continued to gradually improve to areas that came under
government control in 2019 and 2020, with a decentralized approval process requiring
only Governors’ approvals, as opposed to approval from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. For instance, in November, United Nations agencies and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent carried out two multisectoral needs assessments in areas which changed
control in south and western rural Aleppo (Zarbah, Khan Tuman, Is, Tall Hadiyah,
10/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

Kafr Da‘il, Mansurah and Shantarah). Both assessments found considerable levels of
damage and destruction to civilian infrastructure, including water systems, homes and
health facilities. Development of response plans commenced to meet these needs.
38. On 13 October, WFP conducted a mission to the town of Darayya in Rif
Dimashq Governorate. This was the first United Nations mission to this area in 2020.
Despite the reconciliation agreement that was signed in Rif Dimashq in 2016, access
to Darayya remained heavily restricted. As access to the town improved, the number
of resident families increased, with most requiring multisectoral humanitarian
assistance owing to a lack of basic services, dire living conditions and few livelihood
opportunities. WFP, through a partner organization, commenced general food
assistance in Darayya in January and currently supports some 12,500 people in the
town each month.
39. On 4 November, an inter-agency mission to Wahah transit centre and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent health centre in Dumayr in Rif Dimashq was conducted to identify
key elements to be addressed for Wahah to function as a temporary quarantine centre
for civilians voluntarily departing Rukban.
Table 4
Missions from within the Syrian Arab Republic requiring specific approval by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs: October and November 2020
Number
requested

Number
approved

Percentage
approved

Assessment missions

97

46

47

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

96

81

84

Monitoring missions

121

69

57

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

42

27

64

Explosive ordnance assessment missions

31

31

100

387

254

66

Type of request

Total

Note: Missions by United Nations personnel departing from Damascus or travelling cross -line
generally require specific approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Access in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
40. In the north-east, the United Nations maintained regular and sustained
humanitarian access in most parts of Hasakah Governorate and some parts of Raqqah
Governorate, while other areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab, remained difficult
to access from Damascus, owing to the lack of agreement between parties in control
and to insecurity. In early October, a WFP partner received instructions from
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic authorities to stop their distributions of WFP
general food assistance to some 220,000 people in non-government controlled areas
of Raqqah Governorate, while they were permitted to continue operating in
government-controlled areas. Following high-level engagement, WFP on 2 December
received confirmation from the Government that it would be able to restart
distributions in Raqqah.
41. Efforts continued to bridge gaps in the delivery of medical assistance to areas
outside of government control. As at the end of the reporting period, all 17 hospitals
and 106 primary health-care facilities in the north-east had been reached with medical
supplies on at least one occasion, through one or more delivery modalities, including
the hospitals and primary health-care centres that previously depended on United
Nations-supported cross-border operations. Access was inconsistent however, and

20-16348

11/19

S/2020/1195

gaps in medical assistance continued to be reported. The most recent cross -line
shipment of medical supplies, as at the end of the reporting period, was in July 2020.
42. The United Nations continued to advocate for regular and sustained access to
the “Annex” section of Hawl camp and the extension in Roj camp. Services in the
Annex section of Hawl remained limited almost five months on from t he
establishment of the service centre in the Annex, owing to lack of agreement with
camp administration on security procedures. A lack of permits to operate in the Annex
prevented humanitarian partners from delivering at scale.
Access in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
43. Intensifying hostilities along the lines of control in southern Idlib Governorate
and western Aleppo Governorate led to temporary disruptions to humanitarian
assistance. Distributions of WFP assistance to 12,000 people in Idlib and Ariha
subdistricts were delayed owing to insecurity.
44. United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to address the
logistical and operational challenges resulting from the reduction to one authorized
border crossing following the adoption of Security Council reso lution 2533 (2020).
Following the expansion of the transhipment hub at Bab al-Hawa, roadworks
continued on the main route connecting Bab al-Hawa to northern Aleppo, funded
through the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund, with the aim of completing the
most urgent repairs before winter weather makes such work impossible. All United
Nations humanitarian assistance into the north-west is being routed through the Bab
al-Hawa crossing, with over 2,400 trucks of humanitarian aid sent in via this crossing
point since Council resolution 2533 (2020) came into effect. On 27 October, a United
Nations inter-agency mission crossed into Idlib Governorate from Turkey and
gathered first-hand information about the humanitarian situation in the area. The
mission visited a new displacement camp being constructed in central Idlib, supported
through funding from the Central Emergency Response Fund. It saw the extremely
difficult conditions in which displaced people are living, with many still living in
tents on the sides of roads. The mission also met with humanitarian personnel and
visited warehouses storing supplies for winterization and COVID -19 response.
45. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and
2533 (2020). The Monitoring Mechanism monitored and confirmed the humanitarian
nature of 21 consignments consisting of 1,363 trucks that crossed into the Syrian Arab
Republic from Turkey, all through the Bab al-Hawa crossing. This brings the total
number of trucks monitored since the beginning of operations to 42,418 (32,446
through Bab al-Hawa, 5,268 through Bab al-Salam, 4,595 through Ramtha and 109
through Ya‘rubiyah). There were no concerns or questions regarding the humanitarian
nature of these consignments. For every shipment that crossed the border, the United
Nations provided 48-hour advance notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, including information on the humanitarian goods to be delivered, the
number of trucks, the United Nations owner and the destination (district). The
Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Government of
Turkey.
46. Humanitarian workers continued to actively pursue an all-modalities approach
to respond to the humanitarian needs of the affected population, including continued
efforts to complement cross-border operations with cross-line assistance. Dialogue
continued with all the concerned parties regarding the operational modalities for a
first such cross-line mission into the north-west.

12/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

Access in the south-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
47. The most recent United Nations humanitarian convoy to reach Rukban from
within the Syrian Arab Republic was undertaken in September 2019. Since then, only
a handful of commercial trucks have reached Rukban through informal routes. The
United Nations continued to advocate for immediate humanitarian access to civilians
remaining at Rukban. Since the decision by the Government of Jordan in March to
close the border as a COVID-19 preventive measure, medical cases from Rukban have
been unable to access the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of the border.
There have been 63 medical evacuations from Rukban to facilities in the Syrian Arab
Republic since the closure of the clinic. Engagement continued with relevant parties
to facilitate delivery of and access to humanitarian assistance for the remaining
Rukban population.
Visas and registrations
48. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: October and November 2020
Number
requested

Number
approved

Number
rejected

Number
pending a

Visas requested during reporting period

47

20

–

27

Renewals requested during reporting period

139

81

–

58

Visas pending from before reporting period

51

14

1

36

Renewals pending from before reporting period

30

24

–

4

Type of request

Note: The United Nations withdrew two visa requests pending from before the reporting period.
The number of pending visa requests and visa renewal requests shown in rows 3 and 4 covers
the period from February to September 2020.
a
The number of pending visa requests and visa renewal requests covers the period from
February to July 2020.

49. A total of 41 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
50. The United Nations and non-governmental organizations continued to
implement programmes in areas affected by frequent clashes among parties to the
conflict, by air strikes and by the regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and other
attacks. Humanitarian relief personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with
unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war and landmines.
51. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including: 24 staff members of the United Nations and of the
entities of the United Nations system, 19 of whom were staff members of UNRWA;
66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff
members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members
of international and national NGOs have also been killed.
52. A total of 20 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (all from UNRWA) were detained or missing at the end of the reporting period.

20-16348

13/19

S/2020/1195

III. Observations
53. I remain gravely concerned by the complete absence of respite for civilians in
the country in what has now been almost a decade of war, displacement,
impoverishment and loss. None of the metrics point to improvement; on the contrary,
humanitarian needs are deepening, now driven increasingly by economic decay and
the compounding impact of COVID-19. Food prices are higher than at any point in
the conflict. Wasting among children is expected to increase significantly in 2021, as
is the overall number of people in need of aid. According to latest assessments, the
number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic is
expected to rise by 1.9 million, reaching a staggering 13 million people in 2021. Even
as hostilities have decreased in some areas, civilians continue to suffer the devastating
consequences of years of explosive weapons use. I am particularly worried about the
millions of civilians who lack proper shelter, heating fuel or simply warm clothes and
shoes, as we enter this winter season. The United Nations and our humanitarian
partners are racing to get the necessary assistance to those who need it most. They
require urgent support.
54. Humanitarian assistance and unimpeded humanitarian access remain crucial. I
remind all parties to the conflict of their obligation under international humanitarian
law to allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for
civilians in need that is impartial in character and conducted without any adverse
distinction. United Nations agencies continue to work with their humanitarian
partners to overcome the operational challenges that derive from the reduction to one
border crossing to access the north-west. Efforts continue to establish cross-line
access into the north-west. The responsibility for these cross-line missions to proceed
is a collective one, and I call upon the parties to continue their engagement with the
United Nations to reach agreement on the operational modalities.
55. I remain alarmed by the fact that civilians continue to bear the brunt of
hostilities, including as a result of indiscriminate attacks in populated areas. Attacks
that are directed against civilians or that are indiscriminate, including improvised
explosive device attacks in populated areas and markets, must cease immediately. I
am deeply concerned at the recent rise in violent incidents impacting humanitarian
workers, most of whom are Syrians, themselves affected by the crisis and delivering
aid under immensely difficult circumstances. Such violence is unacceptable, and I
call upon all parties to meet their obligations to protect humanitarian workers.
56. I further remind the parties of their obligation under international humanitarian
law not to attack, destroy, remove or render useless objects that are indispensable to
the survival of the civilian population, which include drinking -water installations and
supplies. The COVID-19 pandemic adds to the urgency of protecting access to water
and sanitation. I also call upon all parties to remove practical obstacles to education
in territories under their control, in line with the human right to education.
57. I reiterate my appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and fully support the
appeal of my Special Envoy for a complete nationwide ceasefire throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic, as called for in Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
58. My Special Envoy continues efforts for the unilateral release of persons
arbitrarily deprived of their liberty, the majority of whom remain detained by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. I call upon the Government and all other
parties to account for their fate and whereabouts, and to allow humanitarian and
human rights agencies access to all places of detention. All persons in detention
should be promptly informed of any charges against them. Persons facing prosecution
should be afforded all minimum fair trial guarantees. They should be brought
promptly before a judge and immediately released if their deprivation of liberty is
14/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

arbitrary. Detaining authorities should carry out prompt, effective, thorough and
transparent investigations of deaths in custody and, if it is found that such deaths
resulted from criminal acts, the perpetrators should be brought to justice. Families of
persons who have died in custody should be informed and receive full and adequate
reparations within a reasonable period in the case of wrongful death. Respect for these
principles would also build confidence, both within society and between the parties
and international stakeholders. A failure to address arbitrary deprivation of liberty
would leave credible justice, true reconciliation and sustainable peace elusive.
59. Continued impunity for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law remains of grave concern. Perpetrators of serious
violations and abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law must be
held accountable. I remind all States, in particular those with direct influence over
parties to the conflict, that they are bound to take proactive steps to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law, including as it relates to the protection of civilians. I
call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as all States, civil society and the United Nations system, to
cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Respons ible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011, in particular by providing relevant information and documentation.
Accountability for serious violations and abuses of human rights and interna tional
humanitarian law is both a legal requirement and central to achieving sustainable
peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in the country
to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
60. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the Syrian Arab Republic,
I continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with
Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council and with OHCHR, including through the
establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human
rights.
61. I continue to offer my full support to my Special Envoy and the parties
represented in the Constitutional Committee as they seek the emergence of
commonalities. While it is my belief that the constitutional process is an important
aspect of the larger political process, and could help unlock the other elements
contained in Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), substantive progress toward a
broad political solution to the Syrian conflict remains elusive. I reaffirm that any
sustainable peace arrangement depends on including women at the negotiating table
as full partners. I continue to call upon Syrian parties, and their internation al and
regional supporters, to demonstrate a renewed sense of urgency in finding a United
Nations-facilitated political solution as set out in resolution 2254 (2015), the only
framework that enjoys legitimacy and the support of the entire international
community, with a view to ensuring that the interests of Syrians, ending their
suffering and ensuring that sustainable peace remain the overriding priority.

20-16348

15/19

S/2020/1195

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: October
and November 2020*
Idlib Governorate
• On 9 October, a girl was killed by a reported ground-based strike in Shinan
village in southern rural Idlib.
• On 10 October, a woman was killed by a reported ground-based strike near her
home in Barah town in southern rural Idlib.
• On 14 October, a civilian was reportedly shot and killed by members of Hay’at
Tahrir al-Sham near Balmis village in western rural Idlib, allegedly for refusing
to stop at a checkpoint.
• On 21 October, a woman, a boy and a girl were injured by reported airstrikes in
a residential area of Rami in southern rural Idlib. On the same day, two other
civilians, including a woman, were injured after reported ground -based strikes
in Barah town.
• On 28 October, four civilians, including a boy, were killed and eight civilians,
including a woman and two boys, were injured by a reported ground -based strike
in the city of Ariha in southern rural Idlib. On the same day, four civilians were
killed and three others injured when a reported landmine detonated on
agricultural land near the city of Khan Shaykhun in southern rural Idlib.
• On 31 October, three civilians, including a woman, were injured by a reported
drone strike on agricultural land in Nahlah village in southern rural Idlib. On
the same day, a civilian was killed and five other civilians, including a boy, were
injured by a reported drone strike on agricultural land near Ma‘arratmisrin town
in northern rural Idlib.
• On 1 November, a woman civilian was injured in a reported ground-based strike
in Kafraya town in northern rural Idlib.
• On 4 November, four civilians, including two aid workers and a girl, were killed,
and five civilians, including four women, were injured by reported airstrikes in
the city of Ariha in southern rural Idlib. On the same day, a civilian in the city
was injured by reported shelling, which also damaged two schools. Also on the
same day, two boys were killed by a reported ground-based strike in Kafraya
town in northern rural Idlib. Also on 4 November, a boy was killed and eight
other civilians, including a woman, two boys and a girl, were injured in reported
ground-based strikes in Sina’a neighbourhood in the city of Idlib.
• On 6 November, a girl was killed by reported ground-based strikes in the city
of Ariha in southern rural Idlib.
• On 9 November, a civilian was injured after a reported ground -based strike on
Ibdita village near Jabal al-Zawiyah in southern rural Idlib.

* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
16/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

Aleppo Governorate
• On 1 October, two civilians were injured when a reported vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device detonated in the city of Afrin in north-western rural
Aleppo.
• On 3 October, a woman was injured when a reported landmine detonated on
agricultural land near the city of Tall Rif‘atin in northern rural Aleppo.
• On 6 October, 18 civilians, including 1 woman, 3 boys and 2 girls, were killed
and at least 62 civilians, including 5 women, 9 boys and 2 girls, were injured
when a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated in the city
of Bab. Three humanitarian workers were injured in the blast, and an NGO
ambulance was damaged.
• On 10 October, a boy was killed and a woman and a boy were injured in a
reported indiscriminate exchange of small arms fire between riv al armed groups
in Tel’ Ada town in western rural Aleppo.
• On 26 October, a civilian and his two children were injured when a reported
magnetic improvised explosive device attached to their car detonated in the city
of Bab. On the same day, two male civilians were killed and eight civilians,
including five children, were injured when a reported improvised explosive
device attached to a motorcycle detonated in the city of Afrin in north -western
rural Aleppo.
• On 27 October, two civilians, one of whom was a woman, were killed and a
woman was injured when a reported ground-based strike hit their home in Tadil
village in western rural Aleppo.
• On 29 October, 11 civilians, including a woman, eight boys and a girl, were
injured after reported ground-based strikes in Isca village in Afrin district in
north-western rural Aleppo. A nearby school was also reported to have sustained
damage.
• On 3 November, a boy was killed when a reported landmine detonated on
agricultural land near the town of Dayr Hafir in eastern rural Aleppo.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 2 November, four civilians, including a boy, were injured when a reported
improvised explosive device detonated in the city of Ra’s al-Ayn in western rural
Hasakah.
• On 11 November, the body of a civilian was reportedly found by his family in
the village of Daman in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) later claimed responsibility for his murder.
• On 14 November, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the
city of Shahil city in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 15 November, a boy was injured when a reported landmine detonated near
him in Rumaylan Basha village in north-east rural Hasakah.
Hama Governorate
• On 5 October, five civilians, including a woman, were injured by a reported
ground-based strike near their car on the road between Qarqur and Shaykh
Sindiyan villages in western rural Hama.

20-16348

17/19

S/2020/1195

• On 10 October, five civilians, including two boys, were injured when a reported
landmine detonated on agricultural land near Safsafah village in nort h-western
rural Hama.
• On 21 October, a woman was injured after a reported ground -based strike hit
Qarqur village in western rural Hama.
• On 2 November, two boys were injured when a reported landmine detonated on
agricultural land near the town of Harbinafsih in southern rural Hama.
• On 8 November, three civilians, two of whom were women, were killed when
reported unexploded ordnance detonated on agricultural land in Qasr al Mukharram village in eastern rural Hama.
Homs Governorate
• On 2 October, four boys were injured when reported unexploded ordnance
detonated in Baba Amru neighbourhood in the city of Homs.
• On 3 October, two boys were injured when reported unexploded ordnance
detonated in Wadi al-Dhahab neighbourhood in the city of Homs.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 17 October, two boys were killed and three other boys were injured when
reported unexploded ordnance detonated in Baghuz town in eastern rural Dayr
al-Zawr.
• On 20 October, a tribal leader in northern rural Dayr al-Zawr was killed in a
reported drive-by shooting in Sabhah town in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 13 October, a civilian was killed near his tent during reported indiscriminate
exchange of small arms fire outside Hushariyah village in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 16 October, a boy was killed and eight civilians were injured when reported
ground-based strikes hit Ayn Isa town in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 18 October, a civilian was killed by reported sniper fire in the outskirts of
Tirwaziyah village in Ayn Isa area in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 3 November, two civilians, one of whom was a boy, were injured after a
reported improvised explosive device attached to a motorcycle detonated in Ali
Bajliyah village in rural Tall Abyad area in northern rural Raqqah.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 5 October, two civilians were killed by a reported roadside improvised
explosive device that detonated in the city of Inkhil in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 11 October, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in Da‘il
town in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 15 October, a civilian was killed when a reported landmine detonated on
agricultural land near Dayr al-Adas village in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 27 October, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting by
unidentified perpetrators in the Tafas town in western rural Dar‘a.

18/19

20-16348

S/2020/1195

Rif Dimashq Governorate
• On 1 October, six boys and three girls were injured in a reported explosion on
the road between Bayt Jinn town and Mazra‘at Bayt Jinn village in the area of
Qatana in Rif Dimashq Governorate.
• On 22 October, the Mufti of Damascus and Rif Dimashq Governorates,
Mohammad Adnan al-Afyouni, was killed by a reported improvised explosive
device planted inside his car and detonated as he was leaving the mosque in the
city of Qadsayya in Rif Dimashq Governorate. No group claimed responsibility.

20-16348

19/19
