OFFICIAL
TWENTY-

RECORDS
FIFTH

YEAR

th

1539

MEETING:

NEW

13 MAY 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l539)

. . . , . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . .. . I

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . ) . , , . . . , . . . , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794) , . , , . . , . . . . , * , , , . . . , . , , . . , , . , . , , . * . . I I . 1. . . , , * . . . . . * . . . 1. . 1
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795) . . , . , , , . . . . . , , . * . . * * . , , I . * . * . . . * . . . . * * . . . * * . . . . * . . * I . * . * - . 1

S/PV. 1539

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-NINTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 13 May 1970, at 10.30 a.m.
Presiderzt:

Mr. Jacques KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France).

the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber on the understanding that they will be invited
to sit at the table when it is their turn to address the
Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon) a& Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at
the Security Council table, rind Mr. A. T. Benhima
(Morocco) and Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took
the places reserved for them.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l539)
1. Adoption
2.

3.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.

of the agenda.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794).

3. The Secretary-General has sent word to me that
he has had unexpectedly to undergo medical treatment
this morning and will therefore be delayed in arriving
at the Council’s meeting. In view of the assurance he
gave to the Council toward the close of yesterday afternoon’s meeting he has given me the following message
to transmit to the Council at the beginning of this
meeting:

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795).

“Because of the lack of adequate means of observation on both sides in the Israel-Lebanese sector,
as mentioned in my statement to the Council at its
meeting yesterday morning, it has been possible for
the Acting Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO) to provide only
limited information about military activities in the
Israel-Lebanese
sector. With specific reference to
the implementation
of the resolution adopted by the
Council at its meeting yesterday morning fi*esofution
279 (1970)], I regret to say that 1 have as yet received
no information from the Acting Chief of Staff, This,
I realize, is due to the fact that he has had no verified
information because of the absence of direct means
of observation. I will, of course, convey to the Council immediately
any information on the situation I
may receive from the Acting Chief of Staff of
UNTSO in the course of the day.”

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795)

4, I have just received from the Secretary-General
a message which, through Mr. Tekoah, he has received
from Mrs. Golda Meir. The document will be distributed,l but I think it would be informative for the
Council if we had an immediate reading of it, and I
would ask the Secretary of the Council to read it out.

I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with decisions taken previously by the
Council [15.37th meeting], I intend to invite the representatives of Lebanon, Israel, Morocco and Saudi
Arabia to participate in the debate without the right
to vote. In accordance with the practice followed in
the past, I propose to invite the representatives of the
parties directly concerned, that is, the representatives
Of Lebanon and Israel, to take seats at the Council
table. The other representatives will be invited to take

5.

I call on the Secretary of the Council.
1 Subsequently circulated as document S/9801.

1

6. Mr.
CHACKO
(Deputy
to
the
UnderSecretary-General
for Political and Security Council
Affairs): The communication,
dated 13 May 1970, from
the Permanent Representative
of Israel, transmitting
a message from Prime Minister Mrs. Golda Meir , reads
as follows:

7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Fre&Z?’
The first speaker on my list is the representative of
the United Kingdom, on whom I now call.
8. Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom): I have f1°
intention of going over what we did yesterday, I tias
surprised that the Council was not prepared to calI
for a cessation of all military activity in the area- I
can still see no justification for that failure. But I did
not hesitate to agree with the demand for.withdra&@l
of Israeli troops from an action which we could not
possibly condone. Today we welcome the report which
has just been read to us, and we look forward to the
confirmation
which we may expect to receive from
the Secretary-General in due course.

“I have the honour to transmit to you the following
message from the Prime Minister and Acting Foreign
Minister Mrs. Golda Meir:
“ ‘Excellency,
“ ‘I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your
cable of 12 May, addressed to Foreign Minister
Eban and transmitting
the text of the resolution
adopted by the Security Council on the same day.

*‘ ‘The army spokesman added yesterday that the
operation had been carried out according to plan
and had been concluded, and that our forces were
deploying to leave the area.

9. After the furious debate of yesterday and in spite
of the intense feelings which naturally persist, I wish *
with your permission, to reflect this morning on the
obligations of this Council and the main duty with
which we in this Council are charged. I ask the indtrlgence of the Council to speak of our overriding obligation not to inflame and divide but always to search
for common ground and, even in times of bitter co+
troversy, to neglect no means of promoting agreement
and assisting efforts to achieve peaceful and accepted
settlement.

“ ‘The Israel representative, Ambassador Tekoah,
informed the Council to this effect, before the
resolution to which your cable refers’ was proposed. Mr. Tekoah later explained to the Council
that the return of our forces was being delayed
during the hours of darkness in order to avoid
the risk of firing which might injure civilians. I
wish now to inform you that all our forces that
were involved in this action have returned to their
bases.

10. It might be said that after the violent events of
the past twenty-four hours this is no time to talk peace.
On the contrary, I submit that the perpetuation and
intensification
of conflict surely makes it all the mote
necessary and all the more urgent to find a way out
of the bloody deadlock which causes so much suffering
and so much misery and so much hopelessness. This
is not the time to give up. It is the time to redouble
our efforts to carry out what must be our primary aim:
to bring justice and peace in the place of force and
conflict.

“ ‘I would recall that at the outset of the operation,
our army spokesman stated that it was a combing
action, and that our forces would leave the area
immediately
on its completion.

“ ‘The circumstances which necessitated this defensive action were placed before the Council in the
statement made by Ambassador Tekoah at the
meeting yesterday morning, and in a series of prior
letters to the President of the Security Council.

11. Yesterday the Soviet representative made a very
grave accusation. Hi did so in the heat of reply, and
I have little doubt that he has thought better of it,
but nevertheless it was an accusation that cannot be
allowed to pass. He said that my Government had
sought to impede the implementation
of resolution 242
(1967). With due restraint, I must tell him what indeed
he well knows: that what he said is the exact opposite
of the truth. He and the others who have participated
in our discussions since the June war of 1967 know
very well that at every opportunity, at every meeting.
my delegation has put forward positive, practical proposals. Whether it was in the discussions immediately
after the war or in the consultations leading up to the
unanimous adoption of resolution 242 (1967), or in the
subsequent meetings of the Four, or those of lhc
deputies, always, at every meeting, the United Kingdom has advocated urgency and has pointed the way
to practical progress in carrying out the principles set
out in the resolution.

“‘My Government continues to hold the Government of Lebanon fully responsible for all acts of
violence perpetrated
from Lebanese territory
against the population, territory and armed forces
of Israel.
“‘Our policy remains one of seeking a just and lasting Israel-Arab peace, and unti1 then, of maintaining scrupulous observance of the cease-fire on a
reciprocal basis. If Israel is subjected to armed
attack, it has the same inherent right of self defense
as any other State.
“ ‘(S&zed)
“Please

Golda Meir’

accept, etc.
“(Signed)

“Permanent

12. May I remind the Soviet representative that that
resolution was not put forward by the Soviet Union
but by the United Kingdom. I should add that I have
repeatedly paid tribute to the Soviet Union for supporting it.

Yosef TEKOAH

Representative
“to the United

of Israel
Nations”
2

13. No one can suggest that we have not wished to
see our own resolution put into effect, For two and
a half years we have sought at every opportunity
to
persuade the others to proceed with us on the common
ground of agreement without further delay or dispute.
The record shows what we have repeatedly advocated.
Whenever I have spoken in this Council or in the Four
I have said that delay was the principal enemy, and
I have also consistently maintained that a measure of
common ground of agreement in fact exists.

20. This is the programme of progress which I
advocate. No one who has been associated with the
problems of the Middle East could be easily optimistic,
still less complacent. Passions run too high, suspicions
are too deep, injustices have been too long endured,
hopes Of peace have been too long deferred.
21. But we must see a way forward. We must believe
in the possibility of peace. We must never forget that
our duty in this Council is to resist every telnptation
to embitter disputes, and never to give up the search
for agreement.

14. The damage done by delay is very plain to us
today. Some now despair of progress towards
agreement, but I wish most earnestly to put it to you
today that there is a way to go forward, that we should
choose that way and that we should insist that we
must not be deflected from it.

22. Violence, bloodshed, death and destruction are
not reasons for abandoning our duty in this Counci]:
they are a terrible reproach to us for our delays; they
are overwhelming arguments for pressing on with our
endeavours with renewed determination and with a
compelling sense of urgency. I trust that in that duty
we shall not fail.

15. Where is the common ground? Let me point to
it with every effort to avoid disagreement, and let me
say now that the remarkable, the undeniable fact is
that there is so much on which we have agreed,

23. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): My delegation is
most gratified to hear the good news of the withdrawal
of the Israeli forces from Lebanon. Lebanon is a country which has striven with dignity and wisdom to solve
the problems of religion, race and social class. Its position in the Middle East has always been a difficult
one. We ourselves have in our country, Sierra Leone,
many distinguished residents and citizens of Lebanese
origin who have contributed to our country’s development. We have thus been deeply concerned that,
because of circumstances which do not originate from
the Lebanese Government, their country has twice
been savagely attacked within a year-at Beirut airport
and now in the south-west area of Mount Hermon.
We do hope that reparations will be made to civilians
on both sides who have suffered as a result of that
battle.

16. None of US, I am sure, would wish to detract
from the joint statement of the four Foreign Ministers
made last September,z when they reaffirmed that all
States in the Middle East have an inalienable right
to exist as independent and sovereign States. None
of us would question the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by war. None of us would question
that without withdrawal there can be no peace. No
one can doubt that in order to secure withdrawal there
must be assurance of a just and lasting peace with
the right of every State in the area to live in peace
with secure and recognized boundaries free from
threats or acts of force. No one can doubt that without
a just settlement of the refugee problem with full
respect for the rights of the refugees there can never
be a final settlement. None of us doubt in fact that
the provisions of resolution 242 (1967) must be carried
out fully and completely in every respect.

24. My delegation would urge that, as soon as we
receive from the Secretary-General words of his satisfaction that the resolution that we unanimously adopted
yesterday
[resolution
279 (1970)] has been
implemented, the Security Council should continue Its
work towards peaceful conciliation.

17. In the Four we have examined and elaborated
all these principles. On priorities and methods we sti]]
have some differences, but on the declared principles
we are in full agreement.
18.

The Big Four of this Council have a great responsibility at their meetings to work more speedily towards
a solution of this problem. I would urge that at this
stage we should not continue an exercise which will
exacerbate the feelings of all concerned. The plight
of the Palestinian refugees is great. Development and
progress are a matter of urgency for both Arabs and
Jews. Every fighter plane purchased, whether it be
a Mirage or a Phantom-the
very names of. those
weapons of war show their transitoriness and Impermanence-represents
both retrogression and regression and money which could have been spent on
schools and hospitals for the development of that area.
25.

So what should be done now?

19. I trust that we of the Four will be able to report
to the Secretary-Genera1 before the end of this month.
Thereafter I hope that the Secretary-General will agree
that Ambassador Jarring should resume his consultations with both sides, and I trust that he wil] soon
be able to report to the Secretary-General on his UPto-date discussions with the parties. Then and on]Y
then can we hope to make new progress towards the
settlement we wish to see. Then the way will be open
to make final initiatives-to
use the words of the resolution “to promote agreement and assist efforts to
achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement”.

26. Surely it is in the interest of mankind that we
should al] seek passionately and perSiStently a WaY
towards peace in a region which has produced the
Koran, the Torah and the Bible--documents
weighty
enough to have brought comfort and reassurance to
millions over hundreds of years.

2 Officinl Accords of the Security Comcil, Twenty-follrth
Siipplen~cntfor
S/9485.

October, Novelvlber d

Yew,
December 1969, document

3

I

27. I do hope that at the conclusion of this debate
and with the implementation
of the resolution we shall
allow the processes of conciliation and reconciliation
to cbntinue.

33. On both those occasions the Security Council
warned Israel that if such acts were repeated, the Council would have to consider further steps for the
implementation
of its decisions. Israel has now, impudently defying the clearly expressed will of the United
Nations and world public opinion, committed a further
premeditated
act of aggression against Lebanon, the
most serious attack against that peace-loving country
since the aggression committed by Israel in June 1967
against three Arab countries-the
United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan.

28. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated .fFom Russian): At the urgent request of
the Government of Lebanon, the Security Council is
again discussing a fresh act of aggression against that
Arab country. Troops of the Israeli aggressors have
invaded the territory of Lebanon. Large contingents
of Israeli infantry units, tanks, artillery and aircraft
were used to carry out this large-scale aggressive
operation. The aggressor is barbarously destroying
The
peaceful
Lebanese
centres of population.
unleashed military machine of Israel, in committing
this further act of international
banditry against a
neighbouring
Arab State, has used brutal scorched
earth tactics, that is, the tactics used by the Hitlerites
in those dark days of the Second World War which
cannot be effaced from the memory of mankind, when
stealthily, by night, they attacked other countries. With
United States aircraft, the aerial pirates of Israel subjected Lebanese centres of population to brutal bombardment, committing the criminal murder of peaceftil
inhabitants like that recently committed by them in
the United Arab Republic when they kilIed peaceful
inhabitants, including workers and children.

34. The distinguished
representative of Lebanon,
Ambassador Ghorra, in his statement at yesterday’s
meetings of the Council, advanced cogent facts and
arguments concerning this new monstrous crime on
the part of Israel. These facts speak for themselves,
and we shall not repeat them. Confirmation of the fact
of Israel’s aggression against Lebanon is also to be
found in the statement made by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, U Thant. Even the representative of Israel did not deny the fact of the armed aggression and invasion of Lebanese territory by Israeli
troops, although he tried to justify this new aggression
by all kinds of fabricated, false pretexts.
35. It is quite clear that the fresh act of aggression
by Israel is merely one of the links in the chain of
the policy of international banditry, lawlessness and
seizure of territory which the Government of Israel
has been pursuing for many years now against its Arab
neighbours.

29. The invasion of Lebanese territory by Israeli
troops is evidence that Israel is flouting all the rules
of international law, is flagrantly violating the Charter
of the United Nations and its decisions, is making international banditry the basic doctrine of its foreign policy
and its relations with the neighbouring Arab countries,
is continuing to follow a course of expanding aggression
in the Middle East, is undermining a peaceful political
settlement in that region and is trying to achieve its
imperialist, annexationist purposes by means of open,
insolent military brigandage.

36. Encouraged by the support of its main protectors
and allies-the
United States and American Zionism-for almost three years the ruling circles in Israel
have stubbornly, cynically and arrogantly been continually sabotaging a peaceful political settlement in
the Middle East and refusing to implement the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967, the main provision of which is the inadmissibility
of acquiring
foreign territory through the use of force.

30. As world public opinion well knows, the Security
Council has already twice-in December 1968 and subsequently in August 1969-decisively
condemned
Israel for aggressive attacks on Lebanon and described
those acts of Israeli aggression as a threat to peace
in the Middle East and a violation by Israel of its obligations under the United Nations Charter.

37. Instead of complying with that Security Council
resolution,, withdrawing its troops from all the Arab
territories and helping to establish a durable peace in
the Middle East, Israel has been carrying out one military provocation after another against the Arab States,
calculating that, by escalating the use of force, it will
succeed in achieving its unlawful aims.

31, In December 1968 the Security Council stated
that it “Condemns Israel for its premeditated military
action in violation of its obligations under the Charter
and the cease-fire resolutions” [resolution 262 (1968)].
In August 1969 the Security Council declared in its
resolution that it “Condemns
the premeditated
air
attack by Israel on villages in southern Lebanon in
violation of its obligations under the Charter and Security Council resolutions”
[resolution 270 (1969)].

38. That is precisely the intent of the new Israeli
attack on Lebanon. The Israeli extremists are trying
to intimidate that peaceful Arab country, which stands
firmly for the peaceful political settlement of disputes,
respects its international
obligations and the United
Nations Charter and enjoys incomparably
higher
authority and prestige in the United Nations than Israel
with its policy of aggression.

32. Thus the Security Council, the principal organ
of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security, has already twice condemned
Israel in the most categorical fashion for the international crimes it has committed and its policy of armed
brigandage and international
gangster&m.

39. The contention of Israel that it has some kind. ’
of “right”
to invade Lebanese territory in order to
cotibat Arab patriots is nothing but a false pretext
which has absolutely no basis or justification in international law, You, the Israeli extremists, end your policy
4

of aggression, withdraw your troops from the occupied
Arab territories, and then the problem of fighting the
Arab patriots will disappear of its own accord, It will
disappear just as did the problem of the struggle of
the Soviet patriots, our glorious partisans, during the
years of the Second World War, when they fought
the Hitlerite
invaders and occupiers so bravely and
devotedly and unsparing of their own lives. It will disappear as did the problem of the struggle ofthe Maquis
in France, which fought equally bravely and devotedly
against the Hitlerite occupants of French territory. This
is the reality, and no attempts by the Israeli extremists
and their representatives here to justify this marauding
hltrUSion
into Lebanese territory can be condoned
from any point of view. In this connexion it should
be recalled that the Security Council has many times
in the past emphatically condemned similar actions by
Israel carried out under the pretext that they were
“retaliation”
or “reprisals”.
These condemnations of
the aggressor’s fabricated pretext of “reprisals” are
recorded in a number of Security Council resolutions
where the Israeli position is found to conflict with the
United Nations Charter and international
law. This
“concept”
not of international law but of international
brigandage and lawlessness must now again be condemned most emphatically.

bers of the United Nations and world public opinion
refuse to believe that the United States is powerless
to exert any inflUenCe on the Israeli extremists. The
Arab representatives with equal justification drew a
Parallel between the United States aggression in Cambodia and the Israeli aggression against Lebanon.
44. It cannot be overlooked, in this connexion, that
the intensified
aggression of Tel Aviv was
synchronized with the United States’ freezing of its
Position on a Middle East settlement, supported by
the United Kingdom, with the blocking by the United
States delegation of the possibility of attaining agreement on a peaceful settlement in the four-power consultations on the Middle East, with the stubborn reluctance of the United St.ates-with United Kingdom support-to agree to the withdrawal of a]] Israeli troops
from all the occupied Arab territories behind the line
existing before 5 June 1967, and with its stubborn insistence not to recognize that line as the frontier between
Israel and the Arab States and thereby prevent Israel
from annexing the Arab territories seized by it, Various
formulas are being put forward for leaving the Arab
territories in the hands of the aggressor. Specific areas
have been named which should be left to Israel, And
all this is supported by Mr. Yost and Lord Caradon.
In his statement today, Lord Caradon tried to present
the matter as if the Soviet representative had incorrectly stated the substance of the issue. If this is so,
then I would urge Lord Caraclon to state before all
the members of the Security Council that the United
Kingdom is in favour of the immediate withdrawal of
all Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab territories
behind the line prior to 5 June 1967. If he makes this
declaration in the Security Council, then I will state
that I was mistaken in my assessment of the United
Kingdom position. I put this direct question to Lord
Caradon, and I ask him to give a direct answer witho:lt
the usual evasions and reservations of British diplomacy, which are also attributes of Lord Caradon
himself.

40. The Israeli extremists are clearly committing their
crimes against the beace and security of peoples on
the assumption that those crimes will go unpunished
and that they will continue to enjoy political, diplomatic
and military support from outside.
4 I. The Government of Israel and those who are so
generously
financing
Israeli
aggression,
putting
weapons into the hands of the Israeli militarists and
supplying Phantom aircraft for death-dealing air raids
on the territory of Arab States, obviously calculate
that, through threats, blackmail and the escalation of
aggression, they will be able to make the Arab States
and their peoples capitulate and accept imperialist conditions for a “settlement”.

45. From a financial standpoint the fresh act of aggression by Israel has been aided by a large new loan
of $100 million recently granted to Israel by the United
States. The new act of aggression has also been reinforced by the continued supply to the aggressor of
United States weapons of the most advanced types
and by official promises to continue arming the aggressor in the future.

42. As was shown yesterday in the Council by the
statements and actions of the United States representative and by those of his British colleague and friend,
the United States and the United Kingdom-as
witness
&so today’s statement by Lord Caradon-again
failed
to find strong words that would adequately and decisively condemn the piratical acts of their Israeli prot&g&s and exert a sobering influence and effect on the
Government
of. Israel. Lord Caradon made a long
speech, but there were no words in it to condemn
Israel’s aggression against Lebanon. All the acrimony
in his speech was directed at the Soviet representative;
but the Soviet representative in his statement simply
told. the Council what corresponded to the facts, and
no attempts by Lord Caradon to distort the facts will
succeed.

46. The representatives of the Arab COUntIk,
Lebanon, Syria, Morocco and Saudi Arabia, have quite
rightly drawn the Council’s attention to the fact that
the Israeli aggression against Lebanon was Committed
at a time when, in another part of the world, in SouthEast Asia, the United States aggression against the
peoples of Viet-Nam and Laos is proceeding on an
ever-widening scale, and soon after there had been
a military invasion of the territory of a neutral State,
Cambodia. In both places we have the same Policy
of military adventure and the escalation Of aggression
for the purpose of stifling the national liberation
struggle of the peoples, of eliminating progressive
rigimes, of suppressing the struggle of patriots for the

43. The representatives of Arab States who spoke
yesterday in the Council quite justifiably made serious
accusations against the United States and attributed
to it the blame and the responsibility for the aggressive
policy of Tel Aviv. The whole world, th’e States Mem5

ofjustification and camouflage: as we know, President
Nixon stated, when he announced the invasion of Cambodia by United States troops, that these troops would
be withdrawn after they had completed their mission
in that country. Yesterday the members of the Security
Council heard almost the same words from the Israeli
representative: he repeated, like a lesson learned by
heart, that Israeli troops would be withdrawn from
Lebanon on completion of their mission. That is no
coincidence. The pupils are blindly and bloodily COPYing their teachers.

freedom and independence of their countries and
peoples, and of imposing imperialist conditions of
bondage on the peoples through the use of military
force.
47. At the present historical juncture, in the second
half of the twentieth century, there is but one correct
and scientifically justified name for this: modern
imperialism.
48. At the International
Conference of Communist
and Workers’ Parties held in MOSCOW from 5 to 17
June 1969, a document was adopted which gave the
following description of the tactics and actions of modern imperialism:

51. This imperialist policy is an example of the most
blatant high-handedness in international
relations. It
is a policy of international high-handedness and brigandage, the savage practice of the law of the jungle, and
it must be condemned and stopped in the most decisive
fashion by all peace-loving States and peoples.

“Using military-political
blocs and bases on
foreign territories, economic pressure and commercial blockade, imperialism is maintaining a state Of
tension in a number of parts of the world. It is providing financial and political support to reactionary
organizations and intensifying political pressure.
Armed intervention, brutal repression-particularly
where the struggle takes on the most acute forms
and where the revolutionary forces are fighting with
weapons in their hands- counter-revolutionary conspiracies, reactionary and fascist coups, provocations and blackmail, are all set in motion by imperialism.”

52. The Security Council must not underestimate the
danger of the extreme tension at present existing in
the Middle East through the fault of Israel and those
who protect it. It it were merely a matter of ensuring
the right of every State in the Middle East to security,
peace would long ago have been restored in that area.
But it is now perfectly clear to everyone that the aim
of the present leaders of Israel, with their imperialist
designs and expansionist ambitions, is not peace but
tension in the Middle East, it is to have a free hand
and any excuse for further piratical attacks on Arab
States. It is difficult to avoid the impression that tension
in this area is, alas, the aim of Israel’s protectors, who
are providing it with full military and material support
in its aggression against the Arab States.

49. This description of the policy and actions of modern imperialism
is extremely apt as regards the
instigators of international aggression both in the Middle East area and in the countries of Indo-China.
50. In both places the same logic is applied: the
aggressor, having first invaded’one country, declares
that someone is disturbing and threatening him and
that this, from the standpoint and to the way of thinking
of the aggressor, is sufficient pretext for invading the
territory of another country, and then that of a third,
and so on, sowing death and destruction and creating
a threat to world peace. In both places, frontiers and
State sovereignty, the inviolability
of territory and
compliance with international
obligations and the
generally accepted rules and provisions of international
law have ceased to have any meaning for the aggressor.
The boots of the United States military are treading
the earth of Cambodia. The boots of the Israeli military
are treading the earth of Lebanon and other Arab
countries. Towns and villages are going up in flames;
peaceful inhabitants+hildren,
women and the
aged-are perishing in Cambodia, in Lebanon and in
other countries of the Arab East. United States soldiers, having performed the bloody prelude at Songmy
and other places in South Viet-Nam, are now marauding on Cambodian soil. The Israeli cutthroats, having
become skilled hands at murder and violence against
the Arab population in the occupied territories, are
now doing the same in Lebanon. At the same time,
United States air pirates have again begun their brutal
bombings of the territory of the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam, while their Israeli colleagues in international aggression are continuing their brutal bombings
of the territories of Arab countries. Moreover, in both
cases the same terminology is being used for purposes

53. It is only because they are blinded by a racist
kind of pathological chauvinism and are fraudulently
speculating on biblical myths and legends that the
Israeli leaders fail to see that, by their disregard of
the United Nations and of world public opinion which
condemns them-and
yesterday’s vote in the Security
Council once again clearly demonstrated
this to
Israel-and by their blatantly aggressive policy against
the neighbouring Arab countries, they-these
new,
raving warmongers- are threatening the security of the
Israeli people itself, whose future can lie only in goodneighbourly relations and not in strife with the Arabs.
This policy arouses disgust and indignation in all peaceloving peoples of the world; the actions of the Israeli
aggressors offend the conscience of mankind.
54. The Soviet Union is firmly in favour of a lasting
peace being established in the Middle East area so
that the national strife, hostility and war inflamed by
imperialism may be a thing of the past. The Security
Council resolution of 22 November
1967 provides a
sound and universally acknowledged basis for this, We
shall not slacken our efforts towards the implementation of that resolution in all its paragraphs and provisions. But, in circumstances where Israel is disregarding that resolution and is extending its aggression
against the Arab States, the struggle for peace in the
Middle East, like the struggle for peace in the world
as a whole, should above all take the form of a decisive
6

rebuff to the aggressors in all the parts of the world
where they have unleashed aggression.

of a Security Council resolution. It is quite obvious
that Mrs. GoldaMeir’s
statement is designed to mislead
both the Council and world public opinion.

55. There is only one road to a peaceful settlement
in the Middle East: the withdrawal of the aggressor’s
troops from all the territories occupied by it. Israel
must be made to comply with the decisions of so important an international organ as the United Nations Security Council. The sooner the United States and the
United Kingdom understand the full senselessness,
hopelessness and danger of their connivance with the
Israeli aggressors, the sooner that will be achieved.
No one should have any doubt that the Arab peoples
will never capitulate or acquiesce in the perpetual occupation of their territory.

59. To revert to Lord Caradon’s statement today,
I can say candidly to the Security Council: yes, Lord
Caradon is indeed the author of resolution 242 (1967).
Nobody denies that. He boasted of it today; I acknowledge that he has a right to be proud of it and
even to boast of it. It is true that he put forward the
draft resolution. But since then, for almost three years
since the time of the Israeli aggression, he has been
taking a stand that obstructs the practical implementation of that resolution. That is what makes his position
so unusual. You, Lord Caradon, in fact refuse to support the unconditional principle of resolution 242 (1967)
on the withdrawal of all the Israeli troops from all
the Arab territories occupied in June 1967. You refuse
to support the practical implementation of the principle
of the non-acquisition of territory by war and the principle that the frontiers betweenIsrael and the Arab States
must exactly correspond to the line prior to 5 June
1967. You are actively supporting the United States
approach and formula for the alteration of frontiers
in favour of the aggressor and at the expense of the
territory belonging to the victims of aggression. Where
is the logic of this? We are grateful to you for presenting
the resolution, but we cannot be grateful for your subsequent actions in hindering the putting into effect,
the implementation,
of the resolution. We say this
forthrightly, honestly and openly before the Security
Council and world public opinion.

56. The Soviet Union fully supports Lebanon in its
appeal to the Security Council in connexion with
Israel’s attack. The Soviet delegation cannot fail to
express satisfaction at the fact that the Security Council-for the first time, it seems, in its twenty-five-year
history-has
reacted so swiftly, decisively
and
definitely to an aggression, and adopted at its very
first meeting a resolution aimed at restraining the
aggressor. Those who tried to impede the adoption
of this just resolution once again assumed before the
Security Council and the whole world the ignoble role
of defender and protector of the Israeli aggressors,
and consequently the role of opponent of a peaceful
political settlement in the Middle East, the role of opponent of the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the
occupied Arab territories, the role of opponent of their
withdrawal behind the line prior to 5 June 1967, the
role of opponent of the implementation
of the major
principle of resolution 242 (1967) concerning the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by the use
of force. The Security Council must decisively condemn Israel for this new aggressive act against
Lebanon, committed in violation of Israel’s obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of this Organization. The Security Council must
take further, more effective measures to halt the aggression.

60. Yesterday, even in the course of a procedural
discussion, which in fact turned into a sharp political
debate, you and Ambassador Yost in effect came to
the defence of the aggressor, and tried by various procedural manoeuvres to prevent, or at least delay, the
speedy adoption by the Security Council of the resolution which it did adopt. It was only because those
attempts failed that you were forced to vote for that
resolution together with the rest of the Council. Therefore, the sooner you abandon the policy and position
of defending the aggressor and attempting to justify
his aggressive misdeeds, the sooner we shall be able
to resolve the problem of a peaceful political settlement
in the Middle East.

57. The Soviet Union is prepared, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter, to support effective
measures by the Security Council designed to check
the aggressor,

61. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): Eight inonths have
passed since the Security Council last considered the
situation in the Middle East. The reason for the Council’s inaction is not, as we all know, that tranquillity
has reigned in the region. The reason is that the Se.curity
Council has virtually lost control over the situation
in the Middle East. Violent incidents occur daily. They
are being recorded and filed away.

58. In conclusion, I should like to draw attention to
the statement by Mrs. Golda Meir which was read
out by the Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General.
It is full of hypocrisy and is intended to mislead the
Security Council and world public opinion. The Israeli
logic is strange: you can attack a neighbouring State
at night, but you cannot withdraw your troops at night
from the foreign territory occupied. That is truly the
logic of the aggressor. Moreover, a news dispatch just
received says that Israel sent a further large detachment
of tanks and armoured vehicles to the areas of military
activity in Lebanon at 3.15 a.m.; that is to say, additional troops were sent at dead of night on 12/13 May,
many hours after the adoption by the Council of the
resolution on the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
from Lebanon. Once again we have a violation by Israel

62. Now the Security Council has been convened in
response to an exceptionally large-scale incursion by
Israeli armed forces into Lebanese territory. We have
been told by the representative of Israel that the purpose of the attack was to destroy bases used by Palestinian guerrillas for their activities against Israel. But,
as I have had occasion to state before, my delegation
cannot accept any arguments designed to justify a pol7

for such a settlement is contained -in Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). We believe that the four Powers
engaged in negotiations and the parties themselves
must now make a new and supreme effort to reverse
the’ trend towards increasing violence and danger and
at last set in motion a process that can lead to the
establishment, in accordance with the resolution, of
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

icy of military retaliation. Accordingly we welcomed
the prompt and unanimous action taken by the Council
at yesterday’s meeting in demanding the immediate
withdrawal of all Israeli forces from Lebanese territory.
63. I am aware that condemnation of this or any other
act of violence in itself solves nothing. Once again
the Council is dealing with symptoms rather than the
core of the problem. The latest Israeli raid illustrates
the almost total breakdown of the structure of international arrangements erected in the aftermath of the
war of June 1967 for the purpose of putting an end
to the fighting and creating the necessary prerequisites
for making peace in the Middle East.

68. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpr.etcrtionJ~om
French):
I have no further speakers on my list for the general
debate, but the representatives of the United Kingdom
and the United States have asked to be allowed to
exercise the right of reply.
69. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I am sorry
that Mr. Malik should have thought fit to repeat a
charge which I believe he knows to be untrue-the
charge that my Government has not sought to carry
out and put into effect our own resolution. I was glad
to hear, however, that he confirmed his support for
the resolution in all its parts.

64. At the base of that structure was the cease-fire.
A cease-fire by its very nature is a temporary device,
a first step in the process of making peace. The next
stage in that process was outlined in the Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967, a resolution which
envisaged a comprehensive
political
settlement
between the parties to the conflict, and which also
provided for the use of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to promote agreement between
the parties.

70. On the question of withdrawal and on the question
of peace-and
they must go together-Mr.
Malik
knows very well that we of course set out our’proposals
in the resolution. We stand four-square by the proposals set out in that resolution. Mr. Malik knows also
that in the discussions among the Four on the question
of withdrawal and on the question of peace my delegation has put forward detailed and comprehensive formulations on both subjects. I do not propose to enter
here and now into a discussion of texts which are still
under confidential discussion within the Four, but I
am very happy to be able to assure the Council that,
as Mr. Malik knows very well, the formulations that
we have put forward on those essential subjects of
withdrawal and peace were, first, positive, second,
definite, third, fair and, fourth, fully in accordance with
resolution 242 (1967). Therefore I am in a position to
say that the accusations made by Mr. Malik were false,
and I am glad to reject them.

65. However, the passage of time has so eroded the
cease-fire that it has become virtually meaningless. ‘The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Jarring, has been reduced to inactivity. The impact
of the Security Council resolution of November 1967
is itself in danger of fading. The talks between the
four permanent members of the Security Council are
continuing, but, judging by what the other members
of the Council have been told, no substantive progress
has been made. As Lord Caradon pointed out this
morning, delay is the principal enemy of peace. The
absence of any advance towards a peaceful settlement
is bound to strengthen those on both sides who do
not believe in the possibility of peace or perhaps do
not even want peace. As a result our discussions here
are becoming more and more divorced from the violent
realities of the Middle Eastern conflict, which is acquiring new and frightening dimensions.

71. The PRESIDENT
(irzterlpretatio~z from Fwzclz):
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on
a point of order.

66. My delegation has from the very beginning
strongly supported the efforts of the four Powers. We
continue to support them, because we realize that no
genuine settlement of the Middle Eastern conflict is
possible unless it is backed by some measure of agreement between the permanent members of the Security
Council, and also because we see in these talks an
acknowledgement on their part of their special responsibility for preveliting the conflict. in the Middle East
from endangering world peace. Yet the fact that the
four-Power talks continue cannot absolve the Security
Council as a whole from ultimate responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security in the Middle
East.

72. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(trardnted fiorn Russialz): Unfortunately
I did not
obtain a straight answer to my question from Lord
Caradon’s statement. I put a direct question: are the
United Kingdom and Lord Caradon in favour of the
withdrawal of all Israeli troops from all of the occupied
Arab territories, or not? That is the question, and I
ask Lord Caradon to answer yes or no, and not to
indulge in the turgidity and evasions which are usual
in British diplomacy.
73. Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom):
I shall
merely repeat what I have said to the Ambassador:
that our proposals on withdrawal and peace were set
Out in the resolution. Our formulations
on withdrawal
and peace have been put forward within the Four, as
he very well knows. I have given him a straight answer
to his question, and he knows very well what proposals

67. The only effective way to put an end to the kind
of attacks that we have been dealing with today and
all acts of violence in the Middle East is to work for
a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict
between the Arab States and Israel. The blue,print
8

L

have put forward, both in the Council and within
the Four. I have nothing more to say.

we

Posture, he and his Government will again Join the;,
colleagues in a sincere and genuine effort in which
we are, I hope, all engaged to bring about the full
and rapid implementation of resolution 242 (1967).

74. Mr, MALIK (Union Of Soviet Socialist Republics)
~translated jkm Russian): I think it is now clear to
everyone whose statements contain falsehoods and
whose the truth.

79. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&on >om ~re,zch):
I give the floor to the representative of the Soviet Union
who wishes to exercise his right of reply,

75. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I shall
address myself at an early meeting to the situation
that has called us together and is on our agenda for
today. At the moment I wish merely to make two comments on the irrelevancies in the characteristic statement by Mr. Malik that we have just heard.

80. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The accusation of the
United States representative that my position is inconsistent is without any foundation. From the very first
days of the United States aggression in Viet-Nam, the
Soviet Union has firmly and unwaveringly demanded
the cessation of that aggression and the withdrawal
Of the United States troops from Viet-Nam and from
the whole of Indo-China. Only after that will it be possible to conduct any negotiations anywhere. To discuss
the issue in the United Nations would be to cover
up the aggression and give the aggressor the opportunity of continuing what he is doing, and I think the
United States representative knows this. If he does
not, I am informing him of it, and I should like him
to understand this position. If he understands it, he
will not allow the responsibility to be shifted on to
someone else’s shoulders. The fresh act of aggression
by the United States is censured not only by the world
as a whole, but by your own people, particularly the
young. We have all become aware of that during the
last two or three weeks. So this cannot be justified;
it is not justifiable from any point of view.

76. The Soviet representative has raised the question
of South-East Asia. Some of my colleagues will no
doubt remember that the United States in 1965 and
1% made repeated efforts to obtain action by the
United Nations on the subject of Viet-Nam. Among
others, we brought the question to this Council. All
those efforts were thwarted by the Soviet Union. In
the intervening
years the ally of the Soviet Union,
North
Viet-Nam,
has steadily and substantially
expanded its military occupation of two neighbouring
States, two neutral and independent
States, Laos and
Cambodia, both guaranteed by the international agreements of 1954 and 1962, and North Viet-Nam has
expanded the war from Viet-Nam into their territories
against the will and against ‘the neutrality of their
Governments.
That is imperialism
pure and simple,
and it is connived at and supported by the Soviet Union.
This is, of course, the reason, and the only reason,
for the limited military operation that the United States
is conducting against the North Viet-Namese forces
in Cambodia.
Yet the Soviet Union rejects steadily
and consistently all proposals for the reactivation of
the International
Control Commission in Cambodia,
for the convening of a conference on the problems
of Indo-China,
for any United Nations action in the
area and, indeed, for any negotiations for a political
settlement. Permit me to ask whether this is the action
of a Government genuinely interested in a restoration
and maintenance of peace.

81. With regard to the Middle East issue, you know
perfectly well, Mr. Yost, that what I said here I have
been telling you for more than a year now in our fourPower meetings.
82. As the Soviet representative, I emphatically insist
on the following: that resolution 242 (1967) be
implemented in all its paragraphs and provisions, that
the aggressor should not be rewarded for his aggression-that not an inch of the soil of the victim of aggression pass to the aggressor-and that the troops of the
aggressor, down to the very last soldier and officer,
be withdrawn from all territories occupied by the
aggressor. This is in accordance with the spirit of the
resolution.

77. My second point is to invite the attention of’the
Council to an interesting aspect of Ambassador Malik’s
negotiating technique which I have had the opportunity
to observe at some length during recent months. When
he wishes to negotiate seriously, when he has authority
from his Government to engage in the normal giveand-take of diplomatic negotiation and political settlement, he speaks in a quiet, business-like manner.
When, however, his Government
has decided not to
make any accommodation
whatsoever, to‘dig its heels
in and insist that the Soviet position be adopted a
hundred per cent and hence to bring effective negotiations to a halt, then he endeavours to conceal this
fact by throwing up a smoke-screen and indulging in
a torrent of bombast and invective such as we have
just heard. This is, I may say, a very bad sign for
peace in the Middle East.,

83. I wish to stress that the Arab States have made
enormous concessions and have agreed to regard the
line of 5 June 1967 as the frontier of Israel. They are
making a major concession to Israel. Israel seized a
vast area of Arab territory as a result of the aggression
of 1948-1949. For twenty years it has refused to settle
that problem and return the territory. NOW the Arab
States are making a huge concession. They are not
insisting on the return of that territory; tliey are SimPlY
demanding the establishment of the frontier on the line
of 5 June 1967.
84. YOU, Mr, Yost, are always putting forward the
idea of an adjustment, What does an adjustment mean?
It means rewarding the aggressor at the expense of
the victim of aggression, transferring to Israel some

78. I can only hope that after they have squeezed
all the propaganda advantage they can out of this
9

tive of Finland, in his intervention today, spoke about
our discussion here becoming more and more divorced
from the violent realities of the Middle East conflict,
Humbly I would say that we have this feeling of reality,
because we are the victim of the tragedy. There is
a difference between speaking of villages being
destroyed and of children being killed in school, and
reading letters and looking at photographs-there
is
a difference between that and seeing one’s own
children, one’s own civilians, one’s own villages being
razed to the ground and one’s people killed and massacred in a cynical manner.

part of the Arab territory seized by the aggressor. On
what grounds? Do you think this is in accordance with
resolution
242 (1967)? Certainly not. I reject that
approach and that interpretation. At the basis of resolution 242 (1967) are its main provisions on the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by the use of force,
and we firmly abide by that position.
85. If you and Lord Caradon will take that same
position, we shall solve the problem tomorrow. We
will calI an urgent meeting of the Four including the
Ambassador of France-the
President of the Security
Council-Ambassador
Yost and Lord Caradon; and
tomorrow we will work out a generally agreed formulation on the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory
by the use of force, the withdrawal of all Israeli troops
from all the occupied territories behind the line prior
to 5 June 1967, and the recognition of the 5 June line
as the boundary. We shall quickly settle all the remaining questions-including
peace and whatever else you
like. That is how the matter stands.

91. That, therefore, is the sense of reality with which
our deliberations should be imbued. Of course, there
is a difference of approach between someone who is
the victim of such a situation and someone who is
looking at it in a rather detached way, somewhat in
the manner of Nero watching Rome burn and playing
his fiddle meanwhile.
92. When the representative of Morocco intervened
yesterday and reflected the sense of tragedy among
the Arabs and in the Arab capitals, he drew a parallel
between the Israeli action against Lebanon and the
American action in Cambodia. The same pattern is
repeating itself; the same arguments are being echoed
by one party after the other in a parrot-like way.
However, I would not say that the speech of the representative of Morocco has influenced the editorial
writers of the American newspapers of this morning,
because hardly an Arab voice can be found reflected
in the American press. However, I shall give them
the benefit of the doubt; and starting with today’s Nerv
Yor-k Times editorial, this is what it says:

86. I should like today to obtain a definite answer
from Ambassador Yost and Lord Caradon. Will they
answer “yes” or “no” to the question whether all
Israeli troops should be withdrawn from all the
occupied territories?
87. That is the quintessence, the substance, the crux
of the matter. Until we reach agreement on this matter,
there can be no progress. Without a withdrawal there
can be no peace in the Middle East. That is the reality.
And the sooner our colleagues, the representatives of
the United States and the United Kingdom, understand
this, the better it will be for the affairs of, and peace
in, the Middle East.

“The More Perilous Crisis
88. The PRESIDENT
(z’ntelpretntiorz from French):
As the representative of FRANCE, I would merely
point out that if, from this debate, a strengthening of
resolution 242 (1967) of the Security Council in all its
provisions and its means of implementation
were to
emerge, we would then have made serious progress
towards a peaceful settlement.

“Israel’s large-scale raid against guerrilla sanctuaries in Lebanon calls attention once more to a
continuing crisis in the Middle East that is even more
perilous than the escalating Indochina conflict on
which national and international concern has focused
in recent weeks.”

89. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): In the context of the complaint of which the Security Council is seized,
specifically, the complaint made by Lebanon against
the attack on Lebanese territory and inside Lebanese
territory, and to come back to the actuality of this
complaint, it is in this spirit that I shall make my statement today. In doing so, I propose to deal with the
question first in its world dimensions with such appropriate and valid analogies as obtain in the world today,
and second, within the context of the Middle East
crisis. The two, certainly, are not separable, put
emphasis will be laid on one or the other as the logical
order of the situation obtains.

The only thing is that the author of this editorial did
not give due credit to the Ambassador of Morocco.
93. The second editorial appears also today in the
New York Daily Ne,+~s, under the title “Israel’s
Cambodia”,
with a photograph of Moshe Dayan, the
henchman of Israel. This is what the editorial says:
“The situation”-says
the writer-“is
a dead
ringer for our Cambodian problem in Southeast
Asia-a problem the USA is trying to solve with
troops dedicated to knocking out Red sanctuaries
inside Cambodia’s borders, then returning promptly
to South Vietnam.

90. In this moment of anxiety and concern for the
Arab peoples-and
indeed for the peoples of the world
at large-I
am sure it will be understood if we plead,
and continue to plead, for usurped Arab rights, and
if we protest against the trespassing of our sovereignties
and at being the victims of aggression. The representa-

Israel mounted
an ambitious
“Yesterday,
‘Cambodia’ operation of its own. Twin spearheads
of 100 Israeli tanks and 1,000 troops stabbed into
southern Lebanon in an effort to clean out Arafat’s
guerrillas or a considerable fraction of them.
10

nravelv concerned about the outcome in Cambodia
rearing that the fall of the new Cambodian rkgime
would encourage the Russians to increase their activity in the Middle East. Time quoted the diplomat
as saying: ‘If the United States lets (Cambodian
Premier) Lon Nol down, the Russians will conclude
that the Americans have gone soft.’ ”

.I
.

.

.

“We’re
for Israel in this set-to, frankly.
And” -the writer goes on to say-“we are waiting
with breathless interest for comments on Israel’s
Cambodia-like
stab into Lebanon from such haters
of the US Cambodia moves as Senator J. K. Javits.
“(‘Would
it not be wonderful’ muses a News
operative out loud, ‘if we could trade Javits for
Dayan?‘)“.

And then what is the conclusion’? That the CIA must
continue its brave and courageous work.
99. Then the same Jewish Telegraphic Agency, on
5 May 1970, reports the views of a sound rabbi bf
the Jewish faith criticizing the Jewish stand on VietNam. This is what is reported:

94. Surely, the only comment that could relevantly
be made here is that Senator Javits, who is opposed
to the Cambodia
operation but supports giving Phantoms and Skyhawks and missiles to Israel to perpetuate
its occupation of Arab territory, suffers-as
some
American intellectuals who write about the security
of nations suffer-from
a case of schizophrenia.

“Rabbi Brickner says the Jewish community
should join others in condemning the Viet-Nam war
. . . An American rabbi castigated the organized Jewish community today for ‘failure to join with others
of the greater society’ in condemning the Viet-Nam
war and its recent expansion by the United States
into Cambodia. Rabbi Brickner, Director of interfaith activities . , . said that the failure of organized
Jewry to participate in the anti-war movement
jeopardizes the credentials of the Jewish community
with its own youth who reject a parochial approach
to the issues of war and peace in the world.”

95. That the situations are analogous and follow the
same pattern is not indeed brought out by the Arabs.
First of all, here we have what the American editorials
of today have written; but there is more than that:
there are Zionists and leaders of the Jewish faith who
themselves have drawn the analogy. May I just take
the liberty of showing you a very unique book, published in the United States after the six-day Israeli
Blif&irg
against the Arabs. It is called The Jewish
Stake i/l T/i&Nan7, It has three authors-Meir
Kahane,
Joseph Churba and Michael King-and,
on the cover,
the flag of Israel and the star of David.

He goes on to say:
“Jews have a tendency to view the world situation
in a myopic way, through the prism of the Israeli
glass.”

96. Naw, this whole book argues that if the Viet Cong
and the North Viet-Namese and the forces working
for liberation in South Viet-Nam reach their goal it
will mean a setback for Israel; and it explains how
General Dayan, before the war, went to South VietNam and actually took part as a paratrooper with the
American
aggressive troops there. The analogy is
accepted even by leaders from Israel itself.

100. This is related, because unfortunately that rabbi
was put in jail in the land which we were told yesterday
was the land of the freedom of speech and the right
of dissent. Needless to say, we deeply regret and
deplore the killing of four American students at Kent
State University.

97. Here is the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, the most
authoritative
source of news about Israel and Zionism,
put out in New York itself by the Jewish Agency for
Israel. This is part and parcel of the Israeli Government, in accordance with the Status Law of 1951 and
is recognized as such by the American Government-a
situation unique of its kind in the whole world: a
Government, half of which exists in Israel and the other
half at 51.5 Park Avenue, New York City, New York.

101. I cannot add anything to the analogy that was
given by the Ambassador of Morocco 11538th meeting]
in his brilliant intervention yesterday, except to carry
it to its logical end. There are similarities. For instance,
the President of the United States tells us that “We
will stay in Cambodia for only thirty days and will
go only thirty miles”. But we know that the flotilla
that went up the Mekong River reached Pnom Penh,
which is sixty miles inside Cambodia, and that American advisers were killed. On the other hand, when
President Thieu of South Viet-Nam was asked about
the operation in Cambodia, he said: “There is no timelimit and no limit to the number of times when we
can attack Cambodia and penetrate into Cambodia.
We will do that as we deem it necessary.” The letter
which you read out today, Mr. President, from Mrs.
Golda Meir, also said the same thing.

98. Here is what the Jewish Telegraphic Agency says,
under the title “Israel reported concerned fall of Cambodian rkgime will encourage Russians in Mideast”.
Everything is always in terms of Russians and in terms
of Americans -as though the Arab peoples do not have
an existence. But we do exist. Here is what is reported
in the 5 May 1970 issue of the Jewish Telegraphic
Agency:

102. I would not enter here into an argument with
the representative of a State that has committed and
is committing international brigandry. But to the representative of the United States, who is the author of

“New York, May 4. Time magazine, in a release
to the news media, reported today that an unnamed
‘high Israeli diplomat’ has ‘hinted’ in a statement
to the magazine that the government of Israel is
11

tion should continue as Israel decides and deems fit,
or whether the time will come for Israel to withdraw
after it has imposed its conditions on the Arab States,
of course, with the help primarily of the United States
and the United Kingdom.

a remarkable book, The Insecurity of Nations, I would
put the views expressed on the responsibility of the
United States as one of the two greatest Powers in
the world only last Sunday, 10 May, by Arnold
Toynbee. We may agree or disagree with Arnold
Toynbee. We may say that he is or is not one of the
greatest living thinkers in the world. But we cannot
disagree with the fact that Arnold Toynbee is undoubtedly one of the leading thinkers of the West, and by
no means a pro-communist writer. This is what was
reported last 10 May. The Nell) York Times put the
question last week to the eminent British historian:
“How does the United States look to the rest of the
world these days?” The following is Arnold Toynbee’s
reply-I
cannot read it all, but I shall read some paragraphs:

105. Now, should Lord Caradon refrain from giving
a direct answer, then I will give the answer. And the
answer is not mine. The statements made by the Prime
Ministers of Israel after the 1967 war, by Deputy Prime
Minister Allon, by Dayan, by Eban and others have
become legend. But directly related to my questions
to Lord Caradon is this latest statement by General
Weizmann, again reported by the Jewish Telegraphic
Agency:
“ ‘There must be no territorial concessions whatever to the Arabs,’ General Ezer Weizmann, Israel’s
Minister of Transport, declared at a United Jewish
Appeal fund-raising dinner here last night. Genera1
Weizmann, former commander of the Israel Air
Force, was named to the Cabinet by the Heirut
faction.”

“To most Europeans, I guess, America now looks
like the most dangerous country in the world. Since
America is unquestionably the most powerful
country, the transformation of America’s image
within the last thirty years is very frightening for
Europeans. It is probably still more frightening for
the great majority of the human race who are neither
Europeans nor North Americans, but are Latin
Americans, Asians and Africans. They, I imagine,
feel even more insecure than we feel. They feel that,
at any moment, America may intervene in their internal affairs with the same appalling consequences as
have followed from American intervention in SouthEast Asia.

I will stop here to explain that Heirut is the party of
Menachem Beigin, the hero of Der Yassin. The article
goes on to say:
“He is not a member of the Knesset. He told
his audience: ‘We must be suffering from some
psychosis to think that we have to give back territory.’ He maintained that ‘Once the ancestralIsrael
is in our hands, any talks with the Arabs must be
centered on Israel’s rights with no territorial concessions.’ General Weizmann, a nephew of the late Dr,
Chaim Weizmann, Israel’s first President, did not
specify what he meant by ‘ancestral Israel’.”

“For the world as a whole, the CIA has now
become the bogey that communism has been for
America.”
And he goes on to say: “Today America has become
the world’s nightmare.”
103. In his ceremonial and sermon-like manner, for
which I have the greatest admiration, Lord Caradon
today lectured us once more about international morality and expressed his regret about the failure of the
Council yesterday to adopt the United States and
United Kingdom amendment for the cessation of all
military activities. I would put the following question
to the sense of fairness of Lord Caradon: Exactly what
is meant by that amendment? If it means that the Arabs
should cease to resist Israeli occupation of Syria, for
instance, then I cannot interpret the words of Lord
Caradon to mean anything other than that the Security
Council should decide that Israel should continue to
occupy the Golan Heights militarily. It also means giving Israel the opportunity not only to occupy Syria,
as it did in 1967, but to attack Lebanon whenever it
deems it necessary.

106. So we are faced with a concept of a State that
has no limits, that knows no boundaries. And this has
been again explained in clearer terms by General Dayan
himself in Le Monde of 9 July 1969:
“People abroad ought to realize that quite apart
from their strategic importance to Israel, Sinai, the
Golan Heights, the Tiran Straits and the hills west
of the Jordan lie at the heart of Jewish history. Nor
has the restoration of historical Israel ended yet.
Since their return to Zion a hundred years ago, a
double process of colonization and expansion of
frontiers has been going on. We have not yet reached
the end of that road. It is the people of Israel who
will determine the frontiers of their own State,”
107. To Lord Caradon I humbly submit that here is
a very clear-cut statement by the Minister of War of
Israel in which he acknowledges that Israel has begun
a double process of colonization and expansion, And
more ominous, not only for the Arabs but for the world
community at large, is his statement: “We have not
yet reached the end of that road. It is the people of
Israel who will determine the frontiers of their own,
State.”

104. MY second point is that Israel interprets the
cease-fire as giving legality to Israeli occupation of
Arab territories in Jordan, the United Arab Republic
and Syria. But the time has come when we have the
right to ask Lord Caradon whether he believes that
the cease-fire does in fact mean the continuation of
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, of three Member
States of the United Nations, and whether that occupa12

/

108. Mr. President, you read to us this morning the
text of a letter that was communicated to you by the
Permanent Representative of Israel embodying a statement made by his Prime Minister, Mrs. Golda Meir.
f think it needs no great elaboration to say that Israel
and Israeli spokesmen do not speak with two tongues,
01‘ three or four. They have many tongues. The New
NEW York Times, which could safely be described as
religiously
Zionist and pro-Israel, commenting on the
attack on Lebanon yesterday, had this to say on its
third page today:

Lebanon-which
might be repeated and will be
repeated-I wish to recall here two resolutions adopted
by the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
One is resolution 2546 (XXIV), adopted on 11
December
1969, which recalls all previous
humanitarian resolutions and goes on to say that the
General Assembly:
“Gravely alarmed by fresh reports of collective
punishments, mass imprisonment,
indiscriminate
destruction of homes and other acts of oppression
against the civilian population in the Arab territories
occupied by Israel,

“Another purpose seems to be to warn the Lebanese Government
that if it fails to act effectively
against the guerrillas, it may be subject to the kind
of rtiing carried out against the frontiers of Jordan
and the United Arab Republic.”

L‘
.

.

.

“Corzdemns such policies and practices as collective and area punishment, the destruction of homes
and the deportation of the inhabitants of the territories occupied by Israel.”

Indeed, Sir, if we read carefully we will find that this
threat, which is spelled out so clearly here, is contained
in the letter that was read to us and which has now
been circulated as a document of the Council [S/9801].

113. The General Assembly, in resolution 2535 B
(XXIV), adopted on 10 December 1969, also placed
a special responsibility on the Security Council with
regard to the very grave situation in the Middle East.
This resolution, in its very brief operative paragraphs,

109. It is now within the context of the obligations
of the Security Council that I shall address myself.
To speak about all the atrocities, the Nazi-like acts
being continuously perpetrated by the Israeli occupying authorities, would take me a long time. They are
described in the letter recently submitted by the representative
of the United Arab Republic concerning
the killing of school children, the letter of the representative of Jordan concerning the massacre of civilians
by Phantoms and Skyhawks and the letter of the representative
of Kuwait containing many photographs
taken on the spot of the Arab civilian victims, including
children and women.

” 1. Reaffirms the inalienable rights of the people
of Palestine;
“2. Draws the attention of the Security Council
to the grave situation resulting from Israeli policies
and practices in the occupied territories and Israel’s
refusal to implement the above resolutions;
“3. Requests the Security Council to take effective measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations to ensure
the implementation of these resolutions.”

110. The list is long and the spectacle of the world
standing paralysed before this exercise in lawlessness,
of arrogant defiance, of reliance upon sheer power,
is to us Arabs both electrifying and tragic. For there
is today, in all of our lands, the inevitable response
to the Zionist occupation and to the Israeli stultification
of world morality and law. Palestine has come full
circle.

114. I submit that this is an opportunity-a
living,
actual and real opportunity-for
the Council to undertake the defence of law, to affirm the rule of law against
the law of the jungle, because if Israel is to be permitted
to continue its cynical behaviour and aggression and
attacks and occupation there will be dire results, not
only for the Arabs, not only for the Middle East but
for the world at large.

111. The Zionist apparatus, in the thirties and the
forties, introduced organized terrorism into Palestine
in an effort to thwart every attempt to install a political
system which would safeguard Arab rights and succeeded in the geopolitical murder of the people and
land of Palestine. Now, the descendants of that Zionism
have impelled the descendants of those victims to the
legitimate
reaction of self-defence against annihilation
and utter genocide. Let it not be forgotten that it is
Israel which is in occupation of our territory. It is Israel
which says unilaterally,
as I have stated here and now,
that it has no intention of withdrawing from it, in spite
of all that we are going to hear from Mr. Tekoah.
It is Israel which says that it wishes to negotiate directly
for peace, but has withdrawn from the agenda all Arab
rights and declared them non-negotiable.

(interpretatiorzfiom French):
115. The PRESIDENT
I call now on the representative of Israel in exercise
of the right of reply.
116. Mr., TEKOAH (Israel): I do not believe that the
long list of quotations and misquotations submitted to
the Council by the representative of Syria deserves
any response.
117. The PRESIDENT (irzterpretationfionz French):
I call on the representative of Syria on a point of order.
118. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The representative of
Israel spoke of “misquotations”
by the representative
of Syria, I immediately challenge him to prove that

112. Coming back to the responsibility of the Council,
to the continued
threats, to the attack on
13

there were any misquotations
Otherwise, he is misleading
the least, lying.

in what I have said today.
the Council and, to say

119. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion.fiom
I call on the representative of Israel.

French):

120. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): I would say that the only
way to test Israel’s intentions regarding State boundaries to be established for the first time between Israel
and the Arab States is by talking peace to Israel, not
by waging war against it. We are ready for that; we
hope some day the Arab Governments will be as well.

outrageous statements of the representative of Israel.
We are discussing Israel’s aggression, and not the
actions of members of the Security Council. The fact
that we have allowed him to speak here does not give
him any right to insult members of the Security Council,
His cynicism oversteps the bounds.
125. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtntionfiom
French):
I would appeal to all members to allow this debate
to continue with all the seriousness and gravity which
the situation calls for. The Council should be able to
form an opinion for itself upon the documents and on
the statements made, and each will obviously draw
the necessary conclusions therefrom.

121. As I listened to the Soviet representative’s words
in this meeting I was reminded of our experience in
Israel with Soviet representatives in 1967. When the
Soviet Union began at that time to spread false rumours
about alleged Israeli troop concentrations on the Syrian
border, the Ambassador of the Soviet Union to Israel
was invited to visit the area and to ascertain for himself
that those rumours were unfounded.
He simply
shrugged his shoulders and replied that he was not
interested. When United Nations military observers
investigated those rumours, checked the situation and
reported to the Security Council that the Soviet allegations about concentrations of Israeli forces were a figment of the imagination, the Soviet Ambassador and
his Government simply refused to give any heed to
this. They continued to spread the falsehoods which,
as the world knows, played a significant role in igniting
the 1967 war. Thus it is today. The Soviet representative is not really interested in the purpose, nature and
scope of Israel’s defensive action against bases of aggression in Lebanese territory. He is not ready even
to accept the fact of Israel’s withdrawal. What he is
obviously interested in is to heap slander on my Government, on other Governments,
and to spur on the
Middle East conflict.

126. The representative

of Israel has the floor.

127. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): There would have been
no Arab design in 1967 to launch the final onslaught
against Israel without Soviet encouragement. There
would have been Arab-Israel peace after 1967 had it
not been for Soviet support for the continuation of
Arab warfare.
128. Today’s intervention by the Soviet representative-the representative of a State which suppresses
the rights of small nations and violates the independence and sovereignty of neighbouring States-is intellectually interesting but not surprising. Soviet intervention has become a permanent and grim factor in the
Middle East conflict, a force for war and not peace,
a force for the pursuance of the Arab war of attrition
against Israel. It is’with Soviet arms that the irregular
forces operating from Lebanese territory have been
attacking and murdering Israeli civilians. Soviet
Katyusha rockets, Soviet Kalashnikov guns are now
directed indiscriminately
against Jews as Hitler’s
blood-stained weapons were in the past.

122. I in fact agree with the Soviet representative
on one point: that pupils frequently
follow their
teachers and mentors. In his unbridled abuse the representative of the Soviet Union has faithfully followed
his Arab mentors-a pity, for Arab falsehoods and passions have never brought any good to their propagators.
Yet the influence between the Soviet Union and the
Arab States is a reciprocal one. Indeed, if the Security
Council were’in need of any further explanation why
the Arab States still pursue war against Israel, why
the Arab States trample the cease-fire into dust and
refuse to make peace with Israel, the statement we
heard today from the Soviet representative has undoubtedly disposed of that need. There, under the garb
of a permanent member of the Security Council
entrusted with the promotion of peace and international
security, sits the principal culprit responsible for
inflaming the Middle East conflict.

129: If the Soviet Union were concerned about the
promotion of peace in the region it would silence the
present expressions of its policy, whether in the Security Council or in the Middle East. It would put an
end to Soviet identification with Arab aggression. It
would arrest its growing military involvement in the
regional conflict. It would begin to work to bring the
parties to peace.
130. One cannot but wonder why members of the
Security Council,
and especially its permanent
members, listen to Soviet warlike diatribes, know of
Soviet aggressive activities and designs in the Middle
East, and continue nevertheless to consort with the
Soviet Union as if it were Red Riding Hood’s grandmother and not the bloodthirsty wolf that it is.
131. Indeed, as things stand now, my delegation submits to the Security Council that if this organ wishes
to address itself seriously and constructively to the
Middle East situation, it would be well advised to summon the Soviet Union to take the seat where it belongs
-the defendant’s bench-and to account for its nefarious and dangerous behaviour in the Middle East.

123, The PRESIDENT
(interpr.ctationfr.orn
&e/z&):
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on
a point of order.
124. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (t/z/z&ted from Russian): I protest against the
14

/
I

I

132. The PRESIDENT
(irzterp~etatiorzfrom
I call on the representative of Lebanon
his right of reply.

French):

139. Mr. Tekoah said yesterday that the armed forces
of his country could not withdraw in daytime. They
were waiting for nightfall. The representative of Syria
yesterday reminded us of the thief who comes at night
and steals away at night. The actions of Israel are
always concocted in darkness and carried out at night.
This morning, in his brilliant speech, Ambassador
Malik of the Soviet Union read to us one of the news
dispatches that said that at 3.30 a.m.-at night-the
Israelis were still bombing Lebanon,

to exercise

133. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I promise to be brief.
I wish only to refer to some points that were raised
in the debate yesterday and today. Naturally, I do not
have a crystal ball to enable me to know what is going
on in the chambers of the Big Four in their consultations
about the Middle East. Naturally,
we were very
interested to hear the statements made around this table
today. Nevertheless, I will not deviate from the main
purpose Of the meeting we have called, which is our
complaint against Israel regarding its aggression against
Lebanon.

140. I confirm to the Council that all night covering
their withdrawal from Lebanon, the Israeli air force
bombed and shelled our military and civilian positions.
A lot of destruction has taken place. The justification
by Israel was that its combing operation, as it was
called today by Mrs. Meir, was directed against the
commando positions in Lebanon, against the Palestinian freedom-fighters and against the members of the
resistance movement of the Palestinian people who
are fighting for their homeland.

134. First of all, I owe it to Lord Caradon, whom
I respect for his sense of fairness and legality, to draw
his attention to one point he made this morning, I am
sure in my heart that’my doubts are probably misplaced, but for the record I should appreciate an explanation and perhaps a correction of my misapprehension.

141. Even the fabrications that Mr. Tekoah gave us
yesterday showed how meagre and fallacious were his
pretexts. He pretended-I
have nothing to confirm
this-that five fedayeen were killed and six taken prisoner, and that thirty-seven Lebanese houses were
destroyed. A few cars also were destroyed. An invading army, with a whole armoured brigade comprising
hundreds of tanks and armoured cars and thousands
of soldiers-not
one thousand-participated
in that
assault against Lebanon. What for? To destroy thirtyseven houses, kill five fedayeen and take six prisoners.
What irony, what cynicism. But that is in line with
the official policy of Israel.

135. Beginning his remarks, Lofd Caradon welcomed
the report that was read to us by the Secretary of
the Security Council on your behalf, Mr. President.
That report contained a message from the Prime Minister of Israel covering many points. I am inquiring only
whether Lord Caradon really welcomes that report in
toto or only some parts of it, as I assume he does.
Perhaps he welcomes the fact that the resolution that
was unanimously
adopted by the Council yesterday
was carried out today by Israel.
136. Another point is the fact that the representative
of Israel yesterday accused me of debasing my arguments by pretending that I do not know the facts and
saying that the Lebanese army was engaged with the
Israeli army whereas the Lebanese army knows the
facts better.

142. Mr. Tekoah was just reminding us of Hitler. I
should like to remind him that the Israeli racists and
militarists appear very much to be aping the methods
employed by the Nazis during the last world war. I
should like to quote from a message that was sent
by the late Lord Bertrand Russell on 31 January to
a parliamentarian conference in Cairo, just a few days
before his death. It was in a way his testament. He
said, among other things:

137. I am glad to tell you that I fully agree with Mr.
Tekoah that the Lebanese army knows the facts better
because the Lebanese army knows that seven of its
valiant soldiers have met their death fighting against
the aggressor. Eight soldiers were wounded. The
Lebanese positions were shelled continuously from the
beginning of the invasion until its termination.

“We are frequently told that we must sympathize
with Israel because of the suffering of the Jews in
Europe at the hands of the Nazis. I see in this suggestion no reason to perpetuate any suffering. What
Israel is doing today cannot be condoned, and to
invoke the horrors of the past to justify those of
the present is gross hypocrisy.”

138. I feel sorry for Mr. Tekoah, because he may
have been led into the wilderness of distortion by his
own military superiors, the hawks of Israel. On one
point I should like to say that the niilitary authorities
of Israel certainly also know the facts better than Mr.
Tekoah, for they even know exactly how many shells
they have poured into the lines of the Lebanese army.
Israel’s intention was to drive a wedge between the
Lebanese army and our Palestinian brothers. That has
failed lamentably. Israel wanted to create turmoil, trouble and division in Lebanon. That design also has
failed, because the people of Lebanon has never shown
such unity and solidarity as during the last forty hours
in the face of danger, in the face of Israeli aggression.

143. That line, as I said, is the official policy of the
today
Israeli military hawks. We all know-and
Ambassador Tomeh reminded us of them-of
the
General Assembly resolutions regarding the area and
the mad neighbourhood destruction there, a POliCY followed by General Dayan. This policy was condemned
by a resolution of the Security Council 1.70 i1969)].
It was most recently condemned by a resolution of
the Commission on Human Rights.’ The collective
3 Officio/

&/Jr/f

15

Records

Session,

of the

Supplernenl

01ld Social Cmwil,
5, resolution
10 (XXVI)-

fkotl~17U~
NO.

Forty-

sonal self-discipline, in order to ensure the effective
work of the Council.
149. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Socialist Republics)
(translatedfiom Russian): Mr. President, I shall bear
in mind your wish that we be as brief as possible and
would lay special stress on that part of your comment.

punishment applied in the territories occupied by the
Israel military in Palestine, in the Golan Heights, in
Gaza and in Sinai has been carried a step further from
the occupied territories to territories of sovereign
neighbouring States. There are mass murders of the
civilian population in chosen regions in order to make
sure that nothing interferes with the Israeli sanctuaries
in the occupied Arab territories. This line also involves
the kidnapping of innocent civilians who are summarily
accused, taken back to Israel and tortured or executed.
It involves the destruction of houses and of innocent
villages; it involves wanton air attacks on civilian
centres, resulting in the killing, wounding and kidnapping of innocent people, in the destruction of civilian
installations and the burning of crops. TheIsraelis have
been shooting in all directions while cynically trying
to convince the world that they are for peace.

150. My distinguished
friend and colleague, the
Ambassador of Syria, has called the representative of
Israel a liar. He apparently knows him better than I
do. But having heard his statement, I am inclined to
agree with that assessment. The representative of
Israel has piled up such an unimaginable
heap of
slander, insinuations and fictitious charges against the
Soviet Union that I regard it as beneath my dignity
to answer it all. This has become a habit of his, and
I will not pay any attention to it, as I consider it beneath
my dignity.

144. We have just heard from Mr. Tekoah that he
invites us to test Israel’s desire for peace. Israel has
been tested many times. It is occupying the territories
of three Arab States. The Israeli concept of peace-better called Pax Israel-has
now been extended into
Lebanon by overt aggression and military conquest.

15 1. I will simply give some information to the Security Council. Firstly, the warning which the Soviet
Union and the Soviet Government gave of the impending threat of Israeli aggression against Arab countries
in 1967 was confirmed: the act of aggression was committed and to this day the aggressor has been hindering
a peaceful settlement. This is a historical fact, a?d
no inventions by the Israeli representative here wrll
help him to escape that fact.
152. Israel has many times sat on the defendant’s
bench here in the Security Council. It has also been
condemned many times. It is a criminal that has committed a crime against the peace and security of mankind. Israel has twice been condemned for attacking
Lebanon alone. Therefore, when the convict tries to
slander others, no trust can be placed in what he, the
criminal, says.

145. In a long series of letters to the President of
the Security Council and to the Secretary-General, the
Lebanese Government brought to their attention the
wanton Israeli attacks against our towns and villages
and all the victims and damages we have suffered.
Prior to the last events, from the beginning of 1969
to the middle of March 1970, sixteen Lebanese civilians
were killed, thirty-nine wounded and forty-three kidnapped as a result of these attacks and Israeli incursions
into our territories, in flagrant violation of the IsraelLebanese Armistice Agreement, the United Nations
Charter and the principles of international morality and
law.
146.

153. Mention was made of the Soviet Union’s
assistance to Arab countries. Yes, we are helping. We
are helping with arms, we are helping with appropriate
facilities, we are helping with military advisers. We
do not hide it. We are proud of it. We are helping
the victim of aggression and not the aggressor. We
are grateful to the people of the United States for the
fact that, when we, the Soviet people, the Soviet
Union, were the victims of aggression, they helped
us, during the Second World War. We are grateful
for that; international
law permits the granting of
assistance to the victim of aggression, not to the
aggressor.
154. I quite understand that Israel and its representative here are very pleased when the United States gives
them a $100 million loan for continuing the aggression,
modern weapons, Phantom jets and so on. But here
is the logic of the aggressor: if the aggressor obtains
a loan of $100 million, an influx of arms and promises
of an endless arms supply, that is for the cause of
peace. If, on the other hand, help is given to the victim
of aggression, that is against peace, If the Soviet Union
insists that, in accordance with resolution 242 (1967),
not one inch of Arab soil, not one inch of the territory
of the victims of aggression, should be handed over
to the aggressor, that is said to be against peace and
obstructing a peaceful settlement,

Those are my comments.

147. I revert now to a point which is very important
to us-1 know it is dear to the heart of Lord
Caradon-that
is, the celebration of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, Mr. Tekoah has
proposed that Israel’s desire for peace should be tested,
I think the Security Council should take a measure
to participate in the celebration of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations. It could adopt a
very simple
resolution
whereby
the Council
rededicates itself to the principles and provisions of
the Charter and declares that in commemoration
of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
forthwith no territory of any Member State of the
United Nations should be occupied by a foreign-mi]itary Power.
148. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntionfiom French):
I have three speakers who have asked to be allowed
to exercise their rights of reply: the representative of
the Soviet Union, the representative of the ‘United
Kingdom and the representative of Israel. Obviously,
I intend scrupulously to abide by the concept of the
right of reply, but I would appeal to all our colleagues
that these replies be limited as far as possible by per16

155. If, on the other hand, the participants in the
four-Power consultations support Israel’s claims to
Jerusalem, to Gaza, to Bethlehem, to the Golan Heights
and to many other Arab territories, that is furthering
a peaceful settlement. This is Israel’s logic, the logic
of the aggressor. But who here, in the Security Council,
or in the entire world, can agree with this kind of logic?
If the Soviet Union demands and insists on the basis
of resolution 242 (1967) that all Israel’s troops should
be withdrawn from Lebanese territory, that is a hindrance to a peaceful settlement. If the representatives
of the United States and the United Kingdom, while
speaking of troop withdrawals, have in fact insisted
for more than a year that the borders should be altered
to the aggressor’s advantage, that is furthering a peaceful settlement. It is a blessing, from the aggressor’s
standpoint, It is a curse for the victims of the aggression.
156. In accordance with international law, we are in
favour of assisting the victims of aggression and against
assisting the aggressor. If the Soviet Union demands
that Israeli troops should be withdrawn behind the line
of 5 June, that means that the Soviet Union is standing
in the way of a peaceful settlement. If others support
the aggressor’s territorial claims and desire to hold
on to a considerable part of Arab territory, that is furthering a peaceful settlement. Such is the logic of aggression and the logic of the aggressor, and the logic
of those who support and protect the aggressor.
157. Yesterday and today the Israeli representative
has maintained that his country and his Government
desire peace. If that is so, then let him state that Israel
fully accepts resolution 242 (1967) and all its provisions
and articles and is prepared to implement it, that Israel
is prepared to withdraw all its occupation troops from
all Arab territory behind the line which existed until
5 June and that Israel agrees to renounce all its claims
to any part of occupied Arab territory. Then the whole
world and the Security Council will believe that Israel
wants peace and a peaceful settlement. To date, in
the period of nearly three years following the Israeli
aggression of June 1967, the world has heard no such
statements. If the Israeli representative makes these
statements, the world will believe that Israel wants
peace. We are waiting for such statements.
158, Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom): I wish to
reply to two questions that were put to me-first to
that put by the Ambassador of Lebanon.
159. I am glad to confirm that when I said we welcomed the news which we had received at the beginning
of our meeting, I was welcoming the fact that the withdrawal of Israeli troops, in accordance with the demand
of the Council unanimously made yesterday, had been
completed. That was the welcome which I extended
as we started our deliberations today.
160. I was also asked, by Ambassador Tomeh, about
the position of my Government in regard to the question
of withdrawal. The question of withdrawal and the
goals we wish to achieve have been set out in the
resolution, of which we all know the terms. Iri addition

to that, we have, as I have reported, put forward our
amplification of those proposals in the meetings of the
Four. That was the right place to do it; it was the
right way to proceed. We have stated our position,
and we stand by it. There is no question whatsoever
of going back on the public efforts we have undertaken,
and no question of going back on the proposals which
we have set out. If the representative of the Soviet
Union suggests that my country supports the acquisition of territory by war, then I can only say that that
is a gross distortion.
161. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretatiojzfionz
I call on the representative of Israel,

French):

162. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Soviet representative has just repeated the terms “aggresssion” and
“aggressor” in almost each one of his sentences. I
confess, I cannot claim as much expertise as he and
his Government have on aggression. As for the application of those terms to others, the Security Council’s
categorical rejection yesterday of the Soviet attempt
to attach the description of aggression to Israel’s defensive action in Lebanon was a telling response to the
Soviet representative’s abuse, as indeed was the failure
of a similar attempt in June 1967.
163. I fail to understand why the representative of
Lebanon should insist on alleging that the Israeli action
yesterday was directed not against the bases of the
terror organizations but against the Lebanese army.
We all recall that at the opening of yesterday morning’s
meeting the Secretary-General
stated-and I quote
from the verbatim record:
“The Acting Chairman of the Mixed Armistice
Commission has also reported to the Acting Chief
of Staff information given to him by a Lebanese representative to the Israei-Lebanon Mixed Armistice
Commission who had gone to the border point of
Rosh Hanikra for a telephone conversation with the
senior Israeli representative. According to this information, the senior Israeli representative stated that
the present action going on in the El Arkoub area,
east of the Hasbani River, was aimed only at the
destruction of fedayeen commandos, and that it was
not the intention of Israeli troops to act against the
Lebanese army or population provided that the
Lebanese army and population did not support the
*fedayeen.” [1537th tneetirzg, para. 6.1
164. In the meantime, reports from Arab sources have
confirmed that the Israeli defensive action was directed
solely against irregular forces which have turned
Lebanese soil into a springboard for armed attacks
against Israeli towns and villages and their civilian
population. In this morning’s w/nshingrorz Post, for
instance, we read a report from Lebanon, from Beaufort Castle:
“A high ridge of Mount Hermon was repeatedly
pounded by artillery. ‘Those are Israeli guns trying
to hit a guerrilla base,’ said a Lebanese soldier at
geaufort Castle, which has the dual role of tourist
site and army lookout post.”

‘II

165. The same report goes on to quote an El-Fatah
spokesman
as having said that the commandos had
engaged the Israelis in bitter hand-to-hand combat and
recaptured a guerrilla defensive position that had been
taken by the Israelis at noon.
166. Similar reports have been published by other
information
media. For instance, the Arab Middle East
News Agency reported yesterday: “Lebanese sources
are saying that the Israeli forces enveloped the
fedayeen in the village of Rashiya El-Fahar.”
167. The Middle East conflict is sufficiently complex
without its being further complicated by distortions,
exaggerations
and fantasies.
168. Mr. TOMEH
(Syria): I wish very briefly at this
late hour to thank the representative of the United
Kingdom,
Lord Caradon, for the answers he has given
to my questions.
However, I consider that those
answers are, if I may say so, incomplete
and
inadequate.
In view of the lateness of the hour and
of the grave legal implications contained in this question, I will refrain now from imposing on the Council
by expounding
any further to prove the inadequacy
of the answers given me by Lord Caradon-answers
for which I am grateful-and
I would go on to say
that during the last deliberations of the Security Council
on the question of Southern Rhodesia I had occasion
to quote a book of Lord Caradon’s, entitled A Start
in Freedom. For once in the five years that we had
been together in this Council I drew praise from Lord
Caradonthis
is on record-for my fine taste in excellent literature.
169. The history of England is rich in lords who are
at the same time poets, and only two days ago-on
Monday
afternoon-we
heard a poem by Lord
Caradon. While I praise his prose, unfortunately I cannot say that I have the same admiration for his verse.
However, I would recall that in the tradition of England, there is another great lord who was a poet, Lord
Byron, who indeed gave his life for the cause of the
freedom of a people. I hope that this may give inspiration for some better poetry by Lord Caradon.

Litha

in United

Nations.

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

I .OO (or equivalent

170. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom Fre&):
I certainly would not wish the death of Lord Caradon,
even in the cause of freedom.
171. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I am taking the floor
again since Lord Caradon has made a serious charge
against me. He said that I was incorrectly interpreting
his position and the position of the country he represents concerning the inadmissibility
of the acquisition
of foreign territory by the use of force. Although he
said he acknowledges this principle, he still did not
answer my direct question: Are the United Kingdom
and Lord Caradon in favour of the complete withdrawal
of all Israeli troops from all occupied Arab territories
behind the line which existed before 5 June? He beat
about the bush but gave no straight answer. ,From this
I conclude that he supports the position of the United
States and Mr. Yost that this line should be altered
to the aggressor’s advantage and that part of the Arab
territory should be transferred to or left in the hands
of the aggressor. If I am wrong, if I am misinterpreting
the position of, the United States and the United
Kingdom, then I ask them to make it clear that they
agree with the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of
foreign territory by the use of force, that they are in
favour of the withdrawal of all Israeli troops from the
occupied territory behind the line which existed before
5 June and that they wish that line to be recognized
as the border of Israel. Only direct answers to these
direct questions will show the Security Council that
I am incorrectly interpreting the position of the United
Kingdom and the United States. Thank you.

172. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I shall be
very brief. I can only advise the Ambassador of the
Soviet Union first of all to read Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and then to read his record of the discussions in the Four. From reading these two documents
he will have an ample reply to his question.
The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.

in other

currencies)
