Resolutiow adopted on the reports of the Thfrd Committee

Article 7
1. Everyone has the right to equality before the
law and to equal justice under the law. Everyone, without distinction as to race, colour or ethnic origin, has
the right to security of person and protection by the
State against violence or bodily harm, whether inflicted
by government officials or by any individual, group or
institution.
2. Everyone shall have the right to an effective
remedy and protection against any discrimination he
may suffer on the ground of race, colour or ethnic
origin with respect to his fundamental rights and freedoms through independent national tribunals competent
to deal with such matters.
Article 8
All effective steps shall be taken immediately in the
fields of teaching, education and information, with a
view to eliminating racial discrimination and prejudice
and promoting understanding, tolerance and friendship
among nations and racial groups, as well as to propagating the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and of the Declaration on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples.
Article 9
1. All propaganda and organizations based on ideas
or theories of the superiority of one race or group of
persons of one colour or ethnic origin with a view to
justifying or promoting racial discrimination in any
form shall be severely condemned.
2. All incitement to or acts of violence, whether by
individuals or organizations, against any race or group
of persons of another colour or ethnic origin shall be
considered an offence against society and punishable
under law.
3. In order to put into effect the purposes and principles of the present Declaration, all States shall take
immediate and positive measures, including legislative
and other measures, to prosecute and/or outlaw organizations which promote or incite to racial discrimination,
or incite to or use violence for purposes of discrimination
based on race, colour or ethnic origin.
Article 10
The United Nations, the specialized agencies, States
and non-governmental organizations shall do all in their
power to promote energetic action which, by combining
legal and other practical measures, will make possible
the abolition of all forms of racial discrimination. They
shall, in particular, study the causes of such discrimination with a view to recommending appropriate and effective measures to combat and eliminate it.
Article 11
Every State shall promote respect for and observance
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and shall
fully and faithfully observe the provisions of the present
Declaration, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Declaration on the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples.
1261st plenary meeting,
20 November 1963.

37

1905 (XVIII). Publicity to he given to the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly.
Considering that the United Nations Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination1
provides that the United Nations, the specialized aget}cies, States and non-governmental organizations should
do all in their power to ensure the abolition of all forms
of discrimination based on race, colour or ethnic origin,
Considering the great importance of the speedy implementation of that Declaration in order to liquidate
all forms of racial discrimination ;1s soon as possible,
Considering it essential that, as a step towards the
elimination of all forms ,A racial discrimination, the
Declaration should be made known throughout the
world,
I. Requf'sts that all States shall undertake all necessary measures in order to implement fully, faithfully
and without delay the principles contained in the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination ;
2. Requests the Governments of States and nongovernmental organizations to publicize the text of the
Declaration as widely as possible, using every means
at their disposal, including all the appropriate media
of communication ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies to ensure the immediate and larg~-scale circulation of the Declaration, and to that end to publish
and distribute texts in all languages possible;
4. Im,ites the Governments of Member States, the
specialized agencies and the non-governmental organizations concerned to inform the Secretary-General of
action taken by them in compliance with the Declaration,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on this matter, which will be considered by the General
Assembly at its nineteenth session as a separate agenda
item.
1261st plenary meeting,
20 November 1963.
1906 (XVID). Preparation of a draft international convention on the elimination of
all forms of racial ·discrimination

The General Assembly,
Having adopted the United Nations Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,1
Considering that that Dei:-lardtion is an important step
towards the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination,
Deeply disturbed by the manifestations of discrimination L:ised on differences of race, colour or ethnic origin
still in evidence throughout the world,
Convinccd thcrcfore of the necessity of taking further
action towards the elimination of racial discrimination,
Emphasi:::ing in this connexion the importance of the
speedy preparatiou and adoption of an international
convention on the eli1uirn1tion of all forms of racial discrimination. ;;s envisaged in General Assembly resolution 1780 (XVII) of 7 December 1962,
l. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission vn Human Rights, bearing in
mind the views of the Sub-Commission on Prevention
1 See

resolution 1904 (XVIII), p. 35.

38

General Assembly-Eighteenth Se111lon

- - - - - - ~ - - - , - • - - - - • - - - - - - -

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _v _ _ _ _

of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the
debates at the seventeenth and eighteenth sessions of
the General Assembly, any proposals on this matter
that may be submitted by the Governments of Member
States and any international instruments already adopted
in this field, to give absolute priority to the preparation
· of a draft international convention on the elimination
of all forms of racial discrimination, to be submitted to
the Assembly for consideration at its nineteenth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
provisional agenda of the nineteenth session of the
General Assembly an item entitled "Draft International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination".
1261st plenary meeting,
20 November 1963.

1915 (XVIll). Community action
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 390 D (XIII) of 9 August 1951 which suggests
that Member States should provide assistance to other
countries in the field of community development Council resolution 585 C (XX) of 23 July 1955 ancl' resolution 975 E (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963 referring to
programmes of community development, as well as
General Assembly resolution 1708 (XVI) of 19 December 1961,
Taking into account the fact that community action
has been a method traditionally used in many countries,
and more especially in the developing countries, to carry
out schemes of economic and social value,
Considering that community development is particularly appropriate for areas, both rural and urban, where
a large proportion of the population is marginally employed and therefore represents a considerable potential
resource for economic and social development,
Recognizing that community action is especially valuable for the carrying out of land reform since in
addition to contributing directly to the formatio~ of
an economic and social infra-structure, it facilitates the
spread of agricultural knowledge and techniques and
the establishment of co-operatives, and that there is a
close interrelationship between land reform and community action,
Taking into account the fact that community action
can be a method of ensuring sustained and systematic
effort towards economic and social development producing excellent and positive results,
. Considerin~ t~at community action, incorporating as
1t does the pnnc1ples of self-help and mutual assistance,
constitutes one of the most direct, rapid and efficient
methods of channelling the unco-ordinated efforts of
members of the community into projects of benefit to
it and to the nation -as- a whole,
Realizing that the necessary willingness of members
of the community to take an active part in schemes
?£ common interest is often frustrated or hampered and,
m some cases, wasted for lack of sustained and effective
support in the form of financial and technical aid and
supply of material and equipment,
Observing that the e~ects of community action promote not only economic development but also social
solidarity, national integration and cultural development,
Recognizing the importance of the activities which
the United Nations and the specialized agencies are
carrying out in community development .and of the

assistance which they are rendering to member countries
in that field,
l. Affirms that community action is a valuable and
effective instrument for aci1ieving economic and social
development ;
2. Invites Member States to make the fullest and
best possible use of community action in their efforts
to 1-,romote economic and social development, especially
in sectors where there is a marginally employed population and in co-ordination with land reform;
.
3 Requests the Secretary-General, when establishing
th: activities of the Economic Projections and Programmmg Centre, to suggest the desirability of including
community action in the formulation of plans and program~es of economic development for the developing
countnes;
4. (?-equests the Secretary-General to give special
attention to the present and possible future contribution
of community action towards the attainment of the
objectives of the United Nations Development Decade
and to prepare regular reports on the progress of community action in the developing countries, with special
reference to the exchange of information on experience
and met~ods ~n connexion with the various types of
commumty action ;
5. _Recommends the Member States, the specialized
agenc~es and other int~i:national bodies to give special
attent10n to the prov1s1on of technical and financial
assistance to those countries which request it for the
purpose of planning and executing economic and social
development schemes, especially in c::onnexion with land
reform, that make use of community action;
6._ Requests the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance, the Special Fund and other international
agencies providing technical and financial assistance to
help Governments in preparing community development
programmes as part of their national development-including projects for the establishment of rural centres
to supply tools and equipment, to carry out research
and provide training-in order to make programmes of
community action as effective as possible.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

1916 (XVID). World social situation
The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the Report on the
World Social Situation, 1963,2 of the comments thereon
by the Economic and Social Council and of Council
resolution 975 B (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963,
Noting the unsatisfactory progress made during the
last d~cade in raising levels of living in areas where the
~eed 1s greatest, and the continuing vast disparities in
mcome both nationally and internationally,
Cons_idering ~hat, in order to fulfil the objectives of
the Umted Nat10ns Development Decade and to achieve
satisfactory social progress, the carrying out of social
programmes _should be accelerated and should complement economic programmes within an integrated socioeconomic development,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
916_ (XXXIV) of 3 August 1962 and 984 (XXXVI),
section I, of 2 August 1963, and looking forward to the
Secretary-General's report on the progress of the
Decade called for under these resolutions,
2 United

Nations publication, Sales No.: 63.IV.4.
