S/PV.7482

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7482nd meeting

Thursday, 9 July 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Bohemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Electoral Observation
Mission in Burundi (S/2015/510)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-21348 (E)
*1521348*

S/PV.7482

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

and information suffered increasing restrictions during
the campaign period and as election day grew nearer.
MENUB observers were present in all 18 provinces,
covering 50 of the 119 municipalities, and carried out
observations in 145 polling stations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Electoral Observation Mission
in Burundi (S/2015/510)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; and Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al Hussein, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Al
Hussein, who is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/510, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Electoral
Observation Mission in Burundi.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I have the pleasure to brief
the Security Council on the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2015/510) on the United Nations Electoral
Observation Mission in Burundi (MENUB). The report
provides an overview of the electoral process and the
political and security situations up to the holding of the
legislative and communal elections on 29 June. It also
highlights the activities of MENUB and other United
Nations entities working on Burundi.
As the Security Council is well aware, on
2 July MENUB issued a preliminary statement on
the pre-electoral environment and the holding of
the legislative and communal elections on 29 June.
MENUB assessed that the legislative and communal
electoral processes took place against the background of
a political crisis and in a climate of widespread fear and
intimidation in parts of the country. The fundamental
freedoms of participation, assembly, expression, opinion
2/9

09/07/2015

While MENUB assessed that the Independent
National Electoral Commission adequately handled
the voter registration and the nomination of
candidates, opposition parties repeatedly accused the
electoral management body of lacking credibility and
independence. Preparations and arrangements made by
the Electoral Commission for election day was largely
sufficient, and polling activities took place regularly
in the observed polling stations. Nationwide, many
Burundians went to the polls to cast their votes for
the candidates of their choice. However, instances of
violence and explosions preceded and in some cases
took place alongside election activities, mostly in
Bujumbura.
In view of its findings, MENUB concluded that
the environment was not conducive to free, credible
and inclusive elections. The African Union, the East
African Community (EAC) and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region expressed
similar concerns. On 2 July, the Government of
Burundi issued a statement in which it emphasized that
the communal and legislative elections were conducted
in a peaceful, calm and secure environment with a
“massive” turnout of voters, and that the participation
was free, despite planned efforts by some to undermine
the voting process. The following day, the President
of the Electoral Commission accused MENUB of
observing the elections with “remote-controlled
glasses”. Some opposition political parties and civil
society organizations, notably those opposed to a third
term for President Nkurunziza, called the elections a
sham and declared that they would not recognize the
results.
Following the 29 June election, MENUB has
closely monitored the poll counting and announcement
of results in various provinces. According to the
Electoral Commission, the preliminary results of
the election showed that the Conseil national pour la
défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la
démocratie (CNDD-FDD) received 60.2 per cent, which
corresponds to 77 parliamentary seats, and a coalition
of independents led by Agathon Rwasa and Charles
Nditije received 11.16 per cent of the votes, which
account for 21 seats. The official wing of the Union

15-21348

09/07/2015

The situation in Burundi

pour le progrès national (UPRONA), which is affiliated
with the Government, received 2.49 per cent of the
votes, which corresponds to two seats in Parliament.
The Electoral Commission Chairperson reported on
overall voter turnout as 74.3 per cent, with a much
smaller turnout of 28 per cent in Bujumbura Mairie.
In line with the power-sharing arrangements enshrined
in the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi and the Constitution of Burundi, the Electoral
Commission intends to assign 21 more seats to meet the
requirements of 30 per cent women representation and
to balance Hutu, Tutsi and Batwa seats. The results, as I
mentioned, have been rejected by the opposition.
Preparations for the presidential election are
ongoing. Ballot papers have been printed with all eight
candidates approved by the Electoral Commission,
including those who have announced they would
boycott the election. The distribution of material
to different parts of the country has started. Four
presidential candidates have launched their campaigns,
namely, CNDD-FDD, the Coalition for Peace in Africa,
UPRONA and the Forces nationales de libération. The
remaining four candidates have not launched their
campaigns and belong to political parties and coalitions
that have announced their intentions to boycott the
polls.
The political and security situations in Burundi
have remained tense and volatile since the holding of
the legislative and communal elections. The killing
of a police officer on 1 July by unidentified armed
men sparked a new wave of violence and clashes
between the police and residents of the neighbourhood
of Cibitoke and Mutakura in Bujumbura. Police
raided the area to carry out house-to-house searches,
reportedly to disarm the population, which resulted in
the killing of five civilians. The police operation took
place while Burundi was commemorating its fiftythird anniversary of independence. In a further sign
of potential escalation, one of the leaders of the failed
coup recently claimed on a Kenyan television channel
that his group was responsible for the wave of grenade
attacks and security incidents in Burundi, and vowed to
continue to use violence to overthrow the Government.
Since the suspension of the political dialogue led
by the joint international facilitation team on 26 June,
there has not been any formal forum for dialogue
among Burundian stakeholders. However, some
States members of the East African Community have
continued to consult the parties following the decision

S/PV.7482

of the Community on the proposal of its Summit on the
formation of a Government of national unity.
The East African Community held its third
Emergency Summit on 6 July in Dar es Salaam. In
its communiqué, the Summit implicitly recognizes
the shortcomings identified by the two previous EAC
summits and adopted, among others, the following
decisions: first, the postponement of the presidential
elections to 30 July; secondly, the appointment of
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda as facilitator
of the dialogue among the parties in Burundi; thirdly,
the formation of a Government of national unity,
involving both those who participated in the elections
and those who did not; fourthly, the deployment of an
East African Community election observer mission
to observe the presidential elections; fifthly, the
disarmament of the Imbonerakure and other armed
groups and youth groups allied with political parties;
and lastly, the deployment of military observers to
oversee the disarmament process. So far, the reaction
in Burundi has been relatively muted. The Government
of Burundi has indicated that it would consider the
recommendations, while some opposition members
have expressed disappointment that the communiqué
did not go far enough.
The Security Council has followed the situation
in Burundi for many years through different
reincarnations of the United Nations presence that have
been dispatched to help implement the 2000 Arusha
Agreement and to help consolidate peace and security
in Burundi.
It is regrettable that the hard-won progress achieved
by Burundians is in serious danger of slipping away. As
the Secretary-General indicates in the report before the
Council, Burundi is once again on the brink. The grave
danger the country faces should not be underestimated,
given the increasing polarization and the apparent
choice of Burundian leaders to put personal interests
before those of the country.
The East African Community summit communiqué
provides a clear path forward. The United Nations
remains ready to provide whatever support is needed.
Burundian actors must accept that political dialogue
and compromise is the only way out of the impending
downward spiral. They must act responsibly. The
Government, first and foremost, has the responsibility
to protect all Burundian citizens and their fundamental
rights. The opposition, for its part, also needs to disavow
the use of violence and agree to enter into political

15-213483/9

S/PV.7482

The situation in Burundi

dialogue with the Government. Time is running out,
and the Burundian leaders should do all they can to
safeguard the hard-won peace and the letter and spirit
of the Arusha Agreement.
The President: I thank Mr. Zerihoun for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.
Mr. Al Hussein: I thank the Council for giving
me this opportunity to voice my concern about the
deterioration of the human rights situation in Burundi.
An escalating pattern of politically motivated violence,
coupled with the country’s history of recurring
bloodshed and atrocities, should alert us to the potential
for serious crisis. Already, more than 145,000 people
have fled to neighbouring countries, and this movement
has increased drastically in recent days. As they pack
the few belongings they can carry and abandon their
lands and homes, what the people of Burundi are
telling us is that they fear their country is on the brink
of devastating violence. The risk to human life and to
regional stability and development is high.
The crisis arising from President Pierre
Nkurunziza’s decision to run for a third term of office
has undermined a decade of steady progress in building
democratic institutions and the precious gains achieved
in the sense of a common national community. In the
past six months, members of opposition parties, civil
society activists and media figures who called for the
President to respect the Arusha Agreement and the
Constitution by standing down after 10 years in office
have been targeted for intimidation, severe harassment
and arbitrary detention. Peaceful protests have been met
with unwarranted use of force, including lethal force,
in violation of Burundi’s obligation under national and
international law to guarantee the right to freedom of
assembly. Demonstrators have been imprisoned and
subjected to torture and ill-treatment. We have also
received reports of extrajudicial killings. To date, these
violations have not been investigated, prosecuted or
sanctioned.
Apparently determined to ignore every warning
signal, the Government pushed through parliamentary
and local elections on 29 June, despite pleas by the
Secretary-General, the East African Community, the
African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and multiple other international
actors, including the most recent international team of
facilitators, for a delay to allow space for dialogue and

4/9

09/07/2015

inclusion. The elections were boycotted by opposition
parties and took place in an atmosphere that was far
from conducive to a free, fair and inclusive vote. There
have been outbreaks of violence, including small
arms and grenade attacks, and tension is palpable.
Burundians appear to be braced for an explosion of the
murderous violence, which has so frequently engulfed
the country.
I travelled to Burundi in April and met with the
President and top officials of the Government, the
Constitutional Court and other key bodies. I noted then
the widespread and alarming violence attributed to the
Imbonerakure militia, which has been linked to the
President’s political party. Immediate action must be
taken to curtail those assaults and to stem incitement to
violence and hatred. In line with the recommendation
made during the third emergency summit of Heads of
State of the East African Community on the situation
in Burundi, I urge the Government to disarm the
Imbonerakure militia immediately. All political parties,
the President of the Republic, the police and the military
should place the well-being of their country above their
own political ambitions and interests and take the path
of peace and rule of law.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights field office — which
we have reinforced — has documented dozens of
killings in the past two months, most of them shootings
of demonstrators and human rights defenders by
members of the Imbonerakure militia and security
forces. I draw the Council’s attention in particular to
the assassination, on 26 May, of Zedi Feruzi, a vocal
opposition leader who opposed a third term for the
President, and to the attempted assassination of the wife
of Agathon Rwasa, another leading political opponent.
Some security personnel and Imbonerakure militia
members have also been killed.
Contrary to some recent reports, the massive
outflows of refugees appear to have been sparked not
by rumour but by precise and targeted campaigns of
intimidation and terror. Refugees interviewed by my
Office in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda
and Tanzania continue to refer to the Imbonerakure
militia as the main threat, but some have also stated
that militants from other groups are also employing
violence — a new and disturbing development.
My Office has also documented over 300 cases of
arbitrary arrest and detention of demonstrators, human
rights defenders, political opponents and journalists,
15-21348

09/07/2015

The situation in Burundi

some of whom have since been released. We have
noted numerous cases of torture and other forms
of ill-treatment in detention. A severe crackdown
on independent media has led to the closure of most
private media and radio stations, with some being
burned down. Large numbers of journalists have fled
Burundi for fear of reprisals, as have many human rights
defenders. Recently we have also seen key members of
the President’s own political party and Government
fleeing the country.
Frequent grenade attacks in public neighbourhoods
and a campaign of intimidation of ordinary people
by Imbonerakure militia members have created an
atmosphere that is grim with fear and panic. Many
hard-won gains in inclusive services, institutions
and freedoms for the public are also breaking down.
Numerous schools have closed, and, in any case, lack
of security prevents schoolchildren from attending.
The humanitarian impact of the crisis now includes a
cholera outbreak among refugees in Tanzania.
Since the 1960s, repeated cycles of uncontrollable
violence have devastated Burundi. Although all the
country’s communities speak the same language and
have for centuries lived together in the same hills and
communes, these recurring spasms have, in recent
decades, laid down a pattern of mistrust, bitterness
and pre-emptive violence. In a concerted effort to
rebuild social institutions that can effectively mediate
differences and address grievances, the international
community and regional and national actors came
together in Arusha 15 years ago to rebuild an architecture
of sustainable peace, with emphasis on the rule of law,
observance of human rights, access to effective judicial
and other institutions, and participatory democratic
governance. Slowly, the country has inched back
to greater confidence, more openness and far more
inclusion.
Today, however, that effort is in peril. After years
of deep work to weave together the fabric of society,
communities are reverting to fear. The Secretary
General’s Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, has noted the risk that what
has, to date, been primarily a political crisis could
escalate to a level that would pose a high risk of atrocity
crimes. The nightmares of Burundi’s recent past are
close at hand, and among them we must count the
massive impact of past episodes of violence on regional
development and security.

S/PV.7482

The people of Burundi and the region deserve
far better than these recurring cycles of impunity,
suffering and destruction. They have a right to go
about their lives peacefully, in freedom, equality and
dignity, without fear, and with equitable access to their
country’s many resources and opportunities. They look
to the Council to exert its authority to ensure a speedy
political solution to this dreadful crisis.
I ask Council members to bring to bear all possible
influence to restore a sense of responsibility among key
actors in Burundi. Accountability for all gross human
rights violations, including those that have occurred
over the past six months, must be ensured. Justice must
be served and reason must prevail so that Burundi can
return to the path of the rule of law and democracy,
stability, confidence and peace, including through
elections that are inclusive, transparent and fair. The
Arusha Agreement sought to reconstitute a society
in which differences, whether political or communal,
could be accommodated, and in which the protection
of the State could be counted as secure for all. That is
the path of development and hope, and it is Burundi’s
future. To close off that path would be a monumental
error that would be remembered for generations.
The President: I thank Mr. Al Hussein for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting dedicated to the political situation
in Burundi, and to congratulate you on your country’s
accession to the rotating presidency of the Security
Council for July. I would also like to thank all the
other members of the Council for their ceaseless and
most outstanding efforts to help resolve the crisis in
Burundi. I also congratulate and thank Mr. Zerihoun
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
briefings, which have given us more information about
that crisis, although my delegation cannot agree with
certain implications.
My delegation notes the content of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the United Nations Electoral
Observation Mission in Burundi issued on 7 July. I
will not refer to it in detail because it covers the period
before the elections of 29 June. Certain passages of its
66 paragraphs are therefore no longer relevant, and
new information regarding positive developments has

15-213485/9

S/PV.7482

The situation in Burundi

become available. I will therefore address the Council
on the current situation, as demanded by recent events.
Before I do so, however, I will make a short
comment on the passage in the report regarding the
excessive use of force by the national police of Burundi.
That accusation is no longer valid, because one of
those involved in the abortive putsch of 13 May, a
certain Léonard Ndikumana, has just publicly claimed
responsibility for the grenade attacks and other
violence committed against the police and the civil
population during the uprising intended to prepare the
way for the coup d’état and, after the putsch, to prevent
and torpedo the elections. The claim was made through
a Kenyan television company and was relayed by a
number of western networks, including Radio France
Internationale, TV5 and Deutsche Welle.
By publicly taking responsibility for the attacks
that took place in the country, including the grenades
mentioned by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, which were thrown at women selling fruit next
to the central market, those behind the putsch have
proved once again that the international community
missed the mark when it blamed the attacks on young
people affiliated to the ruling party and the national
police. Responsibility for the grenade attacks has
been claimed and the perpetrators are known. The
entire international community should condemn such
mindless violence, for which responsibility has been
publicly claimed, and demand the immediate arrest
of those behind the putsch in the countries that are
sheltering them. Now that the perpetrators are known,
they must be held responsible for their acts and answer
for them in court.
To return to the present, as I had occasion to say on
Friday before the Council (see S/PV.7473), on the eve
of the legislative and communal elections of 29 June
my Government faced a difficult choice between
two options: to postpone the elections, as certain
partners were requesting, and voluntarily agree to
enter an institutional vacuum, with all of the attendant
consequences; or to proceed with the elections forthwith
and give the country democratic institutions in line
with the Constitution of Burundi.
In view of the risk of a constitutional vacuum, my
Government decided to proceed with the elections,
which allowed the people of Burundi to vote freely
on 29 June. As we all saw, the elections took place
as planned in a calm and tranquil atmosphere, and
no major incidents were reported on election day. All
6/9

09/07/2015

national and regional observers, in particular those
from neighbouring countries, gave favourable reports
on the conditions in which the elections were held. A
single observer mission expressed doubts in its report,
for reasons known to all. I will not return to that case;
I spoke of it yesterday to the Burundi configuration of
the Peacekeeping Commission.
We thank the people of Burundi for turning out in
force for these two elections, at which they chose their
local councillors and their members of parliament. The
turnout of 75 per cent sent a clear message, not only to
all Burundians but also to Burundi’s partners, that the
silent majority, which did not participate in the violent
demonstrations designed to make media headlines, was
eager to vote. The message is also that nothing other
than voter turnout can confer legitimacy on an election.
The people of Burundi have spoken, and their voice
must be respected.
As I said earlier, peace, calm and security
characterized the double election, which certain
detractors of Burundian democracy had described, for
several months before it was even held, as not being
credible.
Participation in the elections of 29 June was
impressive, even massive, and free, transparent and
peaceful. It was eloquent testimony to the resolve of the
Burundian people to restore the country’s institutions
so as to ensure that mandates were upheld pursuant
to basic national law. In the capital, in spite of a few
isolated incidents of deliberate intimidation in recently
restive neighbourhoods — which, happily, were foiled
by law enforcement agents — residents were able to
vote freely, thanks first and foremost to the relocation
of certain voting centres, which limited major incidents
on election day.
In the interior provinces and the 1,001 hills of
Burundi, the behaviour of consitituents surprised many
national and international observers. Indeed, by noon
of election day, more than 95 per cent of registered
voters had already voted. That, too, sent a message that
our people yearned to vote and that they had done so
early in the morning before going to work in the fields.
It also proved that what was being demanded in the
endless reports had taken hold of the silent majority
who wanted to vote come what may.
We note the participation of several political and
independent parties on election day. Some of these
sought to play what I would call an in-and-out game

15-21348

09/07/2015

The situation in Burundi

by pretending to boycott but also going door to door to
convince Burundians to vote for them. That door-todoor exercise has also been noted by the United Nations
Electoral Observation Mission in Burundi (MENUB)
report (S/2015/510). I wish to stress that the Independent
National Electoral Commission never received from
any of the parties, coalitions or independent candidates
formal requests for the withdrawal of their candidacies
for the Communal Council or the legislative election.
Thus, some parties, coalitions and independent
candidates had voters who voted for them despite the
so-called boycott announced through the media. In
upholding civil and political rights recognized in the
Burundian Constitution, in particular the right to elect
and to be elected, the Commission attributed votes and
distributed seats in line with the votes cast. If a political
party, coalition of parties or independent candidate
does not claim the seat obtained, for whatever reason,
the Electoral Code will be applied in line with article
138 of the Electoral Code for the National Assembly,
article 185 for the Communal Council, and article 143
for the Senate. In brief, the call for a boycott by the
Abibenga Amizero y’Abarundi coalition, headed by
Agathon Rwasa, was simply a tactical ploy compounded
by nefarious speculations.
Regarding the outcome of the legislative elections,
according to a report issued by the Independent
National Electoral Commission of 7 July, the
incumbent party — the Conseil national pour la
défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la
démocratie — took 77 of the 100 seats, the Union pour le
progrès national took 2, and the Amizero coalition took
21. Although this makes a total of 100 seats, in order
to adhere to the Arusha Agreement, a number of new
seats will also have to be assigned so as to balance the
parliamentary membership along gender and ethnicity
lines. We hope that Agathon Rwasa will not make the
same mistake he made in 2010 by renouncing the seats
he had obtained due to political capriciousness. That
would be a serious error for that politician to make, and
would represent total disdain for his constituents. We
count on our partners to advise him not to tilt further
towards the wrong side of history.
I take this opportunity to thank the entire
Burundian people, the territorial administration, and
the law enforcement and security forces for their joint
efforts to ensure the security of voters and voting sites
on electional day. I also thank and congratulate the
many national, regional and international observers

S/PV.7482

who remained in the hills and neighbourhoods in order
to closely follow the elections of 29 June. More than
200 regional and international observers, in addition to
those of MENUB, enjoyed national accreditation, as did
thousands of national observers. We therefore believe
that the accredited electoral observers contributed
significantly to strengthening peace and democracy in
our country.
We thank the Foreign Ministers of the Central
African Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of Kenya,
who, through a political statement, congratulated the
Independent National Electoral Commission on having
organized and led the first communal and legislative
elections in full transparency and with exemplary
freedom, and in which all political partners were
invited to participate. The statement demonstrated that
the Burundian people did indeed want elections and
democracy.
In this regard, I would make my usual point
underscoring respect for the regional dimension. It is
difficult for us to understand the disconnect between
the perceptions inside and outside Africa regarding the
assessment of the elections in my country. In the future,
we shall have to try to reconcile the positions of New
York with that of the region. As I said, the report of
the regional observers reinforced the role of regional
actors and the importance of respect for the regional
dimension on the part of those outside the continent.
At the same time, I would be remiss were I not to
thank all the countries and international organizations
that had the courage to support the national sovereignty
and the legitimate right of the Burundian people to
democratically choose its own representatives to
various institituions, and to promote the regional
dimension here at Headquarters. The representatives
of those countries know who they are. I also deeply
thank the civil society and religious organizations
that courageously supported the elections and acted as
observers with true professionalism and neutrality. We
especially thank those the observers from the political
parties, who braved hunger and exhaustion for the
love of their country in order to monitor the elections
throughout the cycle, from beginning to end.
We further thank the countries that hosted
Burundian refugees during a media and political
onslaught that was rife with lies and rumours calling
on Burundians to flee their country. We call on those
countries to assist Burundi in the repatriation of

15-213487/9

S/PV.7482

The situation in Burundi

those refugees by showing them that peace has been
restored and that the reasons for which they fled were
not founded. My Government is of course determined
to establish conditions conducive to the return of our
compatriots who ran away on the basis of those rumours.
We take this opportunity to thank those thousands
of Burundian refugees who are returning to the country.
They were not mentioned by the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, but we believe that approximately
40,000 of them have already returned to the country.
The international community is often interested in
those who flee countries, but not in those who return.
Intellectual honesty requires me to stress the many who
have already returned.
Regarding the follow-up to the process and the
Emergency Summit of the East African Community
(EAC) held on 6 July in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, I
should like to inform the Council that we welcomed
the conclusions of the Summit. Burundi participated
actively at the Summit, during which the region’s
leaders issued pertinent resolutions to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Burundi, which we were pleased
to welcome as a whole. We also welcome the fact that
President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was named to guide
the inter-Burundian dialogue. Similarly, we are very
pleased that the East African Community has taken
the lead at the highest level, which serves to strengthen
coherence and a focus on regional issues in resolving
crises and differences in Africa.
The Council is not unaware that the United Nations
is well positioned to promote greater coherence among
subregional, regional, continental and international
aspects in response to the resurgence post-conflict
crises. Experience on the ground in Burundi in recent
times has proved that greater regional and subregional
coherence is a key element is supporting efforts to
resolve differences and crises. It continues to be crucial
to integrate a regional and subregional perspective in
the mediation efforts.
Many countries, including Burundi, prefer to
receive assistance and advice from neighbouring
countries and regional organizations, which know
our country, culture and political history and are
better placed to provide quite effective advice to find
appropriate solutions to the crisis in Burundi. Under the
principles of proximity and subsidiarity, the African
Union is called upon to support subregional initiatives
and once again cede the leading role to subregional

8/9

09/07/2015

actors in the East African Community in carrying out
the dialogue.
I should like to mention that the appointment of
a presidential-level mediator and the EAC’s leading
role in the inter-Burundian dialogue is in line with the
operational part of the African Union Peace and Security
Council communiqué adopted at its five hundred and
fifteenth meeting, wherein the Council calls on the
Chair of the African Union Commission immediately
to launch consultations for the operationalization
of international facilitation under the aegis — and I
emphasize this — of the East African Community.
With regard to the postponement of the elections
proposed by the Summit, the date of 30 July has
been put forward. While the Government welcomes
that recommendation, I would like to point out that
the provisions of the Constitution of Burundi do not
allow a postponement to that date. In line with the
Constitution, the country’s President must be elected
one month prior to the end of the preceding mandate.
The term of office of the current President will end on
26 August, which means that the next President must be
elected no later than 26 July. In addition, 15 days must
be factored in for a second round of voting — that is,
between 15 and 26 July. We are quite willing to accept
a week’s postponement — say, 21 or 22 July, which
would pose no problems pursuant to the Consitution.
Burundi is currently discussing this with the leaders
of the region, and I think a compromise will in fact be
achieved on the exact date for the elections.
Before concluding, let me say that we often talk
about the crisis and the political problems; but we must
also discuss the economic problems Burundi will face
in the coming months. And I would also like to mention
the immediate challenges the Government must face in
the next few days.
The first challenge is to restore confidence
among Burundians. We must continue to undertake
extraordinary efforts to bolster national unity. To that
end, the inter-Burundian dialogue will have to continue
beyond the elections. A week or two is not a long time,
and we cannot expect things to be resolved by magic.
The Government is fully prepared to do that, which is
also in line with the call made by EAC Heads of State.
In addition to national unity and the restoration
of trust among Burundians, we must also restore trust
between the Government of Burundi and various
partner countries that have taken staunch positions on

15-21348

09/07/2015

The situation in Burundi

the Burundi crisis. Given the evolution of events, we
should act in line with political reality to restore trust
with our partners. The next Government will therefore
have to take steps to bring our partners together and
regain that lost trust.
We will also face the challenge of proceeding
with the disarmament programme. Disarming the
civilian population is very important. We have a major
disarmament programme in place but, given the electoral
context, it must be sped up vis–à–vis all groups. No one
group is to be singled out. We are talking about overall
disarmament of the civilian population.
We will have to strengthen the private sector in
order to generate jobs. We must find alternatives to
violence for young people. People with jobs do not turn
to violence. Most of the young people one sees in the
street are unemployed. We must therefore also have
the support of our partners to boost the private sector,
create employment and help youth find alternatives to
violence.

S/PV.7482

The foregoing also applies to Burundi’s politicians,
most of whom expect to hold on to their political posts
forever. But not everyone wins elections. We have to
start to think about how to find other employment for
politicians who lose elections, so that they can find
alternatives in the private sector rather than turning to
violence after they leave office.
I should like to conclude with a brief comment on
something said by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. In speaking about disarmament, I thought
he singled out a particular group — young people. I
emphasize that disarmament is about everyone. With
regard to young demonstrators throwing grenades,
they were not thrown by youth of the party in power.
Those were claimed from Nairobi, and we know who is
responsible. But I repeat, disarmament is about everyone.
Singling out just one group is counterproductive.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

15-213489/9
