A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/162
23 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.2)]
54/162. Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Rights
of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, and its subsequent
resolutions thereon,
Considering that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities contribute to political and social stability and peace and enrich the cultural
heritage of society as a whole in the States in which such persons live,
Concerned by the frequency and severity of disputes and conflicts concerning minorities in many
countries and their often tragic consequences, and concerned also that persons belonging to minorities are
particularly vulnerable to displacement through, inter alia, population transfers, refugee flows and forced
relocation,
Acknowledging that the United Nations has an increasingly important role to play regarding the
protection of minorities by, inter alia, taking due account of and giving effect to the Declaration,

00 26547

/...

A/RES/54/162
Page 2

Noting that the Working Group on Minorities of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection
of Human Rights1 of the Commission on Human Rights held its fourth and fifth sessions from 25 to 29 May
19982 and 25 to 31 May 1999,3 respectively,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;4

2. Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to minorities may exercise fully
and effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination and in full equality
before the law, in accordance with the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities;
3. Urges States and the international community to promote and protect the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as set out in the Declaration, including
through the facilitation of their participation in all aspects of the political, economic, social, religious and
cultural life of society and in the economic progress and development of their country;
4. Also urges States to take, as appropriate, all the necessary constitutional, legislative, administrative
and other measures to promote and give effect to the Declaration;
5. Recognizes that respect for human rights and the promotion of understanding and tolerance by
Governments as well as between and among minorities are central to the protection and promotion of the
rights of persons belonging to minorities;
6. Appeals to States to make bilateral and multilateral efforts, as appropriate, in order to protect the
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in their countries, in
accordance with the Declaration;
7. Calls upon the Secretary-General to make available, at the request of Governments concerned,
qualified expertise on minority issues, including the prevention and resolution of disputes, to assist in
existing or potential situations involving minorities;
8. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to promote, within her
mandate, the implementation of the Declaration and to continue to engage in a dialogue with Governments
concerned for that purpose;
9. Requests the High Commissioner to continue her efforts to improve the coordination and
cooperation among United Nations programmes and agencies on activities related to the promotion and
protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities and to take the work of relevant regional
organizations active in the field of human rights into account in her endeavours;

1
2

Formerly known as the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/18.

3

E/CN.4/Sub.2/1999/21.
4
A/54/303.
/...

A/RES/54/162
Page 3

10. Calls upon the High Commissioner to resume inter-agency consultations with United Nations
programmes and agencies on minority issues, and urges those programmes and agencies to contribute
actively to this process;
11. Encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to continue to contribute to
the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities;
12. Calls upon the Working Group on Minorities of the Subcommission on the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights of the Commission on Human Rights to implement further its mandate with the
involvement of a wide range of participants;
13. Invites the High Commissioner to seek voluntary contributions to facilitate the effective
participation, including through training seminars, in the work of the Working Group on Minorities of
representatives of non-governmental organizations and persons belonging to minorities, in particular those
from developing countries;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including on good practices in the fields of education and the
effective participation of minorities in decision-making processes;
15. Decides to continue consideration of this question at its fifty-sixth session, under the item entitled
“Human rights questions”.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
