United Nations

S/PV.6368

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6368th meeting
Wednesday, 4 August 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Long Zhou
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Sumi
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1883
(2009) (S/2010/406)
Note verbale dated 28 July 2010 from the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/404)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-47406 (E)

*1047406*

S/PV.6368

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009)
(S/2010/406)
Note verbale dated 28 July 2010 from the
Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2010/404)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Melkert to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/406, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1883 (2009). I also wish to draw the

2

attention of members to document S/2010/404,
containing a note verbale dated 28 July 2010 from the
Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Ad Melkert, to whom I now give the floor.
Mr. Melkert: I welcome the opportunity to brief
the Security Council today on the challenges facing
Iraq and on the role of the United Nations. As the
Security Council considers the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), I wish to reiterate the Secretary-General’s
personal commitment to see the United Nations
continue to implement its mandate and assist the
people and the Government of Iraq to build a
sustainable and prosperous future. During the past
year, my team and I have been working with our Iraqi
counterparts in a range of areas that are vital for Iraq’s
future. While notable progress has been made, major
tasks are still ahead.
Following the successful completion of the
parliamentary elections on 7 March 2010 and the
certification of the election results on 2 June, Iraq has
reached a critical juncture. Despite several months of
negotiations, the transition to a new Government is still
pending. As stated in the Secretary-General’s report
before the Council (S/2010/406), persistent delays in
the Government formation process are contributing to
uncertainty in the country and creating conditions that
could be exploited by elements opposed to Iraq’s
democratic transition.
This process represents a real test of Iraq’s
transition to democracy and the commitment of Iraqi
leaders to adhering to the country’s Constitution.
Continuing disagreements over who has the right to
form the next Government and the appointment to key
posts persist. It is too early to speak of an impasse, as
some do, yet this cannot be excluded as a risk. There
have been some encouraging signs. The main political
blocs appear to agree on the need for a partnership
Government and have been discussing possible powersharing arrangements. I believe that, at this stage,
Government formation could benefit from adherence to
a specific time frame, as well as a collective process
through which a resolution could be reached.
While negotiations continue, attention must be
paid to the business of governing during this period.
Last week, a common understanding seems to have
10-47406

S/PV.6368

evolved among all political blocs over whether, indeed,
the stage of a caretaker Government has been reached.
While this is an issue for Iraqis to decide upon
themselves, the concern is that a prolonged delay could
impact on the day-to-day business of governing and
could affect all walks of Iraqi life.
It is well understood that the Government
formation process is a sovereign process and the full
responsibility of Iraqis themselves. For its part,
UNAMI continues to meet and listen to all parties
concerned and stands ready to provide assistance and
support at their request.
It is indeed the enfranchisement of the voters that
now matters most. I therefore reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call in the report for Iraqi leaders to show a
higher sense of urgency and to work together to forge
an agreement through an inclusive process, without
further delays caused by either domestically or
externally generated considerations. There is no reason
to be pessimistic as yet, for Iraq has embarked on an
historic path that will shape the future of the country.
However, the onus is ultimately on Iraqi leaders to
ensure an orderly and peaceful transition of power.
This is owed to the people of Iraq and expected by the
international community.
Further delays in the formation of a Government
are also impacting on the country’s basic infrastructure
and services, affecting the livelihood and well-being of
Iraqi citizens. Recent protests in a number of cities
denouncing the lack of electricity are a sign of
potentially growing disillusionment and anger over
what has become a situation of daily life for the
average Iraqi citizen. The supply of electricity is at
about 67 per cent of peak demand, with periods of
blackout still averaging more than nine hours per day
nationally. The Government has made electricity
production a priority. Shortages will take several years
to overcome, meanwhile negatively affecting prospects
for employment and economic growth.
In furtherance of identifying the development
agenda, on 26 July I chaired the Global Open Day for
Women and Peace, in celebration of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), in Iraq. The
meeting, widely attended by women parliamentarians
and civil society leaders, called for wide-ranging legal
reform, technical support for reconciliation and
advocacy for gender equality.

10-47406

With the National Development Plan as a basis,
the Government has set its priorities to address features
of underdevelopment in a country with such rich
resources. Yet political delays stand in the way of
appointments, mandates and capacity-building. After
the signing of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, many United Nations agencies
are preparing for their part in the international
technical assistance and advice that should accelerate
progress on the ground.
I must, however, express a word of concern on
the less than clear strategic involvement of the
international community in its support for Iraq.
Recently, the Humanitarian Coordinator appealed to
donors “not to give up their commitment to the Iraqi
people”, as only 12 per cent of the required $187
million sought for the 2010 Humanitarian Action Plan
for Iraq had been received. Clearly, contributions from
Iraq’s national budget should provide the lion’s share
for development and humanitarian action in the future.
However, that will still take time, and time is not on
the side of Iraqis who require significant support right
now.
Once the Government formation process has been
completed, it is imperative that Iraqi leaders continue
to make national reconciliation a priority and address
the many outstanding political and constitutional
challenges facing the country. This includes ArabKurdish relations, particularly as they relate to
disputed
internal
boundaries,
revenue-sharing,
legislation related to hydrocarbons, the federal
framework and the constitutional review process. One
area that I am pleased to report on is our serious efforts
to promote dialogue in Ninewa governorate.
Following last year’s initiative by Deputy Prime
Minister al-Issawi, UNAMI has continued to support
efforts to achieve progress in relation to Ninewa
residents currently in detention in the Kurdistan region.
Additionally, as part of this process a forum has been
created for Ninewa’s various minority communities to
come together to identify ways to protect their rights.
Central to the discussion in Ninewa is the handling of
security arrangements between the Government of Iraq
and Kurdistan regional security forces. The trilateral
combined security agreement between the federal
security forces, the Kurdistan Regional Government
security forces, and the United States Forces in Iraq
that currently operate in the disputed areas has made
significant progress towards confronting instability in

3

S/PV.6368

these areas. Efforts to establish clear and sustainable
security arrangements for the years ahead remain vital.
It is my hope that the process to end the boycott
of the Ninewa Provincial Council will gain momentum,
particularly as clarity and progress are achieved on
some of the efforts just outlined. It is also hoped that
the Ninewa talks will create a positive atmosphere for
addressing the issue of disputed internal boundaries
and improving relations between Arabs and Kurds.
Concerning Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter and relations with Kuwait, I should like to
refer to my visit on 20 June to Kuwait, as well as
various informal exchanges, which have confirmed that
the time has come for a serious concerted effort to
draw outstanding issues to a close. With the new
Ambassador of Iraq having arrived in Kuwait,
conditions for a results-oriented dialogue have
improved. Entering an era of good-neighbourliness
would serve as the necessary response to relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
833 (1993), and at the same time be of great mutual
benefit for trade and development.
Once the formation process is complete, it is
essential that the new Government move quickly to
fulfil Iraq’s outstanding obligations under Chapter VII
resolutions, which are necessary for Iraq to achieve
international standing equal to that which it held prior
to the adoption of these resolutions. I hope that the
actions taken by the new Government in this regard
will create a new momentum for the SecretaryGeneral’s report pursuant to resolution 1859 (2008),
which was submitted last July and remains pending
with the Security Council. UNAMI continues its work
to assist parties in this endeavour.
In a climate of uncertainty and volatility, UNAMI
and the United Nations country team continue to work
on the basis of their respective mandates in order to
provide to the Government and people of Iraq, at their
request, the kind of support that will contribute to
stability, investments and long-term development.
I should inform the Council that the practical
implications of the United States military drawdown
are now starting to have an impact on our operations.
We have engaged with the Government of Iraq to
ensure that the conditions for the future United Nations
presence in the country are on a secure and sustainable
foundation, which will require finalization of the
United Nations-Iraq status of mission agreement and

4

an increase in the Organization’s own security and
operational capacity encompassing aviation, transport,
infrastructure and life support.
I must stress that, in order to keep the United
Nations presence at current or even higher levels,
adequate financial resources from Member States will
inevitably be required. I call upon the Council to weigh
the implications of this particular period of transition
as part of its consideration of the extension of the
UNAMI mandate. I would like to remind the Council
that a great number of United Nations staff members
are still operating under challenging working and
living conditions. A clear signal of ongoing
commitment and support is critical to all those who are
dedicating themselves to helping the Iraqi people build
a peaceful and prosperous country.
In conclusion, Iraq has made considerable
progress since 2003. It has come a long way in
consolidating its peace and security and promoting the
welfare of its citizens. Nevertheless, we cannot
underestimate the challenges that it still faces. It is
essential that the Security Council and the international
community as a whole do their utmost to ensure that all
necessary support continues to be provided to Iraq until
such time that it can reach its full potential. I wish to
assure the Council that the Secretary-General and
UNAMI will endeavour to implement whatever new
mandate the Security Council establishes, working for
the benefit of the people of Iraq.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Melkert for his briefing.
I now give the
Representative of Iraq.

floor

to

the

Permanent

Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to present our thanks to your
predecessor, Her Excellency Mrs. Joy Ogwu,
Permanent Representative of Nigeria, for her
distinguished efforts during her presidency in the
month of July. Our thanks also go to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, and his team in Baghdad and in New York for
their vigorous efforts in assisting the Iraqi Government
and the Iraqi people.
The past year has witnessed a substantial drop in
violence and a manifest improvement of the security

10-47406

S/PV.6368

situation in Iraq, despite some terrorist acts targeting
innocent civilians. With the implementation of a
bilateral agreement on the withdrawal of United States
combat troops from Iraq, Iraqi security forces, despite
some challenges they face, are assuming full
responsibility for securing the country and have
undeniably shown their ability to manage the security
of Iraq by carrying out powerful strikes against
terrorists and through law enforcement, regardless of
partisan, ethnic or sectarian considerations.
This year has also witnessed the successful
holding of legislative elections, which took place on
7 March and elicited considerable Arab, regional and
international attention. Monitors from the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the League
of Arab States, in addition to international observers
and civil society organizations, have all expressed their
confidence in the transparent and fair elections held in
Iraq.
The announcement of the election results was
delayed by the constitutionally mandated ratification
procedure, which entailed a recount of votes in
accordance with electoral law and regulations. We were
able to get beyond this stage because we referred the
Constitution and a decision of the Independent
Electoral Commission.
All of the major political parties are currently
making extensive contacts in order to hold a fruitful
session of the newly elected Council of
Representatives, which will elect a new Speaker of the
Council and the President and will then ask the new
Prime Minister to form a Government based on the
provisions of the Iraqi Constitution. We hope, and all
parties have agreed, that this new Government will be
formed without delay, as any delay will negatively
affect the security situation.
The improvement of the security situation in Iraq
has encouraged many Arab and foreign countries to
reopen their diplomatic missions and has significantly
contributed to the development of Iraq’s friendly
relations at the regional and international levels, in
addition to the appointment of 53 Iraqi ambassadors to
various countries of the world that have expressed their
support for this development. Moreover, the
chairmanship of Iraq at the Arab Summit next year will
highlight Iraq’s endeavours to become an effective and
responsible member of the Arab world and the

10-47406

international community. Iraq will continue to
strengthen its friendship ties and cooperation with its
neighbours in order to regain its positive position
among them, living peacefully with its people and its
neighbours and reinforcing stability and security in the
region.
In the development field, on 4 July the Iraqi
Government
launched
a
five-year
National
Development Plan 2010-2014, which includes
approximately 2,700 strategic projects in various
sectors valued at $186 billion, in order to develop the
Iraqi economy and improve the quality of services
provided to Iraqis. The implementation of this plan will
provide 4 million jobs in order to address the problem
of unemployment in Iraq.
The most important issue that Iraq faces at this
stage remains freeing itself from the burden of
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. Pursuant to
the report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2009/385, it became clear to us that we
would have to follow two courses of action. The first
deals with issues concerning the situation in Iraq. The
second deals with issues concerning the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait.
Because of the importance and sensitivity of the
latter, there has been a common understanding among
all relevant parties, including our brothers in Kuwait,
that this path would be considered after the formation
of the new Iraqi Government. We earnestly hope that
movement on this path will be in consultation and
coordination with our Kuwaiti brothers in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In this
regard, I wish to stress once again that Iraq is
committed to the implementation of all Security
Council resolutions without exception.
With regard to the first course of action, there are
three key issues: the remaining issues of disarmament,
particularly those relating to resolutions 687 (1991)
and 707 (1991), the remaining contracts of the oil-forfood programme, and the issue of the protection of
Iraqi funds. I will talk about what we have done in this
process with transparency and high credibility.
With regard to the remaining issues of
disarmament, after the Security Council adopted
resolution 1762 (2007) in order to terminate the
mandates of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) under the

5

S/PV.6368

relevant resolutions, we had to pursue the remaining
issues in this area based on the aforementioned report
of the Secretary-General. On this basis, on 18 January
2010, we sent a letter to the President of the Security
Council and the Director General of IAEA, which
explained all of the steps we have taken, as well as the
steps we plan to take in this area.
We came to the conclusion that Iraq had fulfilled
its obligations and requested the Security Council to
consider the immediate lifting of all restrictions
imposed on Iraq under the Security Council resolutions
on disarmament and weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missiles, including resolutions 687 (1991) and
707 (1991).
Based on those letters, the Security Council
issued a presidential statement on 26 February 2010
(S/PRST/2010/5) welcoming the letter from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the steps
carried out by Iraq and requesting IAEA to indicate its
position regarding Iraq’s cooperation with the Agency.
On 11 March 2010, the Director General of IAEA
informed the Secretary-General that Iraq has excellent
cooperation with IAEA (see S/2010/150). We expected
a positive response from the Security Council in the
form of a resolution which would lift the remaining
restrictions on Iraq in the field of disarmament so that
Iraq would be able to benefit from scientific progress
and technology. However, this did not happen, possibly
because of the concern of the international community
and the Security Council, particularly the five
permanent members, at that time regarding
preparations for the 2010 Review Conference of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the importance of the Conference yielding positive
results to end the stalemate of the past 10 years, as well
as other international concerns which were given
priority.
In addition to what I have just discussed, Iraq has
recently taken important steps in the area of
disarmament and non-proliferation. In this regard, I
would like to refer to the letter of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council dated 25 July 2010
(see S/2010/403). We have decided to voluntarily
adhere to the Additional Protocol to the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement between Iraq
and IAEA. On 16 July 2010, Iraq provided notification
to IAEA, on the basis of article 17 of the Additional
Protocol, in response to IAEA’s initial declaration.

6

Furthermore, we have set up a national committee of
experts, with the participation of the relevant Iraqi
authorities, for the liquidation of chemical residues of
the former chemical weapons programme and, on
28 June 2010, Iraq submitted a briefing to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on this matter, and it received full approval
from that organization. We will proceed without delay
to liquidate those residues with the assistance of our
friends and the international community. We are also
privileged to have begun our membership of the
Executive Council of OPCW for the period 2010 to
2012.
The Iraqi Government also decided, on 13 July
2010, to join The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation, and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs is following the legal and
administrative procedures for joining. Moreover, the
Iraqi Government adopted a strict mechanism to
control dual-use items as part of its transparency- and
confidence-building measures with international bodies
on disarmament, all of which have been reported to
IAEA, OPCW and other disarmament bodies.
After all of these steps taken by Iraq, we are
looking
forward
to
the
Security
Council’s
consideration of this issue and its adoption of an
appropriate resolution to end all remaining restrictions
on Iraq in the field of disarmament.
As for the remaining contracts of the oil-for-food
programme, the Iraqi Central Bank received a letter
from the United Nations, dated 30 April 2010, which
stated that 65 disputed contracts remain. Consistent
with the Iraqi Government’s desire to finish the
remainder of the oil-for-food programme as soon as
possible, a ministerial committee headed by the Deputy
Prime Minister for Economic Affairs was formed to
follow up and audit controversial contracts with the
relevant Iraqi ministries. The committee recommended,
in principle, to pay the sums due for 26 contracts
partially or entirely. As for the remaining 39 contracts,
the committee decided to settle and end this
programme completely before Iraq presents its third
quarterly report, based on paragraph 5 of Security
Council resolution 1905 (2009).
With regard to the protection of Iraq’s funds and
the implementation of the successor arrangement for
the Development Fund for Iraq and the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board in accordance with

10-47406

S/PV.6368

Security Council resolution 1905 (2009), Iraq is doing
everything possible to provide the requirements for the
protection of Iraqi funds, whether by ending the
financial claims of individuals and companies that
were inherited from the former Iraqi regime, or through
the settlement of its sovereign debts, or through contact
with banks and international institutions to seek
possibilities for adequate protection. Iraq has covered
all of those areas, as described in Iraq’s second
quarterly report to the Security Council, issued in
document S/2010/365* of 8 July 2010.
However, the assessment reached by the Iraqi
Government so far confirms that the protection of
banks and financial institutions is not up to the level of
protection that would be provided by a resolution of
the Security Council under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter. Thus, the Government of Iraq will
continue its efforts to take the appropriate decisions
after further contacts with the relevant authorities and
will determine its position in this regard at the time of
the forthcoming third quarterly report.
Removing the provisions of Chapter VII which
imposed on Iraq financial and other burdens that affect
its sovereignty has almost become part of our bitter
past, and we are serious in our determination to dispose
of them with the Security Council’s help. What Iraq
has done over the years that followed the fall of the
former regime in the area of respect for and
commitment to the resolutions of international

10-47406

legitimacy should be responded to by the Security
Council with appreciation and consideration. We
request that the Council take the necessary measures to
liberate Iraq from all restrictions imposed on it by
Security Council resolutions, in order to enable Iraq to
exercise its natural role as an effective member of the
international community, to perform its duties and to
enjoy its rights, as was the case before the adoption of
Security Council resolution 661 (1990).
The Government of Iraq, while it highly
appreciates the role of UNAMI in providing advice and
support, looks forward to that role becoming more
effective and influential through the return of the
specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations to work in Iraq, making an actual direct
contribution to the process of building and
reconstruction. The constitutionally elected Iraqi
Government, while reiterating its desire to extend the
UNAMI mandate, hopes that this mandate will be to
provide the needed support and assistance through a
specific mechanism and with the prior approval of the
Iraqi Government.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

7
