S/PV.7920

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7920th meeting

Tuesday, 11 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley/Ms. Sison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2017/223)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09758 (E)
*1709758*

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of condolence on the terrorist attacks in
Egypt
The President: Allow me to extend our condolences
to our friends in Egypt. What we saw happen was
devastating because it happened in the most sacred of
places, where people go to feel safe, to feel comfort
and to find peace. Our thoughts and prayers are with
all of the people of Egypt, and we stand in mourning
with them.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2017/223)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Peru, Spain and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/223, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré: I would like to express my gratitude
to the United States presidency of the Security Council
for convening today’s meeting on Haiti.
2/30

11/04/2017

(spoke in French)
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Haiti.
(spoke in Spanish)
I should like to thank, in particular, all the countries
that contribute troops and police to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and all
Member States assisting in the stabilization process
in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
Six months ago, in the aftermath of the passage of
the devastating Hurricane Matthew, when I last briefed
the Security Council (see S/PV.7789), we called for
solidarity with the Government and people of Haiti
as the country struggled to keep on track an electoral
process, which was critical to the consolidation of its
stability. Today, as a result of the successful holding
of elections on 20 November 2016 and 29 January
2017, Haiti’s political outlook for 2017 and beyond has
significantly improved, with the opening of a crucial
window of opportunity to address the root causes of
the political crisis that preceded the polls. The elections
provided for the installation of directly elected officials
at all levels of Haiti’s governance structure for the
first time since 2006, including the peaceful transfer
of power to the third democratically elected President
since the deployment of MINUSTAH to Haiti in 2004.
In contrast with the parliamentary dysfunction
registered in 2015, all 119 Lower Chamber members
have been elected, and all but one of the 30 senators
have been seated. Among those are four women, and
the fiftieth legislature has been functioning regularly
since the opening of the second legislative year
on 9 January. Municipal authorities have been in
place almost a year now, and the publication of final
results for local elections is imminent. Following the
inauguration of Haiti’s fifty-eighth President, Jovenel
Moïse, on 7 February, Prime Minister Jack Guy
Lafontant and his Cabinet assumed their functions
after parliamentary endorsement on 22 March. Haiti’s
return to constitutional order and the full functioning
of the executive, the legislature and local Government
has now set the stage to address the many pressing
challenges facing the country.
A relatively stable security situation prevails,
despite continuous signs of fragility. The Haitian
National Police (HNP), now 14,000 strong, has
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

demonstrated increased capacity in the planning and
execution of complex operations, including the securing
of the elections, while simultaneously performing
routine tasks in combating crime and more effectively
maintaining public order. The further development of
the National Police, including in the areas of internal
management and oversight, the police-to-population
ratio and geographic coverage, will have to occur
within the framework of the new five-year strategic
development plan 2017-2021 in order to ensure the
sustainability of the law enforcement body.
To that end, international support, including from
the United Nations, will be needed to enable the HNP
to eventually provide security for all Haitian citizens. I
have called on the Government to continue prioritizing
the further professionalization and the provision of
financial and material resources to the HNP, despite its
stated intention to reconstitute a national defence force.
The preservation by the Government of the apolitical
character of the police will be particularly critical to
the credibility of the institution and its ability to serve
all Haitian citizens.
Political challenges remain the primary impediment
to consistent progress in the administration of justice and
human rights to truly anchor the rule of law and render
police work more effective while creating conditions
conducive for foreign and domestic investment and
job creation.
The justice and human rights system continues to
suffer from multiple deficiencies, including a lack of
popular confidence, accountability, limited institutional
capacity, high rates of prolonged pre-trial detention
and inhumane detention conditions. These deficiencies
call for a renewed engagement of the executive and
the legislative alike to devise a comprehensive reform
package that can finally tackle these long-standing
hurdles to stability and development. In that context,
the discontinuation of the mandate of the Independent
Expert on the situation of human rights in Haiti is
regrettable, and I continue to call on the Government
to nominate a ministerial-level focal point for human
rights and to expedite the transparent and merit-based
appointment of the National Ombudsperson, even as
the United Nations monitoring role of the human rights
situation continues.
Equally, the outcome of the recent action taken to
fill key appointments in the Supreme Court and the
Superior Council of the Judiciary is eagerly awaited

S/PV.7920

as important steps to fully restore the judiciary and
underpin its independence from the executive and
legislative powers.
The resolution of Haiti’s protracted politico-electoral
crisis has established the political space and institutional
stability needed for Haiti’s democratic institutions to
develop a constructive and forward-looking agenda
to deliver tangible results that respond to the diverse
expectations of the Haitian people, in the wake of
post-hurricane reconstruction and a difficult economic
situation, while addressing the root causes of weak
governance and recurring political crisis. This will be
critical in order to establish conditions conducive to
lasting stability and sustainable development, also in
view of MINUSTAH’s transition.
In that regard, I am encouraged by the President’s
calls and those of Haitian political, civil society and
private sector leaders in support of a genuine dialogue on
a concrete road map for progress in key areas, including
the identification of clear development priorities and
the consolidation of the rule of law. It will be important
that this road map be driven by the desire to enhance
service delivery of the State and the confidence among
Haitian citizens in the democratic institutions.
The United Nations in Haiti looks forward
to intensifying our cooperation with all Haitian
stakeholders as they identify and implement those
national priorities. I am also encouraged by the calls
from a broad cross-section of Haitian society for
constitutional reform to, among other things, simplify
the electoral cycle and strengthen legal oversight bodies
with a view to stabilizing the country’s democratic
institutions and reforming its governance.
The progress achieved during the past 13 years
in Haiti’s stabilization process is notable. It is
therefore timely to reshape the partnership among
the international community, the United Nations and
Haiti with a view to ensuring the sustainability of that
progress. It is with this in mind that the SecretaryGeneral has recommended the closure of MINUSTAH
in six months from now and the establishment of a
smaller peacekeeping operation with concentrated
focus on the rule of law and police development, with
strong good offices and human rights monitoring roles.
With the Council’s support, the transition from
MINUSTAH to a new and smaller mission would be
guided by a joint transition plan that would underpin
the gradual transfer of tasks to the Government,

17-097583/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

international partners and the United Nations country
team. Government leadership and joint ownership
will be as crucial to a sustainable transition process
that underpins the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation for the future of the United
Nations presence in the country, as will be a shift in
focus of the international community’s support away
from stabilization to institutional strengthening.
(spoke in French)
I encourage the President of the Republic and
the new Government and Parliament to implement
a programme of institutional reforms aimed at
strengthening governance at all levels and addressing
the most pressing political and socioeconomic problems.
(spoke in English)
In the same vein, I can on Haiti’s international
partners to forge a renewed partnership with the
Haitian authorities and the Haitian people and to lend
their support to assist the authorities in implementing
those reforms in a coordinated manner that helps to
consolidate the gains already achieved.
I thank all my colleagues in MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team for their dedication and
commitment during this critical period for Haiti, and
I thank all of Haiti’s international partners for their
continuous support in assisting the country to fully
seize this exceptional opportunity to begin a new
chapter in Haiti’s history as the Mission transitions.
The President: I thank Ms. Honoré for her briefing,
her leadership and her service.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Madam, I join in your expressions of condolence
over the attack that took place in Egypt. We offer our
sorrow, solidarity and commitment to continuing to fight
all manifestations of terrorism and barbaric extremism.
I thank you for convening this debate on the
question of Haiti. I also particularly thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré, not only for her comprehensive briefing but
also for dedicated work and leadership of the United
Nations activities in Haiti.
4/30

11/04/2017

Uruguay associated itself with the statement to be
pronounced by the Permanent Representative of Peru
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
of 17 March (S/2017/223), presenting the findings of
the multidisciplinary strategic assessment mission
carried out in early February under the leadership
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The assessment was produced at a moment of great
importance for Haiti, since the newly elected President
was inaugurated on 7 February, marking the return
of the country to constitutional order. We therefore
congratulate the people of Haiti, President Jovenel
Moïse, Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant and the new
Government team, wishing them success in this new
stage of such importance to Haiti.
Haiti has been facing huge difficulties, including
serious natural disasters, and has yet to overcome
numerous and complex challenges in strengthening its
democracy, political stability, the rule of law and the
Haitian National Police, protecting human rights and
promoting economic and social development. Haiti
no doubt still needs the international community’s
assistance to make the structural reforms necessary to
achieve sustainable development. It is also evident that
the situation in Haiti is not as we found it 13 years ago,
when the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) was established. Security is among the
sectors that has seen progress, including the increased
capacities and growing professionalization of the
Haitian National Police.
We believe that part of our responsibility
consists in determing the best way to support Haiti
in the current situation. In that regard, the strategic
assessment mission has provided important factors for
evaluation. These indicate that there is no reason today
for MINUSTAH to remain in Haiti beyond 15 October.
They also show that the current needs of the country
require another type of United Nations presence
and another type of support. We are aware of the
recommendation for the establishment of a new mission
with the main function of assisting the Government of
Haiti in the institutional strengthening of the rule of
law, supporting and strengthening the Haitian National
Police and monitoring, reporting and analysing the
human rights situation .
The issue of cholera in Haiti deserves special
mention. We welcomed with great satisfaction the new
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

United Nations approach to cholera, and in our capacity
as Chair of the Group of Friends of Haiti, we coordinated
the efforts towards the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 71/161, which welcomed that new approach.
Today, we also welcome the references to cholera
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, in
particular the reference to the certain political role for
the new mission, in complement to the efforts of the
United Nations country team.
In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm Uruguay’s
commitment to and solidarity with Haiti. Uruguay
has been on the ground at its side since MINUSTAH
was launched in 2004, contributing, at the time of its
greatest deployment, two battalions, a maritime unit,
an air force unit, police officers and staff officials. In
the conviction that a military presence is not needed
in Haiti today, Uruguayan troops will withdraw from
the country on 15 april. and will do so with a sense
of fulfillment.
I also wish to reiterate our public recognition of
the work of all MINUSTAH personnel, especially the
women and men of my country who are deployed or
will be deployed to it, and our heartfelt recollection of
all those who have lost their lives in the line of duty.
All have demonstrated throughour the past 13 years
their dedication and commitment to the recovery and
stability of Haiti.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Madam President, you spoke
on behalf of all of us when you expressed condolences
to our colleagues of Egypt on the barbaric terrorist
slaughter of innocent Egyptians. On behalf of my
Government, I condemn this heinous terrorist attack.
We will continue to stand with Egypt in this struggle.
We thank Special Representative Ms. Sandra
Honoré for her briefing on the most recent developments
in Haiti and on the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We
take this opportunity to express appreciation to her,
as well as to the civilian and military personnel of
MINUSTAH, for all their efforts in carrying out their
mandate of restoring a secure and stable environment
to promote the political process, strengthening
Government institutions and rule-of-law structures, as
well as promoting and protecting human rights in Haiti.
In that regard, we welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/223), which notes the
progress made in consolidating democracy and
stability in Haiti. The holding of the presidential

S/PV.7920

elections in a peaceful and orderly manner, in spite of
the post-hurricane challenges, and the inauguration of
Mr. Jovenel Moïse as President of the Republic marked a
significant milestone in the restoration of constitutional
order in Haiti.
We also take note of the report on the progress made
in the overall security situation in the country, which
remains relatively stable in spite of tensions observed
during the electoral process, such as public protests
and disturbances in Port-au-Prince and its environs. It
is also encouraging that the Haitian National Police has
improved its performance in terms of crime prevention
and response, as well as public order management,
which contributed to creating a stable environment for
the holding of the elections.
Nevertheless, we understand the challenges that
the Haitian National Police continues to face, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
and strengthening, professionalizing and reforming it
remains a work in progress. We also note the challenges
in terms of justice reform. There is therefore a need
for sustained international support in that and other
areas and we recognize the work that has been done
by MINUSTAH to provide the necessary assistance
in that regard. Ethiopia is one of the MINUSTAH
police-contributing countries and we are pleased to
have made a very modest contribution to those efforts.
After the 2010 earthquake, Hurricane Matthew
also had a devastating impact on the Haitian people,
causing a serious humanitarian crisis. That was further
compounded by the outbreak of the cholera epidemic
and we note the apologies by former Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon on behalf of the United Nations for
not having done enough to contain the spread of that
disease. We realize that there is now a new approach to
dealing with the issue and to addressing the suffering
of the victims. It is important for the international
community to support the Haitian Government in its
efforts to eliminate the disease.
Hurricane Matthew and the outbreak of cholera
have had a crippling impact on the country’s economy.
Haiti certainly needs long-term support to address its
vulnerability and economic fragility. That is why the
sustained engagement of the United Nations is critical.
We note the recommendation of the Secretary-General
for a gradual drawdown of MINUSTAH to maintain the
gains made over the past 13 years and ensure a successful
transition to another follow-up peacekeeping mission,

17-097585/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

which will work to consolidate peace by strengthening
the institutions of justice and the rule of law, as well as
by supporting the institutional and operational capacity
of the Haitian National Police. Therefore, we support
the renewal of MINUSTAH’s mandate for a final six
months to allow a smooth transition.
We also recognize regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the Organization of
American States, the Union of South American Nations
and the Caribbean Community, for their important
role in the process of stabilization and reconstruction
in Haiti.
Finally, we in Africa have a special attachment
with people of African descent in the diaspora and
we stand in solidarity and support with the people
and Government of Haiti, as they continue striving to
consolidate the progress made recently and address the
multiple challenges facing their nation.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to begin by extending sympathy on behalf of my
country, France, to Egypt and Sweden, which have both
suffered reprehensible terrorist attacks in recent days,
and reiterate my Government’s full support.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Honoré, for her briefing.
I align myself with the statements that will be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Peru, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
I would like to address two points in my statement.
First, I should like to express our satisfaction about
the recently concluded election process in Haiti, which
heralds the restoration of constitutional order and
provides new opportunities for meeting the challenges
that the country faces. I would also like to convey our
support for the Secretary-General’s recommendations
with regard to the dynamic nature of the United Nations
presence in Haiti, which gives us the opportunity
to evaluate the achievements of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and move
towards the establishment of another peacekeeping
mission that is more lightweight and better suited to the
country’s needs.
France welcomes the recent conclusion of the
electoral cycle that began several years ago in Haiti,
and the subsequent restoration of constitutional order
on 7 February. We believe that that was a major
6/30

11/04/2017

development in the process of stabilizing the country.
Such developments are particularly noteworthy
because the elections took place in a generally peaceful
environment. Their success can be attributed primarily
to the Haitian Government and, in particular, to the
Provisional Electoral Council and the Haitian National
Police, which all played a key role in organizing
the elections and in providing security. We would
like to take the opportunity to welcome the spirit of
accountability demonstrated by former provisional
President Jocelerme Privert, who kept his promise to do
all in his power to conclude the electoral cycle as soon
as possible. Once again, France warmly congratulates
Mr. Jovenel Moïse on his election as President of
Haiti, following a transparent, inclusive and credible
election process, as well as on the swift inauguration
by Parliament of Jack Guy Lafontant as Prime Minister.
Haiti has turned over a new leaf following several
months of uncertainty caused by successive election
delays, and once again now has strong institutions that
are fully vested with democratic legitimacy, which can
effectively meet the daily challenges that its people
face. The Haitian population and the international
community have every reason to welcome that outcome.
Haiti and its leaders can count on France’s ongoing
support during this new phase, which will allow for
deepening relations and enhanced cooperation between
our countries.
France welcomes the recommendations contained
in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/223), which addresses the outcome of the
strategic assessment review conducted in Haiti early
this year. More than 13 years after the establishment
of MINUSTAH, we fully support the idea that it is
now time to evaluate the Mission’s achievements in
stabilizing Haiti and move towards developing a new
approach to the United Nations presence in Haiti that
is more suited to the country’s needs and conditions
on the ground, which have changed dramatically.
The work of MINUSTAH, which continues to be
supported by the Security Council, as well as by the
troop-contributing countries — whose efforts we
commend here today — has enabled Haiti to emerge
from the emergency situation it faced until recently by
restoring a relatively safe environment, taking part in
the rebuilding efforts after the 2010 earthquake and
providing considerable support to the Haitian National
Police, whose growing authority is an indicator of
stability in Haiti. I would also like to point out that it
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

is important for the Haitian National Police to remain
a professional, apolitical and independent institution,
as underscored by the Special Representative, and the
backbone of Haiti’s security chain.
In spite of the gains made, France remains convinced
that the United Nations has not yet completed its work
in Haiti. That is why we support the establishment,
on the day after MINUSTAH’s termination, of a new
peacekeeping operation that is more lightweight and
focused on strengthening Haiti’s institutions in a few
key areas, with a mandate and specific exit timeline,
in keeping with the good practices we encourage in
the area of peacekeeping. The new operation will
have to consolidate the progress achieved in the past
few years, particularly by ensuring that the Haitian
National Police can function independently, but also by
working on some major new projects in the area of the
rule of law, such as combating impunity, strengthening
the judiciary’s professionalism and independence and
establishing a prison system that is compatible with the
country’s needs and respects the rights of prisoners.
The human rights situation, various aspects of which
continue to be a cause for concern, will also have to
be carefully monitored and accompanied by regular
recommendations. We expect to see the Haitian
authorities cooperating fully in that regard, and we are
willing to continue our bilateral dialogue on that subject.
Lastly, the new operation will have to work closely
on the ground with the United Nations country team,
which from now on will be the actor in the forefront in
dealing with the country’s other challenges, especially
where the Secretary-General’s new approach to
combating cholera is concerned. France is supporting its
first phase in particular, including through a voluntary
contribution of €600,000. We encourage all of Haiti’s
partners and friends to translate their words into deeds
and to contribute to that collective effort to benefit the
Haitian people.
For a long time now France has been urging the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities towards Haiti by
taking the decisions needed to ensure that the United
Nations engagement on the ground can continue to be
as appropriate and effective as possible. The SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations for closing MINUSTAH as
soon as possible, and establishing a successor mission
focused on issues related to the police, the rule of law
and human rights, give us the opportunity to do that.
They combine the execution of a responsible transition
designed to maintain the results achieved in the past

S/PV.7920

few years with a demonstration of the Council’s ability
to make sure that the United Nations modalities of
action on the ground continue to evolve and that their
chief goal is finding the best response to the needs
of the populations involved. France fully supports
that approach.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to join my
colleagues in expressing my condolences to the people
and the Government of Egypt and firmly condemning
the recent terrorist attacks there, as well as to our
brothers and sisters in Somalia in the wake of the
attacks there a few days ago.
I would like to thank the presidency for convening
today’s debate on the situation in the Republic of Haiti.
We welcome Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We acknowledge the tireless work that she and all the
men and women of the Mission — civilian, military
and police — are doing for the Haitian people through
their efforts to help the country safeguard its people’s
security and achieve long-term stability.
Bolivia welcomes the new governmental structure
and elected officials, the result of the excellent conduct
of the electoral process and a clear sign of the progress
being made towards achieving lasting political stability
and consolidating democracy in Haiti. We would like
to reaffirm our commitment to our brother country’s
present and future. We are part of the cooperative
efforts of the region and the international community
to help Haiti overcome the socioeconomic problems
that have afflicted it for decades. We encourage all
the efforts being made to consolidate the country’s
stability and promote its development through stable
mechanisms designed to assist and cooperate with the
Haitian authorities.
In that regard, we would like to stress the importance
of the new United Nations justice and support mission
that will succeed MINUSTAH and that should
continue the work of supporting and consolidating the
national security forces. In our view, therefore, it will
be important for the Security Council to continue to
evaluate the situation on the ground in Haiti, which
is why we should work with our Haitian brothers and
sisters to plan a visit by the Council so that it can get
first-hand information on the situation.

17-097587/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

We urge the international community to continue
and strengthen its solidarity with Haiti. It is everyone’s
responsibility to combat the poverty and injustice
that are products of a series of circumstances that
have affected the country not just in terms of political
instability and natural disasters but in some cases even
through the presence of the United Nations itself.
We commend the progress that both the State
and MINUSTAH have made in the past 14 years and
the extraordinary capacity for resilience shown by
the people of Haiti. The continued improvement and
professionalization of the Haitian National Police,
which will improve the State’s presence and authority,
are also especially important. It is crucial to ensure
that resources continue to be allocated to quick-impact
projects aimed at promoting citizens’ security and an
effective legal framework that will protect them and
enable them to fully exercise their rights.
However, despite this progress, we are concerned
about the endemic cholera situation, which has infected
approximately 788,000 people since its outbreak in 2010
and has killed around 9,000. This highlights the vital
need to strengthen Haiti’s national health institutions
and water and sanitation systems and their ability to
respond to the problem. While we have taken note of the
United Nations efforts to mitigate the cholera problem
by acknowledging its responsibility for the original
outbreak in 2010, in our view such recognition is not
enough. The international community must consider
ways of making reparation for the damage as soon as
possible. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to launch an emergency response
to the cholera epidemic and the new United Nations
approach in campaigning against its spread.
We would like to emphasize that negotiations
on a new mandate for a mission in Haiti should be
consistently conducted in consultation and coordination
with the country’s Government and new authorities,
and should always take their priorities into account,
with Haiti seen as the sole and principal author of its
own destiny, without any interference.
Finally, I would like to reiterate what was said at
a recent meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of La Alianza Bolivariana para los Pueblos de Nuestra
América, which is that we believe we owe a historic
debt of gratitude to the Haitian nation, and that we are
committed to continuing to promote cooperation with
it, in accordance with its Government’s priorities and
8/30

11/04/2017

in full respect for its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative Honoré for her briefing
this morning, and to join others in expressing my
condolences to Egypt for the terrible attacks that took
place there on Palm Sunday. Our thoughts and prayers
are with them.
At the outset, I think it is important to point to the
progress that Haiti has made over the past 13 years. In
these meetings we often discuss the most pressing and
recent developments, and that can occasionally mean
that we lose sight of the overall trajectory of countries
on our agenda. For Haiti, that trajectory is upwards.
We have seen the professionalization and reform
of the Haitian National Police, and we have seen the
improvement in the security section. We have witnessed
credible and fair elections, as the Special Representative
just outlined, which have led to a peaceful transfer of
power and a return to constitutional order. We were all
shocked when Haiti was struck by natural disasters, but
we have also seen the resilience of the Haitian people
and the process of rebuilding.
Clearly this is not a story of uninterrupted
progress. There is much more to be done, especially
where protecting human rights, empowering women,
widening access to justice and, of course, achieving
long-term development are concerned. Along with
many others in this Chamber today, the United Kingdom
is gravely concerned about the continued presence of
cholera in the country. We have contributed more than
$600,000 to the United Nations Haiti Cholera Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund. I urge others to step up and
make what contributions that they can so that together
we can rid Haiti of that horrific disease once and for all.
Despite those challenges, Haiti in 2017 is a different
country than that of 2004, the year in which the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) began. As President Moïse said
in his inauguration speech in February, it is time for
MINUSTAH to go. A great deal has been achieved
by the Mission during those 13 years. On behalf of
the United Kingdom, I want to offer our thanks to
everyone involved in MINUSTAH and the United
Nations country team for their hard work in securing
that outcome.
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

I would like to particularly express my thanks to
Sandra Honoré for her services as Special Representative
for almost four years.
We want to see a phased withdrawal over the next
six months and a successor Mission continue some
of MINUSTAH’s work. To be effective, that mission
must have access to the most appropriate personnel
and equipment. It should be underpinned by highquality training and skilled leadership alongside clear
accountability for underperformance and misconduct.
The successor to MINUSTAH, like all peace operations
mandated by the Council, must have a clear exit
strategy. That exit strategy should be established at the
beginning of the mission, not at its end, and include
clear benchmarks covering a two year-year period.
Joint analysis and planning with the United Nations
country team are critical, as is the gradual but steady
handover of responsibilities to Haiti’s Government and
national institutions. A two-year exit strategy should
safeguard Haiti from the risk of a sudden and hastily
planned withdrawal or, quite differently, the quagmire
of a mission that never ends. That does not signify the
end of the United Nations commitment to Haiti, and it is
not an end of the United Kingdom’s commitment, either.
Even with the leadership and the resilience of its
people, Haiti will still require development support
from the international community for peace to be
sustained. The decisions that we make in the Council
are critical to that goal. We need to select the right
United Nations tools to provide the right support, and
we need to show the courage and discipline to let Haiti
stand on its own.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): First of all, our
delegation expresses its deep condolences to the
delegation of Egypt on the terrorists attacks, which
took place last Sunday, and its sympathy with the
people of that country. Kazakhstan stands with Egypt
in combating terrorism.
I thank Special Representative Honoré for her
detailed presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/223). My delegation joins other members of the
Security Council in welcoming the progress achieved
in strengthening stability and democracy, as well as
the results of the peaceful elections, the restoration
of constitutional order in Haiti and its successful
conduct, despite the challenges that the country and its
citizens face.

S/PV.7920

Kazakhstan is encouraged by the comprehensive
and ambitious policy statement of Prime Minister
Lafontant. The strong engagement of the international
community is an obvious necessity for Haiti’s
sustainable development, while paying attention to
improving housing, water, education, gender equality,
prison conditions and the struggle against transnational
crime. Furthermore, we welcome Prime Minister
Lafontant’s announcement for courageous reforms
to reinvigorate public administration, combat waste
and direct resources to top-priority programmes.
Establishing a responsible State, in which citizens are
educated and guided by a sense of collective solidarity,
sends a strong message to Haitians as they follow the
path of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Establishing the proposed truth and reconciliation
commissions will positively generate a sense of social
justice and stability.
Kazakhstan acknowledges the valuable role of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and other United Nations institutions in
Haiti, especially with regard to stabilizing the security
environment and to capacity-building for the Haitian
National Police. We support the Secretary-General
and the Group of Friends for Haiti’s recommendations
to establish a new, integrated stabilization mission
focusing on inclusive political mechanisms, the rule of
law, criminal justice and institutional and human rights
related reforms.
Humanitarian assistance is critical to a country that
has been devastated by numerous natural disasters and
the cholera epidemic. We should design the new mandate
in close dialogue with the Haitian Government and civil
society. That is especially necessary as we elaborate on
the future role of the United Nations presence based
on the findings of the strategic assessment mission,
while further considering the possibility of transferring
some powers from MINUSTAH to the United Nations
country team. In our view, the revised mandate should
cover a wide range of issues, including human and
drug trafficking, disaster management and human
rights monitoring. With the continued support from
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
we see a positive track for Haiti with the hope and
resilience that its people have demonstrated.

17-097589/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

11/04/2017

Special attention should also be given to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and the subsequent relevant
resolutions so as to enhance gender equality and
empowerment. The support of the United Nations,
especially UN-Women, UNICEF and the World
Health Organization, as well as regional organizations
like the Organization of American States and the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), among others,
will lay the foundations for future conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and mediation to establish a stable Haiti.
The participation of civil society will be indispensable
in that process.

Allow me to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré for her
briefing. We fully support the efforts that she has
made with her team in Haiti. I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate the Government and
the people of Haiti for holding presidential elections
at the beginning of the year and for choosing a new
President who will lead the country towards political
stability, conclude the transitional period and ensure
the return to constitutional order. Haiti is at a historical
crossroads. Despite its political progress, it continues
to face tremendous challenges at every level, including
an aggravated economic situation and political and
security challenges.

Kazakhstan believes that it is important to be a
part of the international support for Haiti, and with
others it has worked for the progress that we see today.
My Government contributed humanitarian support in
response to the devastating earthquake that occurred
in 2010. Last year, Kazakhstan supported the initiative,
entitled “Innovation pole of the greater north-the City
of knowledge”. It is aimed at establishing infrastructure
for a knowledge-based economy in Haiti and will carry
out the same functions that the biggest global research
centres for technology, innovations, new ideas and
development also fill.

Egypt contributes police personnel to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Mission plays a pivotal role in addressing those
challenges, and that role needs to continue until national
institutions are fully capable of shouldering their
responsibilities. That will help prevent a new crisis in Haiti
with political, security and humanitarian ramifications
that would require another international intervention.
Moreover, it is vital for the international community
to work hand in hand to support Haiti and promote the
capacity of its State institutions so that they can live
up to their responsibilities at this critical juncture and
move towards a more stable future. Therefore, as we are
looking to renew the Mission’s mandate, I would like to
raise the following points.

In 2016, my country joined CARICOM as an
observer and remains committed to promoting a
partnership with Caribbean countries. As the only
Central Asian country with observer status in the
Community, Kazakhstan has supported two highpriority regional CARICOM projects. The first
involves developing and implementing water-resource
management through a policy and action programme,
and the second concerns lending institutional support
for the Ministries for Foreign Affairs of CARICOM
member States, of which Haiti is one.
Finally, capacity-building is imperative to taking
bold steps towards democracy and sustainable
development for Haiti, and we support the Government
of Haiti in its efforts to meet the challenges that it faces.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank everyone for their condolences
and support, which have demonstrated their solidarity
with Egypt during this very stressful time. The crimes
that have claimed the lives of many innocent people
in Egypt and countless other places in the world show
how important it is for us to work together to eliminate
that phenomenon.
10/30

First, we stress the need to ensure that the Mission’s
mandate is in line with political developments, progress
in the field, and the need to build State institutions.
We therefore support the six-month extension of the
mandate, after which a new mission will be established
with a specific mandate.
Secondly, we stress the need for the new mission’s
mandate to be limited to the establishment of State
institutions, in particular a national police apparatus
and rule-of-law enforcement institutions, in line
with national priorities and needs and without any
unconventional or successional mandate.
Thirdly, the United Nations bears a moral and even
legal responsibility to support the Haitian authorities in
their fight against the cholera outbreak. Therefore, the
United Nations presence must ensure that there is the
necessary capacity to halt this outbreak.
Fourthly, it is important we promote our efforts in
the next phase to create a genuine partnership with the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

Commission so that the support provided to Haiti
includes the social, political and development
dimensions needed for a more stable society and that it
is responsive to the country’s basic needs.
In conclusion, we must avoid making hasty decisions
that pay no heed to the special needs of Haiti and the
necessary capacity to build national institutions capable
of shouldering their responsibilities. Allow me to take
this opportunity to express our full support for Haiti,
and I stress our trust in the ability of the Government
and the people of the country to get through this critical
period and move towards development, prosperity and
inclusion in the region.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We express our condolences to our Egyptian
colleagues in connection with the terrorist attack on
9 April. The masterminds of these attacks demonstrated
both their lack of humanity and cruelty in carrying them
out. We support the measures that are being undertaken
by the Government of Egypt in its unrelenting fight
against terrorism. We express our condolences to the
bereaved families and hope that the injured will recover
as quickly as possible.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Honoré, for her briefing on the
results of the strategic review of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and on
the situation in the country. We are pleased to note
the conclusion of the long electoral process, with the
conduct in November of last year of the presidential
elections and then in January of this year the
parliamentary elections, which clearly served to ease
social and political unrest in the country.
We welcome the intention of the new Government
of Haiti to strengthen national unity, peace and
democratic order as well as its demonstrated readiness
to engage in constructive dialogue with a wide variety
of political forces to resolve problems of import for
the whole country. One of the key items on the Haiti
agenda is shoring up the system of governance at all
levels in the interest of overcoming still highly relevant
social and economic problems and ensuring long-term
stability. In this regard, we consider the approval by the
National Assembly of the newly-formed Government
as a positive step towards establishing a viable and
effective chain of executive power, which will ensure
the reformation planned for by the Government of Haiti.

S/PV.7920

With respect to international support, we note the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of the United Nations mission for the next sixmonth period and its gradual drawdown of the military
component, which is fully staffed at present. We see
a reason to reconfigure MINUSTAH according to
the new situation, but that has to be done in the most
cautious manner. It is important to prevent a security
void. It would be unacceptable to repeat the negative
experience of the drawdown of the predecessor mission
in 2000. More generally speaking, we would like to call
attention to the following rather important aspect.
In spite of the fact that the relevant recommendations
of the Secretary-General reflect the positive trends on
the ground, we are convinced that the situation remains
quite tenuous. The Haitian Government and Haitian
society have a number of daunting tasks to fulfil and
which need to be urgently resolved. I do not think that
we could call the post-conflict stage a simple one.
As has many times been stated in this Chamber,
including at the Security Council meeting with the
Secretary-General on 6 April (S/PV.7918), which is
the most recent example, increasing the effectiveness
of how peacekeepers carry out their mandates means
that the mandates have to be well defined, clear and
realistic. We are guided by the idea that the SecretaryGeneral’s proposed new mission in Haiti will continue
to act under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
However, the provisions of this Chapter must be applied
only with respect to those tasks where it is absolutely
necessary. I am referring first and foremost to security
and the maintenance of law and order.
For its part, in the framework of international
efforts, Russia will continue to make its contribution
to undertaking a host of tasks to ensure stability and
security, with a view to rebuilding the country in line
with MINUSTAH’s mandate.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, Madam
President, as you did at the beginning of the meeting
and as other colleagues have done before me, I would
like convey our deepest condolences to the Egyptian
delegation, the Government and the people of Egypt
and the Egyptian Coptic Christian community for the
meaningless terrorist attacks that happened on a very
important Sunday for Christians all over the world.
Sadly, I think that it has almost become a habit to
start our meetings by conveying condolences, which

17-0975811/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

suggests the enormity of the terror menace in the world.
Again, I offer my condolences.
(spoke in French)
I wish to warmly thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Honoré, for her briefing
and for her work over the last four years. I would
also like to underscore the fact that Italy aligns itself
with the statement to be made by Observer of the
European Union.
We welcome the conclusion of the electoral
process, the inauguration of President Jovenel Moïse,
the formation of the new Government and the renewal
of the National Assembly. Now that the constitutional
order has been re-established, we encourage the Haitian
authorities to pursue a programme of political, economic
and social reform so as to strengthen the security
situation in Haiti and its democratic institutions and to
embark on a path of sustainable development. I would
like to focus on two points.
First, this is a crucial turning point for Haiti, which
the international community must be ready to support
in a manner that is effective and adapted to the actual
needs of the country, working in close cooperation with
Haitian institutions. In this regard, we welcome the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General for a
responsible transition of the United Nations presence
with the end goal of leaving Haiti in a position where it
can independently guarantee the security, fundamental
rights and the well-being of its citizens.
We support the gradual drawdown of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in the next six months and its replacement with a
peacekeeping mission with a lighter footprint, focused
on the rule of law, justice and human rights, which
are areas where we expect to see specific progress
towards lasting stabilization and the building of an
inclusive and resilient society. The compact envisaged
by the Secretary General in his report (S/2017/223) is
a tool to facilitate this process and to systematize and
guide assistance from the United Nations and other
international stakeholders.
My second point is that countries and the United
Nations, in providing assistance, need today to go
from an emergency-reaction posture to a structured
strategy of reconstruction and development for the long
term. We are mindful of the humanitarian challenges
and fragility that lie down this road. Haitians have
12/30

11/04/2017

continued to suffer from the devastating consequences
of Hurricane Matthew, which ravaged the country, and
from cholera since 2010. The international community
has mobilized so as to join with the national forces in
addressing these crises. Italy, following the urgent call
made by the United Nations, contributed to UNICEF
programmes and the International Committee of the Red
Cross. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s new
initiative aimed at enhanced support for measures to
combat cholera and assist victims, an approach that was
adopted by the General Assembly in December through
resolution 71/161, which my country co-sponsored.
Shoring up security, the rule of law and democratic
institutions; creating a just and effective judiciary and
penal system; ensuring equality and the enjoyment of
fundamental rights; and eradicating abject poverty all
are key priorities for which the Haitian Government
will have to take responsibility on behalf of the Haitian
people. I wish here to underscore the importance of
greater participation by women at all levels, political,
social and economic.
By way of conclusion, let me say that the role of the
international community remains vital, first of all in
continuing to build the capacity of the Haitian National
Police. The United Nations must deploy the tools best
adapted to assist the country while refraining from
drawing down too hastily. Caution must be exercised
and continuity ensured so as not to undermine the
achievements made over the years by MINUSTAH.
We believe that the transition planned for by the
Secretary-General will be balanced. It will provide
the Council with calibrated, flexible tools tailored to
conditions on the ground and to the needs of Haitian
institutions, in line with the parameters of efficiency,
responsibility and clarity identified for mandates in the
framework of the reform of peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the United Nations.
Finally, I reiterate our commitment, through the
Security Council and the European Union as well as at
the bilateral level, to continue with joint, coordinated
efforts to support the Haitian authorities as it moves
towards lasting peace and inclusive democracy.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin
by adding our deepest condolences to those already
expressed to the families of the victims, to our friends
at the Egyptian Mission and to all Egyptians. We
join others in condemning this heinous attack in the
strongest terms.
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and for the recommendations of the strategic
assessment mission. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Sandra Honoré for her briefing today.
Since the establishment of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in 2004,
Haiti’s development and stabilization have faced many
challenges: political instability, economic fragility and
natural disasters. Overcoming the devastation caused
by the earthquake of 2010 was particularly challenging.
Yet, in spite of these obstacles, the people of Haiti
have constantly displayed their strength and resilience
and their determination to build a better future for
themselves and their children. MINUSTAH has played
an important role in supporting their efforts.
In recent months, the people of Haiti exercised
their democratic right by electing a new President and
Parliament. We hope that the confirmation of a new
Government on 21 March will lead to a concerted effort
and renewed effort to address the most pressing issues
facing the country.
As Haiti continues on its journey of development,
the time has come for the role and composition of
MINUSTAH to evolve. In this process, we must learn
from the mistakes of the past; it is important that
there be adequate planning for a successor transition
mission after MINUSTAH. This includes managing the
handover to the United Nations country team, in the
spirit of the agenda on sustaining peace.
An integrated and joined-up United Nations
presence in Haiti, both during and after the transition,
will be needed in order to support the people and the
Government of Haiti as they address the long-standing
risks and drivers of instability. This includes joint
analysis and planning across the system. Continued
efforts will be needed to reduce social inequalities,
unleash the potential of the Haitian people by
spurring economic growth so as to alleviate fiscal
pressure and strengthen trust in, and the capacity of,
national institutions.
We welcome the strong rule-of-law and human
rights focus in the successor mission’s mandate.
Working under an integrated strategy across all
United Nations entities in Haiti, we see a significant
opportunity for the United Nations to deliver as one
around these issues. The Global Focal Point for Police,
Justice and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in
Post-Conflict and Other Crisis Situations can contribute

S/PV.7920

to playing an important role in coordinating the ability
of the United Nations to deliver as one on the rule-oflaw mandate. However, these efforts should be planned,
led and mandated by Haitian counterparts. The United
Nations must continue to provide dedicated support
to the Haitian authorities, including to the Haitian
National Police, to strengthen their capacities.
The important work undertaken by MINUSTAH
on gender mainstreaming and against sexual violence
must not be lost in the transition process. It will be
important to maintain a strategic focus, dedicated
coordination and targeted budgeting for gender issues.
We welcome the recommendation that the successor
mission, along with the United Nations country team,
develop a coherent gender and sexual and gender-based
violence strategy, as well as support the systemization
of such strategy programming in the security and
judicial institutions.
The recent peaceful elections, the inauguration
of President Moïse and the appointment of a Prime
Minister and Government are an important milestone
for Haiti. As the people of Haiti increasingly take
their future into their own hands, the United Nations
must stand ready to support their efforts. Sweden will
remain a committed partner for Haiti as it begins this
new chapter.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan, too, offers its
deep condolences to the families of the victims of
the terrorist attacks in Egypt on Sunday. We join our
colleagues in condemning these despicable acts and
in expressing our solidarity with the people and the
Government of Egypt.
I would like to thank Sandra Honoré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
highly informative briefing. As the conclusion of the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) approaches after 13 years,
Japan reiterates its appreciation for the dedication and
accomplishments of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Mission in support of a more
stable, prosperous future for the Haitian people.
Japan is proud to have contributed to MINUSTAH
by dispatching approximately 2,200 Self-Defense Force
personnel for post-earthquake reconstruction. We pay
tribute to the brave men and women from all troop- and
police-contributing countries for their efforts.

17-0975813/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

Japan has followed the Haitian elections and political
process with great interest, and at times with concern.
We are pleased that elections have finally been held
successfully, despite the impact of Hurricane Matthew,
and commend Haiti’s ownership of this process.
This election is a milestone for Haiti’s strengthened
democracy and its return to constitutional order.
Now is the time for Haiti to build on this political
progress to create more effective and accountable
rule-of-law and justice institutions. We are pleased
by the Haitian National Police’s increased capacity
to provide security independently from MINUSTAH.
But the police is only a single component of the justice
sector and the penal chain. Haiti’s justice sector overall
demands further reform, carefully balancing capacity
development with enhanced civilian oversight.
Japan greatly appreciates the work of the recent
strategic assessment mission as we consider the shape of
future United Nations involvement in Haiti. We support
its recommendations, including on the importance of
enhanced police capacity. We must support Haiti now
to ensure its self-reliance in the future. It is Haiti’s
progress and MINUSTAH’s success that have allowed
the Council to transition to a smaller, new United
Nations mission. We underline the need for a clear,
highly focused mandate to consolidate gains through
justice support, including by strengthening the rule
of law.
Haiti has made commendable progress in highly
challenging conditions, but the road ahead is still
long. Japan is committed to its continued support for
Haiti’s development, including by improving basic
social services, supporting post-disaster reconstruction
and fighting cholera. We look forward to working
with the international community to ensure that
recent improvements provide a lasting foundation for
Haiti’s future.

11/04/2017

(MINUSTAH), for her briefing on the situation in
the country.
Ukraine welcomes the fact that the long period
of institutional instability in Haiti is finally over.
We commend the Haitian authorities, in particular
the Haitian Provisional Electoral Council and the
Haitian National Police (HNP), on the positive
steps taken to restore democratic institutions. We
welcome the renewal of the National Assembly, the
formation of a new Government and the adoption of
a governmental programme built around priorities in
security, justice, energy, education, health, agriculture
and decentralization.
We congratulate the Haitian people who, while
facing many political, economic and social challenges,
have managed to bring the country back to constitutional
order. The full restoration of Haiti’s democratic
institutions will help the country to move forward and
to build one Haiti for all Haitians, as President Moïse
stated in his inaugural speech.
We underline that the efforts of all political
stakeholders should be focused on ensuring stability
and security as a crucial elements of democratic
consolidation. All political forces and all sectors of
Haitian society should be actively engaged in this
important endeavour. Broader unity is indispensable
to achieving such goals as strengthening national
human rights institutions and respect for human rights,
combating criminality and sexual and gender-based
violence, ending impunity and ensuring accountability.
The return to constitutional order should enable Haiti,
with the help of the international community, to
address the urgent socioeconomic and humanitarian
needs that have been aggravated by cholera and
Hurricane Matthew.

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I join our colleagues in
expressing our solidarity with Egypt and mourning all
those who were senselessly killed in recent barbaric
terrorist acts. It is indeed sad that we so often have
to start our statements in the Chamber by expressing
condolences, but we do have to stand together in
addressing this evil.

Ukraine commends the important role MINUSTAH
played in ensuring stability and security in Haiti.
Its contribution to strengthening the capacity of the
Haitian National Police is particularly important. We
recognize that the recent Haitian elections passed
with few incidents, thanks largely to MINUSTAH, the
Haitian National Police and the Provisional Electoral
Council. While the security situation in that Caribbean
country is not perfect, solid progress has been made
over the past few years.

I would like to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

That is why Ukraine welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s
recommendations
concerning
the
MINUSTAH mandate. We share the opinion that the

14/30

17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

time has come to end MINUSTAH’s mission and to
replace it with a reduced presence that will focus on
strengthening rule-of-law institutions, supporting and
developing the National Police and engaging in human
rights monitoring and reporting. However, we should
approach this decision with the necessary responsibility
and a well-thought out strategy of transition in order to
avoid the repetition of past failures and missteps.
We consider it essential to continue the work
of strengthening the Haitian police. The SecretaryGeneral’s recent report (S/2017/223) highlights the
gains made over the years in developing the capacity
of the HNP. At the same time, further consolidation of
this achievement is vital. In that context, we welcome
the position of the new Government on making the
formation of a professional national defence force a top
priority. On the other hand, we would like to underline
the necessity of continued efforts of the United Nations,
other multilateral agencies, international and regional
partners and individual States Members of the United
Nations in supporting the long-term security and
development of Haiti.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Madam
President, you spoke eloquently in extending
condolences to our colleague from Egypt on behalf
of all Council members. I now do so on behalf of the
Senegalese delegation, as my Government did on Palm
Sunday, to condemn the heinous murder of persons who
were praying in a holy place during a holy month.
I thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her highquality briefing on the situation in Haiti. I also thank
her for her outstanding work at the head of the Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).
Over the past six months, the political situation
in Haiti has made significant progress, including the
holding of presidential, legislative and parliamentary
elections in a climate of calm, transparency and freedom
under the auspices of the Transitional Electoral Council.
I commend the people and the authorities of Haiti, in
particular the Provisional Electoral Council and the
Haitian National Police, for their outstanding work
accomplished in a professional and impartial manner.
I also commend MINUSTAH for its good offices and
work, which have made a major contribution to the
stability and security of the country and to lending
credibility to the electoral process.

S/PV.7920

These joint efforts have allowed Haiti to return to a
fully functional constitutional order after several years
of institutional stalemate. The election and swearing in
on 7 February of the new President, Mr. Jovenel Moïse,
who was elected in the first round with 56 per cent of
the vote; the holding of legislative and parliamentary
elections on 29 January; and the establishment of the
Government of Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant
with a governing programme approved by the Haitian
parliament perfectly demonstrate the renewal of the
constitutional order.
The international community, and particularly
the United Nations, while recognizing the significant
progress made, must continue to support the Haitian
Government, as MINUSTAH is doing through the
implementation of several projects to promote good
governance and democracy, strengthen State authority
and improve the living conditions of the people in a
humanitarian context that remains difficult and marked
by the consequences of Hurricane Matthew.
This situation has been compounded by a cholera
epidemic that has raged in Haiti for several years, with
devastating impacts that should be duly managed by the
international community, especially now that the United
Nations, through its former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, has publicly acknowledged responsibility in
the spread of cholera in Haiti. Senegal supports the new
approach of the Secretary-General on cholera and calls
on Security Council members to collectively promote
the effective implementation of this new approach, in
close cooperation with the Haitian Government and
the victims.
There is a need for a regular follow-up of the
situation in Haiti, which remains fragile. Much remains
to be done, in particular in the areas of security, justice
and human rights. This pertains particularly to the
draft criminal procedure code, which is an important
element for benchmarking the stabilization of the
country. Following the withdrawal of the Mission, we
must prevent a security vacuum and the recurrence of
past errors and failures that once give rise electoral
crises and large-scale public unrest.
Despite the outstanding progress made by the
Haitian National Police, which has become far more
professional and effective, work remains to be done
with respect to crime due to ongoing insecurity over the
past six months, as indicated by statistics, which reveal
546 homicides in the reporting period, as compared

17-0975815/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

to 510 from 1 March and 31 August 2016. I recall
that during that same period, 200 cases of rape were
reported, 20 kidnappings took place, 30 police officers
were killed and 635 violent protests were recorded.
Regarding MINUSTAH’s mandate, Senegal reiterates
its confidence in Ms. Honoré and the entire MINUSTAH
team. It supports the recommendations made by the
strategic assessment team, which conducted its work
from 6 to 11 February. concerning the configuration of
a new mission to succeed MINUSTAH at the end of its
mandate, 15 October.
In conclusion, Senegal belieaves that Haiti finds
itself at a crossroads. That is why we urge Security
Council members to continue to pay particular
attention to the humanitarian, security and economic
situations in Haiti, which have been put to the test in
recent years. When the President assumed his new
functions, the outgoing provisional President Jocelerme
Privert highlighted the importance of assessing losses,
damages and needs following Hurricane Matthew in
October 2016. The provisional President stressed in
particular that environmental, social and economic
vulnerability was inexorably increasing with each
passing day, with 96 per cent of the Haitian population
living under the constant threat of two well-known
factors: droughts and floods. Mr. Privert added that,
in the framework of the draft three-year document
for 2017-2019, the Government needed to mobilize
upwards of $900 million in order to strengthen coastal
infrastructure, secure transportation and capacities
across productive sectors, all in a consistent manner,
in order to reorganize national territory in the social,
economic, environmental and institutional spheres.
At his inaguration, the fifty-eighth President of
Haiti, Mr. Moïse, responded as that by the end of his
five-year term, the changes that he promised during
his electoral campaign would become a reality. Those
promises included restoring the confidence of the
Haitian people in the political system and class, as well
as in the elite; strengthening inclusion and national
sovereignty; and rebalancing the national territory.
That is why Senegal appeals to the Council, through
me, to assist Haiti, which is, as we see it, the first
black republic to gain independence and the first South
American democracy with a Parliament of more than
200 years old and a Senate that is 207 years old. I think
that the international community must continue to
support the country.
16/30

11/04/2017

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
strongly condemns the terrorist attacks that took
place in Egypt on 9 April and expresses its deepest
condolences to the victims. We would also like to
express our condolences to the families of the victims
and the injured. China is resolutely opposed to terrorism
in all its forms and firmly supports Egypt’s efforts to
combat terrorism.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s debate. China listened carefully
to the briefing of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré.
In February, with the support and assistance of the
international community, Haiti successfully held its
presidential election. The new Government has now
started its work smoothly. The Haitian National Police
is becoming more robust, the overall situation in Haiti
is stable and new opportunities are arising for national
development. China hopes that all parties in Haiti will
jointly maintain this positive momentum and contribute
to the overall stability and development of the country.
We hope that the new Government in Haiti will
identify a development path that fits its national
situation; accelerate infrastructure, agriculture and
other major sectors of development with a view to
eradicating poverty, creating more jobs, improving
livelihoods; and promote the fundamental resolution
of all issues in Haiti. China expects the international
community, including countries of the region, to
continue to contribute to improving the situation in
Haiti, help the Haitian Government in building the
capacities of the Haitian National Police, and support
the Government’s efforts to bear responsibility for
maintaining national security and stability. At the
same time, we hope that the international community
will provide more humanitarian assistance to help
hurricane-stricken areas in Haiti to rebuild.
Recently,
Secretary-General
Guterres
recommended that the mandate of United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) be
extended for a final period of six months and that a
smaller, successor peacekeeping mission be established
at that time. That is recognition of the Haitian
Government’s ability to maintain stability and in line
with developments on the ground and the expectations
of all parties. China supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General and hopes that MINUSTAH will
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

withdraw in an orderly manner, while ensuring stability
in Haiti.
MINUSTAH has played an important role in
maintaining security and stability in Haiti since 2004.
China commends MINUSTAH’s contributions and the
positive efforts of Ms. Honoré as head of MINUSTAH.
China hopes that the international community will
actively respond to the new approach of the United
Nations to cholera in order to help Haiti eradicate the
epidemic as soon as possible.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing today.
We commend Haiti for its recent peaceful
transition in power. It was an important step towards
stability and democracy in Haiti. Peacekeeping has
made a great contribution to Haiti. Its support of the
Government has been essential to ensuring a secure
and stable environment. It has also provided invaluable
assistance in aiding the Haitian people in recovering
from a number of natural disasters, including the 2010
earthquake and Hurricane Matthew.
However, as I have said before in the Council,
the real measure of progress in Haiti or any country
where we have a peacekeeping mission is not dollars
spent but our impact on the lives of the people we seek
to help. Have we lifted them up, both as individuals
and as a nation? Have we fostered independence?
Have we made their lives better? It is in that spirit that
we welcome the results of the strategic assessment
mission, which recommend that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti close in its current form
by 15 October. The military component of the mission
will withdraw, and what will follow will be a more
focused, police-only mission.
MINUSTAH has never been a traditional
peacekeeping effort. There is no civil conflict or peace
agreement to monitor. The new mission of the United
Nations for justice support in Haiti will devote its
efforts to where they are most needed — in support of
the rule of law, developing the Haitian police force and
protecting human rights.
At our debate last Thursday (S/PV.7918) on
peacekeeping operations review, we asked Council
members to focus on the political foundations necessary
for the success of peacekeeping missions, including

S/PV.7920

whether the mandated tasks and overall concept of
the mission are consistent with political realities on
the ground. We regard the transformation of the Haiti
Mission, including the withdrawal of the military, as a
strong example of how peacekeeping missions can and
should change as a country’s political situation changes.
We believe that the new Haiti embodies the core
principles of success we have developed as part of our
peacekeeping review. Thanks to the recent elections
in Haiti, the political context is right for this Mission,
and the Haitian authorities are working hard to improve
their capabilities. The new Mission will foster the
independence and self-sufficiency of the Haitian people
and will continue to support the Haitian National
Police. The Mission also has defined the exit strategy
established from the very beginning. That will help
ensure a smooth transition of tasks and responsibilities
in the future.
Looking beyond the transition of the Mission,
the Government of Haiti must focus on strengthening
its judicial system and human rights institutions to
help ensure long-term stability. It bears the primary
responsibility for coming through on this; but it
can count on support from the United Nations, the
international community and the United States.
As the Mission in Haiti undergoes this transition,
we thank the men and women of MINUSTAH for
their service, and the Haitian Government for their
cooperation. We also thank the troop and police
contributors to the Mission and the Group of Friends
of Haiti for their work to promote stability and
development. The United States is a long-standing
friend and partner of Haiti. We remain committed to
working with the Haitian Government to ensure the
country’s long-term security, democratic development
and economic growth. We look forward to a new
chapter of growth and independence, and the unfolding
story of the Haitian people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
following on from the President of the Council and
the colleagues who spoke before me, I should like
to express once again the deep sorrow and sincere
condolences of the Haitian Government and people to
Egypt, Sweden and Somalia, where the deadly attacks

17-0975817/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

of the past weekend caused innocent victims. I assure
the Egyptian, Swedish and Somali Governments of the
complete solidarity of the Haitian authorities.
I should like to begin by thanking the Security
Council for inviting the Government of the Republic
of Haiti to express its views and observations on
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2017/223).
I wish to express the Haitian Government’s grateful
appreciation to the Secretary-General who, in his
first report on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), shows a spirit of
solidarity and commitment to the Haitian people for
which we are deeply thankful. His objective, wellresearched and balanced report, as well as his judicious
recommendations, testify to his well-known breadth of
vision and generosity of spirit.
The progress made in recent years towards the
establishment of the rule of law in Haiti, although
limited in some respects, remains undeniable. That
progress is clearly highlighted in the report. Institutional
weaknesses are also highlighted, as is the slow pace of
some key reforms. There are still many obstacles on the
path to the rule of law and the development of human
rights in Haiti. The report also stresses the serious
socioeconomic challenges, the effects of declining
official development assistance flows, the urgent need
for food security, and the deteriorating health situation,
illustrated by the resurgence of the cholera epidemic.
However, there are glimmers of hope on the horizon.
The accession to the presidency of His Excellency
Mr. Jovenel Moïse, on 7 February, at the conclusion of
an arduous and complex but highly successful electoral
process, was unanimously hailed as a decisive turning
point in political life in Haiti. As the Secretary-General
points out in his report, with the peaceful conclusion
of the electoral process and the return to constitutional
order, an important step has just been taken. A general
election with unchallenged results was held. The peaceful
transfer of power, the restoration of Parliament to full
functioning, the legitimacy of elected representatives,
and the appointment of an open Government bringing
together some of the main political groups represented
in the legislature, are elements that form the bedrock
of the stability that the new Government, led by Prime
Minister Jack Guy Lafontant, is working to consolidate.
The impartiality and professionalism demonstrated
by the Haitian institutions in these elections are rightly
18/30

11/04/2017

emphasized in the report. In that regard, MINUSTAH’s
role in strengthening the capacities of the Haitian
National Police, which was undoubtedly a key element
in the establishment of a climate of security and
stability, should be commended. That is undoubtedly
one of the outstanding achievements to be credited to
the Mission. Now that the objective of creating a safe
and stable environment — one of the major thrusts of
the mandate entrusted to MINUSTAH by resolution
1542 (2004) — has been achieved, we can overcome
the structural disadvantages and address the serious
problems that have so long compromised the political,
social and economic stability of Haiti, and that have
impeded foreign direct investment in the country. The
report of the Secretary-General provides an overview
of the challenges ahead.
In that regard, the President of the Republic,
together with the Government and Parliament, has
just launched a programme of institutional reforms to
tackle the most pressing sociopolitical and economic
challenges, in particular that of bringing Haiti through
a situation of economic fragility to one of sustained
growth. It is in that spirit of dialogue and consultation
that the Prime Minister has presented to Parliament an
ambitious programme of action aimed at implementing
a number of reforms that are considered essential from
the economic and social points of view, as well as in the
areas of security, justice and human rights — in short,
in terms of consolidating the rule of law, in parallel
with the sustained revival of growth and development.
In that regard, we welcome the desire of the United
Nations to actively support the priorities of the
Government and the main thrusts of its plan of action
by, inter alia, assisting in the organization of the Etats
généraux sectoriels de la Nation.
With regard to the mandate of MINUSTAH, there is
a perfect convergence between the views of the United
Nations and the Government of Haiti on the gradual
and orderly withdrawal of MINUSTAH after 13 years
of work in Haiti. The Haitian Government considers the
consolidation of security and stability achievements to
be essential. The phased withdrawal of the military
and civilian components of MINUSTAH should
enable the Haitian institutions concerned to effectively
assume the functions of the Mission. Consequently,
both parties must agree on a withdrawal timetable
that cannot give rise to any kind of security vacuum.
The proposed transition period thus responds to the
common concern to ensure that the Haitian National
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

Police has adequate capacity to assume over time full
responsibility for the country’s security and to address
all threats of instability within the country, irrespective
of an international uniformed presence.
For that reason, the Government of Haiti supports
the Secretary-General’s recommendation on the
extension of the MINUSTAH mandate for a final
period of six months, extending the original deadline to
15 October 2017. it also supports the recommendation
to the Security Council to establish, under a new
name, a new presence whose functions would be
focused mainly on strengthening the rule of law and
the police. In that context, the Government of Haiti
endorses the modalities of the transition, including,
first, the complete but staggered withdrawal of the
2,370 members of the military component during the
transition period; secondly, the reduction in the number
of police units formed and of individual police officers;
thirdly, the participation of the new mission in the
implementation of the strategic development plan of the
Haitian National Police; and fourthly, the integration of
the activities of the new mission into the United Nations
country team, taking into account Haiti’s residual
stabilization needs, as well as its good offices role in
support of political stability and good governance.
The guiding principle to orient the future role and
presence of the United Nations in Haiti is to ensure a
responsible transition that builds on the achievements
of the past 13 years, while meeting the country’s
priority needs for stabilization and capacity-building.
The Government of Haiti adheres to that vision. It
will continue to work closely with the United Nations
to ensure the full success of the new phase in their
cooperation. It also hopes that the United Nations
appeal for a new impetus of solidarity with Haiti will
be widely heard by the international community.
It is in this context that the President of the
Republic and the Government of Haiti place the
greatest interest in the reactivation of the humanitarian
and reconstruction mechanisms in the regions that
were tragically hit by Hurricane Matthew in October.
Whole populations are still living in scarcity and
distress, the stricken victims of Haiti’s exposure to
climate change. I reiterate the Haitian authorities’ call
to keep Haiti’s Sud and Grande-Anse provinces on the
agendas of humanitarian agencies, non-governmental
organizations and the country’s cooperation partners
through the structures of the Haitian State.

S/PV.7920

As it did on 1 December 2016 at the informal
information meeting with the Secretary-General
on the new United Nations strategy against cholera
in Haiti, the Haitian delegation reiterates the value
attached by the Government of Haiti to the twopronged approach advocated by the Secretary-General
to the eradication of cholera in Haiti. The Government
strongly and urgently calls for the funds necessary
for the implementation of parts I and II of the plan of
action — some $400 million over two years — to be
raised within the required time frame.
The Government of Haiti takes this opportunity to
thank all friendly countries, members of the Security
Council, troop-contributing countries and all of Haiti’s
cooperation partners for their ongoing commitment, in
one way or another, to MINUSTAH. May the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms Sandra
Honoré, be thanked and congratulated for the hard
work she has done for nearly four years.
At this crossroads, where a safe and stable
climate allows the Haitian people to see a glimmer of
hope, the Government fervently looks forward to the
continued support of all its partners in the context of
the new United Nations presence in Haiti. It calls on
the international community to lend its full support to
the difficult task of rebuilding the country’s essential
infrastructure, sustained growth, social progress and
sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): At the outset, allow me
to express our condolences to the Government and the
people of Egypt for the tragic terrorist attack perpetrated
on Sunday, which took so many innocent lives.
I thank the United States for convening this debate. I
congratulate the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Sandra Honoré, on her briefing and reiterate
my Government’s appreciation for her leadership.
I also appreciate the contribution of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Régis.
I would like to start by commending Haitian
political actors and the efforts of the leadership of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) to support the political process, which
allowed the completion of the electoral process and the
return to constitutional order last February.

17-0975819/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

Brazil supports the Secretary-General’s positive
assessment regarding stability and security in Haiti.
In this context, we agree to the gradual withdrawal of
the military component, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, attuned to realities on the ground.
As the United Nations reduces its military
footprint, development assistance should be scaled up.
Very often, however, as troops depart development
and humanitarian actors and resources follow suit. A
future presence of the United Nations in Haiti should
be able to reverse that trend. It should be based on
the broad repertoire on the relation between security
and development, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and sound transitions.
Aware of MINUSTAH’s accomplishments, we
must bear in mind that the United Nations work in
Haiti is not over. There are still many challenges
ahead. In this regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that a new United Nations
peacekeeping mission be established in Haiti following
the possible termination of MINUSTAH by 15 October,
in order to continue to assist the Government of Haiti
in consolidating its gains by reinforcing Government
institutions and strengthening the national capacity in
the rule of law, police development and human rights.
MINUSTAH’s experience has shown the potential
of innovative approaches that should continue to
be carried out by the new mission. Tools such as the
reduction of community violence and quick-impact
projects have played an important role in supporting
core stabilization objectives and will certainly be
crucial for the consolidation of the rule of law in Haiti.
We also reiterate our support to the United Nations
for its new approach to cholera in Haiti and the full
implementation of that approach in order to tackle the
significant increase in the number of suspected cases of
cholera. It is alarming that 440 Haitians are still dying
per year from the disease.
Brazilian society has been very supportive of
Brazil’s engagement with MINUSTAH since its
inception. Moreover, the past 13 years have provided
a unique and unprecedented experience for Brazil, as
it led the command of MINUSTAH’s troops and the
deployment of more than 30,000 soldiers, working
side-by-side with peacekeepers from our region and all
around the globe, to support the Haitian authorities in
their efforts to ensure a secure and stable environment
20/30

11/04/2017

for their people, and also to help them to reconstruct the
country after natural disasters.
During that period, we identified several
best practices and lessons learned related to the
implementation of MINUSTAH’s mandate that
could be further discussed and incorporated in other
peacekeeping missions, such as the Group of Friends
of Haiti, enhanced civilian-military coordination
in the field, community-approach strategies as
confidence-building measures, the innovative use of
engineering units and the important role of women in
all areas of the stabilization process.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Brazil’s longterm commitment and solidarity with Haiti and our
confidence in the Haitian people’s determination
to persist and succeed in their quest for stability,
democracy and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): My country, which has unfortunately
also fallen victim to terrorism, would like to reiterate
to the international community and, in particular, to
the countries that have suffered its cruel effects last
week, our solidarity and firm readiness to continue
collaborating in efforts to combat this scourge. The
victims suffer, whatever the reason for which they
were attacked, and that should push us all — above and
beyond extending our condolences — to demonstrate
our unity and stoicism as we face the barbarism
of terrorism.
With regard to today’s topic, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/223) on
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for
her briefing. I take this opportunity to thank her for
her valuable and effective efforts in Haiti as head of
MINUSTAH over the years.
We warmly congratulate the Haitian people for
concluding the electoral cycle that began in 2015 and for
the restoration of constitutional order. Spain reiterates
its readiness to collaborate with the new Government in
order to overcome the country’s challenges. We welcome
the deployment of MINUSTAH’s strategic assessment
mission, but we regret that the new Government has been
left with very little leeway to weigh in on the situation.
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

Ongoing consultations with the Government are a good
practice that should be maintained, in particular when
preparing for the departure of a peacekeeping operation
that has been deployed in the country for 13 years.
We thank MINUSTAH for its efforts and support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation for it to exit
the country responsibly and be replaced with a new
peacekeeping operation, focused on promoting the rule
of law, on the ongoing training of the Haitian National
Police and on assessing the human rights situation.
We would like to have details about the Mission’s
departure as soon as possible, so that that withdrawal
can take place in the very short time frame of a mere
six months, with the simultaneous drawdown of formed
police units. I do not recall the Security Council ever
stipulating such a short time frame for the departure
of a mission. In any event, the mission’s departure will
pose major challenges, as this is a very delicate time
in the country and the process should be conducted as
smoothly as possible.
With regard to the mission that will replace
MINUSTAH, we encourage the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to keep the communication
channels open with the new Government in preparation
for it. We believe that the mandate to support the Haitian
National Police and promote the rule of law, which the
Secretary-General recommends, should be entrusted
to the new mission. It can be achieved and sustained
only with the leadership, ownership and participation
of the Haitian Government. In addition, preserving the
new mission’s role as a deterrent will, no doubt, pose a
challenge, and we will have to procure aviation capacity
on the civilian market for the deployment of additional
personnel where necessary.

S/PV.7920

I thank, in particular, Special Representative
Honoré for her briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/223) and for her tireless commitment
to Haiti over the past four years. Everyone here has
stated that it is encouraging that tangible progress has
been made in a situation that, just a few months ago,
seemed dire on many fronts.
I would also like to acknowledge the Government
and the people of Haiti for demonstrating their ability
and resilience to hold free elections, which illustrates
their respect for democratic values. The election of
President Moïse and the formation of his Government are
significant and tangible steps towards the consolidation
of democracy in Haiti. We also welcome the election of
30 per cent of women to municipal councils. We hope
that the United Nations will continue to provide them
with the support needed to allow them to carry out their
work efficiently.
I have repeatedly stated here in the Security Council
that we must protect, at all costs, the achievements
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). Now that we have renewed its
mandate for the final time and are moving towards
the establishment of a new mission, it is essential to
preserve the progress that has been made in order to
overcome some of the challenges and hurdles that still
prevent the Haitian people from reaching their full
potential. The future presence of the United Nations
in Haiti must have as its goal to ensure a responsible
transition that would prevent the emergence of security
or institutional gaps. The central responsibility for the
transition lies with the Government and its leaders.

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for today’s debate on the situation in Haiti.

The progress made by the Haitian National Police
force, which the Special Representative outlined, in
particular with regard to its performance and the duties
that it must undertake in this new phase so as to ensure
democratic continuity, will continue to be supported by
my country through both the presence of our officers
and police in the country and the training of female
Haitian police officers in Colombia. Female police
officers, to date, barely account for 9 per cent of the
force, but we will continue to train them. We hope that
the force’s 2017-2021 strategic plan will also include a
major component on gender and the prevention of and
response to acts of sexual violence.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement that
will be made by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti.

As Special Representative Honoré pointed out, it is
urgent that progress be made on reforming the justice
system so as to cut down on illegal and prolonged

In conclusion, I would like to recall that in spite
of the gains made, Haiti still requires international
assistance in this new phase, and Haitians know that
they will have Spain’s full commitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.

17-0975821/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

detentions without trial, ease congestion in prisons and
improve respect for the rule of law and human rights,
an ongoing task that still needs work. The Haitian State
has shown itself able to comply in that regard through
its acceptance of 175 of the 213 recommendations set
out in its submission to the Human Rights Council’s
universal periodic review.
Our brotherly people and the Government of Haiti
face many challenges, but there are tools available
that can help to build a peaceful, stable country with
sustainable development. That will require very
close coordination between the country team and
MINUSTAH and, later, with the special political
mission, but the Government of Haiti can count on our
support in that effort.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing our
condolences to the peoples and the Governments of
Egypt and Somalia for the dastardly attacks perpetrated
recently in their countries. We thank the United States
for organizing today’s debate and Ms. Sandra Honoré
for her comprehensive briefing on the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2017/223) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
including its recommendations on the new peacekeeping
operation that will, we hope, succeed MINUSTAH as
of 15 October.
My country associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Peru on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti. I would also like to make
some additional comments in my national capacity.
Argentina has participated in every United
Nations effort to help Haiti to attain stability and work
out its own path to development since 1994. In that
regard, we can only be pleased with the forthcoming
successful conclusion of MINUSTAH’s mission and
the transition to a new phase, which will, we hope, see
peace consolidated in Haiti for good. We commend the
Haitian people for the peaceful conduct of their electoral
process and the restoration of constitutional order, and
congratulate their new President, Mr. Jovenel Moïse, on
his election in February and wish him every success in
his new job.
We also welcome the new Government under Prime
Minister Jack Guy Lafontant and encourage his efforts
22/30

11/04/2017

to tackle his country’s continuing tough challenges.
In that regard, we are pleased that both the SecretaryGeneral’s report and the resolution drafted by the
Group of Friends of Haiti expect that the mandate
of the new mission to be established in October will
focus on helping the Haitian State to strengthen its
rule-of-law institutions, develop the Haitian National
Police and protect human rights. Those are functions
whose inclusion in peacekeeping-mission mandates my
country has always argued for. We trust that the mission
will also contribute to the country’s economic and social
development by continuing to conduct programmes for
reducing community violence, quick-impact projects
and other activities that can help to achieve genuine
and lasting peace, including through political efforts
supporting implementation of the Organization’s new
approach to cholera.
After 13 years in Haiti and following the departure
in April 2015 of our battalion and air unit, our
military hospital will leave in October. After that,
we are planning to continue the participation of the
15 Argentine civilian police officers who are there
currently, with the possibility of adding some more
if that is possible and needed under the new mission’s
mandate. With regard to the coming transition and
as we expressed at the Council’s meeting with the
Mission’s troop- and police-contributing countries (see
S/PV.7914), we would perhaps have preferred a more
gradual drawdown of MINUSTAH’s police component,
whereby the police and civilian components would
begin to be reduced once the military withdrew or
after a certain amount of time has passed, so as not
to suddenly weaken the Organization’s presence at a
time when both the police and civilian activities are
becoming more essential to the consolidation of peace
and the achievement of sustainable peace. Nonetheless,
we would like to reiterate our confidence in the
judgement of the Secretariat and the will of the Haitian
Government and the people, and we hope that both
the transition and the launch of the new mission will
go smoothly and with adequate human and material
resources, and will signal the start of an era of peace
and development in Haiti.
I would like especially to thank Ms. Honoré on the
successful conclusion of her work.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

Ms. Adamson (European Union): I would first like
to express our condolences to our Egyptian, Swedish
and Somalian colleagues for the recent attacks in
their countries.
(spoke in French)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/223) and the Special Representative for her
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.
The European Union is pleased that the long period
of institutional instability in the electoral process in
Haiti is finally over. The completion of the electoral
process resulted in the transparent and credible election
of a President by an ample majority and a renewed
National Assembly. A new Government has been
formed, and its programme has the support of the new
National Assembly. We congratulate the Haitian people
and their political stakeholders. Despite enormous
difficulties and the weaknesses in their system, they
have succeeding in restoring constitutional order to the
country based on the will of the voters, something that
Haiti desperately needs if it is to tackle its many political,
economic, social and environmental challenges.
As has been the case for the past few years, the
efforts of all to ensure stability and security will
continue to be crucial to the process of democratic
consolidation. Thorough reform of the electoral system,
agreed on by consensus, will be key to avoiding new
crises and regaining the people’s trust. In that context
and while we regret the fact that the mandate of the
United Nations Independent Expert on human rights
has not been renewed, we emphasize how important
it is to ensure that the Government’s new structures
and mechanisms for protecting human rights take
up and further develop the Expert’s work so far. The
European Union will continue to be a faithful partner
to the Republic of Haiti and is committed to supporting
it in this sensitive phase, in consultation with its
other partners.

S/PV.7920

The European Union is one of Haiti’s major donors
in emergencies and for development, as its response
following the recent devastating effects of Hurricane
Matthew testified. The member States of the European
Union and the European Commission have launched
a series of short-, medium- and long-term actions
ranging from immediate assistance to assistance for
reconstruction and prevention amounting to tens of
millions of euros.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s proposal to
close the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and replace it with a reduced presence
focused on consolidating the rule of law and the police
service, with the principal aim of supporting political
stability and good governance, including election
monitoring and reform. MINUSTAH plays a key role
in providing political stability and security in Haiti,
including by ensuring security during particularly
difficult times, such as the recent holding of elections.
We must, therefore, consider making decisions
with commensurate caution and responsibility in
the framework of a permanent dialogue with the
Haitian authorities.
Furthermore, the European Union believes that the
security situation in Haiti needs to be closely followed,
as was recently illustrated by the attack against former
President Aristide, which could have had serious
consequences for public order and the stability of the
country. We therefore believe that it is essential to
continue the work of strengthening the Haitian police.
When the time comes, during the transition period,
it will be essential to ensure a well-prepared continuity.
The security and welfare of citizens, as well as the
stability of the country, are at stake. In that regard,
we welcome the emphasis placed on issues relating
to the rule of law and human rights in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/223), and we encourage
further clarification on the steps to be taken and
future responsibilities.
In conclusion, I would like once again to express the
appreciation of the European Union for the fundamental
contribution made by MINUSTAH in terms of security,
democracy-building and the rule of law in Haiti. It is
now necessary that the sequence of events that will
ultimately make the Haitian State fully responsible for
the security and protection of its citizens be precisely
defined, planned and fully implemented in close
consultation with the new Haitian authorities.

17-0975823/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

With the United Nations and the international
community, the European Union will support the
Haitian authorities, so that they can strengthen their
commitment and efforts to ensure a better future
in peace, democracy and the well-being of all the
Haitian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): First, allow me to express our most sincere
and heartfelt condolences to the delegation of Egypt and
the delegation of Sweden on the condemnable attacks
that their countries have recently suffered.
My delegation thanks you, Madam President, for
organizing this meeting, and, at the same time, we
would like to take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré, for her presence.
We align ourselves with the statement to be made
by the delegation of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
Guatemala commends the efforts made by the
brotherly country of Haiti, which have contributed to
its stabilization and the strengthening of its democracy,
in particular the peaceful conclusion of the electoral
process on 7 February. We would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate President Jovenel Moïse on
his election.
Guatemala welcomes the leadership and commitment
shown by the national authorities in financing,
organizing and providing security for the holding of
credible and inclusive of elections despite the adverse
humanitarian conditions resulting from the impact of
Hurricane Matthew. The success of the elections and
the transfer of power is an example of the political
maturity of the Haitian authorities.
We recognize Haiti’s efforts to strengthen its
justice and human rights sector. We encourage the
authorities to continue working towards ensuring that
their institutions, particularly the Supreme Court, are
fully functional, which is needed for strengthening
the rule of law and the standing of the institutions of
the country.
We believe that, when the Security Council
considers the Haitian national context, it must do so in
a comprehensive manner, in particular by taking into
24/30

11/04/2017

account the humanitarian situation, which was severely
aggravated following the impact of Hurricane Matthew
on 4 October, the consequences of which are still
affecting the population, owing to the limited access to
drinking water and the presence of presumed cases of
cholera. In that context, we commend the coordinated
efforts led by the Government of Haiti, with the support
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the country team and humanitarian
partners, to address the various needs arising from the
effects of Hurricane Matthew.
Furthermore, we believe that it is worth underlining
that the role and presence of the United Nations in Haiti
must have as their main goal to ensure a responsible
transition based on MINUSTAH’s achievements of
the past several years and to ensure the continued
support of the country’s priority needs. To that end, it
will be essential to ensure that the withdrawal of the
uniformed members of the peacekeeping mission does
not foster the perception of a security vacuum and
that the successor mission is focused on the rule of
law, human rights and the strengthening of the police.
We firmly believe that any transition must be carried
out in a responsible, gradual and realistic manner in
accordance with the country’s priorities and needs so
as to achieve sustainable peace in Haiti.
In conclusion, Guatemala supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations and appreciates the
leadership of Ms. Sandra Honoré and the work of
MINUSTAH’s civilian and uniformed personnel. The
degree of commitment shown over the past 12 years to
fulfil the mission’s mandate has reflected a coordinated
effort on the part of the international community that
has borne fruit. Guatemala has participated in those
stabilization efforts in Haiti and has contributed to
MINUSTAH since 2004. Our commitment to the
brotherly country of Haiti has been firm and consistent,
and it is our heartfelt wish to see Haiti achieve stability
and development for which we reiterate our support in
the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Allow me to join
Canada’s voice to others in expressing our condolences
to Egypt and Sweden.
Let me begin by highlighting the immense task
that has been accomplished by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since 2004
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

with regard to stability and security in Haiti. In that
regard, I would like to pay tribute to that mission’s staff
for their commitment and dedication demonstrated over
the past 13 years, including during the terrible events of
January 2010 and October 2016.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
sincerely thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her presentation today and her
tireless efforts towards Haiti’s development.
(spoke in French)
My country is particularly pleased with the
restoration of constitutional order in Haiti. The recent
conclusion of the electoral cycle must now pave the way
for a lasting socioeconomic recovery that will benefit
all and facilitate the transition to a successor United
Nations mission with a new name in accordance with
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2017/223).
More compact and focused, that new peace
operation will play a key role, notably through the
continued strengthening of the capacities of the Haitian
National Police and the necessary consolidation of the
rule of law. It is necessary that democracy, as well as
peace and security, take root as the foundation and the
necessary ingredients for greater prosperity for the
entire Haitian population, with particular attention
accorded to women, children and the most vulnerable.
Thanks to the efforts that have been made by the
Haitian people, we now can see the light at the end of
the tunnel and the next major stage — the economic
development of Haiti. But there will be no economic
development without growth supported by private
investment in Haiti. It is therefore urgent to consolidate
the rule of law and maintain peace and security so as to
develop an environment conducive to investment and
development. Only that kind of economic development
can ensure true improvement in the quality of life of the
Haitian people.
Although the progress made to date is undeniable,
the situation nevertheless remains fragile and
incomplete. As such, the progress achieved must be
preserved and consolidated through an effective and
responsible transition by duly taking into account the
situation on the ground, in particular the capacity of
the Haitian police to assume its entire mandate on its
own. The coming months will be decisive with regard

S/PV.7920

to the preparation and consequently to the success of
that transition.
As we turn a new page so that Haiti and the
international community can embark upon a decisive
turning point for the country’s future, Canada will
stand by the Haitian people in the name of our common
values and the strong bonds of friendship and solidarity
that unite us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to reiterate to the Government
and the people of Egypt the solidarity and sorrow of
my Government for the criminal attack they suffered
last weekend.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing
and welcome the presence here today of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Régis.
Chile associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Peru on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti.
Today’s debate is historic, since, as agreed by
the Security Council, we will be begin the process of
drawing down the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and establishing a successor
peace operation. That concludes a cycle initiated in
2004, when the international community came to the
aid of our Haitian brothers and sisters by setting up
a multidimensional mission with a broad mandate,
in which, for Chile and other countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean, the link between security
and development as a way of achieving sustainable
peace was fundamental. Rapid-impact projects and
programmes to reduce community violence carried out
by the MINUSTAH contingent are the most concrete
manifestation of that.
There are areas where achievements have been
considerable, such as stabilization and security,
and others where tasks are still pending, such as the
strengthening of the rule of law, access to justice and
human rights. Similarly, MINUSTAH played a key role
in addressing the humanitarian challenges posed by
the catastrophic 2010 earthquake and the subsequent
reconstruction, as well as the devastating consequences
of Hurricane Matthew and other natural disasters that
have regularly struck Haiti in the past.

17-0975825/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

The recent conclusion of the electoral process, the
restoration of constitutional order, the formation of
the new Government, the legislative power’s return to
functionality, the election of local authorities and other
milestones provide an opportunity that we cannot pass
up in our efforts to strengthen the principle of national
ownership and produce needed synergies with the
international community.
The United Nations will continue to be necessary
in supporting Haiti, and, accordingly, the peace
operation that will succeed MINUSTAH will play a
key role, together with the country team. That is why
we fully share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
a responsible transition in the United Nations presence,
grounded in the achievements of the past 13 years, is
required. Only in that way can we keep from losing
what we have gained on the road to stability and
development. We reiterate the importance of always
keeping in mind the conditions on the ground, and
especially of avoiding security gaps. Coordination
among all actors will be crucial.
Challenges to making progress in sustainable
development remain. However, the main humanitarian
challenge is the need to tackle the cholera epidemic.
Chile fully supports the new approach of the United
Nations in that connection, and we recently made a
contribution to the trust fund established to combat the
disease. However, funding is still very low, so we call
on the international community to contribute.
In addition, given the magnitude of the efforts
required, we find it difficult to believe that the new
United Nations mission in Haiti would not be linked to
the tasks that must be fulfilled. We reiterate our support
for the work of the Senior Adviser on the Impact of
Cholera in Haiti.
Chile will continue to promote United Nations
support for the new Government and the Haitian people
and to bolster the development of public policies aimed
at economic development, the consolidation of the rule
of law and the political participation of the country’s
citizens. After 13 years and the withdrawal of our
troops, we will continue to support Haiti. Indeed,
our assistance during the period from 2015 to 2018
represents nearly half of the what Chile earmarks for
the entire region.
This is an appropriate time to pay tribute to all
the men and women of various nationalities who have
26/30

11/04/2017

served in MINUSTAH, particularly those who have
given their lives for peace.
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s commitment
to Haiti and its people, reaffirming the importance
of continuing to support this sister nation, which has
sovereignty over its own development. As President
Bachelet pointed out in her latest visit to that country
a month ago: “We are sure that the road that Haiti has
started down with the support of the international
community will bear fruit sooner rather than later.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for your invitation to
participate in this meeting.
We welcome the fact that Haiti is on the path
of institutional normalization with the holding of
elections, the inauguration of a new president and the
restoration of constitutional order. We recognize the
support of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the international community
in that process. The arrival of the new Government in
Haiti provides us with the opportunity to work with new
partners, who are the principal persons responsible for
the destiny of their nation, and who, with the support
of the international community and the United Nations,
can focus their efforts on the development challenges
that Haiti faces.
I am particularly grateful to the Secretary-General
for his report on MINUSTAH (S/2017/223), and we
take due note of his recommendations on the gradual
drawdown of that mission before November 2017 and the
establishment of a successor mission. The new mission,
which is focused on strengthening Haitian institutions,
in particular the Haitian National Police, is particularly
welcome. However, the mission needs to have a mandate
and be given the capacity to assess the human rights
situation on the ground. The transition of the mission
must be carried out in a responsible, progressive and
prudent way so as to avoid a security vacuum. This
new stage is favourable for showing the capacity of the
United Nations and its Members to handle transitions,
assess progress and adjust peacekeeping operations to
political and security contexts.
We must ensure the foundations of sustainable and
lasting peace in Haiti. The drawdown of MINUSTAH
must not mean that the United Nations system is
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

failing to support that country. On the contrary, like all
other States, Haiti must meet the goals of sustainable
development. The United Nations, with the cooperation
of the international financial institutions, should
organize its efforts so as to reach concrete and longterm solutions for achieving those goals.
To that end, it is fundamental that, first, there be
maximum coordination among all the components of
the United Nations system present on the ground. The
future Resident Coordinator will have to ensure that all
actions are consistent with the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Secondly,
the health situation in Haiti must be improved, with
particular attention to coordinating, under the leadership
of World Health Organization and the Pan American
Health Organization, the effective provision of health
services and efforts to address the ravages of the cholera
epidemic in the country, for which we must support the
new approach of the Secretary-General. Thirdly, efforts
must be undertaken to build infrastructure in the water,
sanitation, roads, transportation and education sectors.
Fourthly, Haiti must be supported as it seeks to take
steps to reintegrate returnees in a positive manner.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate
Mexico’s commitment to sustainable peace in Haiti and
to the development of the country, as well as to the work
of the Economic and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti, in which my country participates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes to express
its heartfelt condolences to the delegations of Egypt
and Somalia and to their Governments and peoples
on the appalling terrorist attacks committed in their
countries. We strongly condemn these criminal acts
and reiterate our absolute rejection of such actions
by terrorist groups. We also call on the international
community to come together once and for all to put an
end to this scourge.
We wish to extend our congratulations to the
delegation of the United States on presiding over the
work of the Security Council this month. We also
welcome the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honoré, whose work at the helm of the

S/PV.7920

Mission has been guided by her firm commitment and
dedication to bringing about stability and development
for the Haitian people. We also welcome the presence of
the representative of Haiti.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its commitment to peace and democracy in Haiti,
and we congratulate the Government and the people
of this brotherly country on the successful holding of
presidential, legislative, municipal and local elections.
In this connection, we congratulate the President of the
Republic of Haiti, Jovenel Moïse, on his election.
The peacebuilding process in Haiti benefited
from resolute support on the part of the international
community and from the good offices of the United
Nations and the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States. These forums have over the past few
years taken diplomatic and logistical measures to bring
about stability and well-being for the Haitian people,
supporting this brotherly country in strict accordance
with the principles of sovereignty, independence and
self-determination.
Despite these encouraging developments, serious
challenges remain on the economic, social and structural
fronts in Haiti, reflections of a history plagued with
political turbulence and interference, which have
led to institutional fragility and undermined social
justice in this brotherly Caribbean country, the first
to obtain its independence in the Latin American and
Caribbean region.
Therefore, in this new phase of the institutional
life of Haiti, we must continue to provide support
to its authorities, with a view to achieving the goals
agreed upon within the framework of the Sustainable
Development Goals and ensuring that no one is left
behind. It is for this reason that we encourage the
international community to continue to cooperate with
the Haitian people unconditionally and in a manner
devoid of any political pressure, focusing on its social
development agenda, especially in terms of eradicating
poverty and reducing inequality, and with emphasis
on the consequences of the natural disasters that Haiti
has suffered.
Over the past few years Haiti has been impacted by
large-scale natural disasters that have had a devastating
effect on its people and on its economic and institutional
structure. The January 2010 earthquake and Hurricane
Matthew caused the country’s general situation to
deteriorate even further, especially on the humanitarian

17-0975827/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

front. In addition, Haiti has faced the repercussions of
the cholera outbreak and the spread thereof since 2010.
This tragic context requires a sustained commitment on
the part of the international community to strengthen
its cooperation mechanisms aimed at assisting the
Haitian people.
We also must devise a robust and timely response to
help the Haitian authorities to strengthen their choleraelimination plan by 2022 so as to help bring about a
transition from urgent humanitarian interventions to
programmes geared towards development in Haiti. It
is also necessary to translate into concrete action the
new focus of the United Nations in the fight against
the spread of cholera under the programme approved
by the General Assembly in its resolution 71/161.
We hope that the budget cuts will not affect these
humanitarian programmes.
We are at a critical time at which we must reflect
on the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in the context of the end of MINUSTAH’s
mandate in mid-October this year. Venezuela recognizes
that to date the Mission has helped to achieve stability
and to achieve important objectives in Haiti, but the
Security Council must also be aware that it has made
mistakes. We must therefore question the pre-eminence
of a security-based vision that has sidelined the
strengthening of the institutional capacities of the
Haitian State.
In this context, we welcome the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in his report
(S/2017/233) and the conclusions of the strategic
assessment mission, which carried out its work
following the elections. We deem appropriate the
caution expressed in the recommendation that there be
a phased, orderly withdrawal of the military contingent
in Haiti, which will help to fulfil the mandate of
supporting the efforts of the Haitian authorities to
ensure the country’s stability in the process of the
strengthening of their democratic institutions.
The close of MINUSTAH must mark the beginning
of a new phase of political stability in Haiti and the
end of military interventions focused on security in
Latin America and the Caribbean. The United Nations
successor mission to support justice in Haiti must be
focused on helping its authorities strengthen the rule of
law and social development.
Venezuela, as the second most active country in
the region in terms of bilateral cooperation with Haiti,
28/30

11/04/2017

is fully committed to development, political stability
and social stability in a free and sovereign Haiti. The
Bolivarian Government of President Nicolás Maduro
Moros has continued the legacy of Comandante Hugo
Chávez Frías, providing sustained assistance to the
people of Haiti on the basis of the principles of solidarity,
complementarity and reciprocity. In the framework of
the Petrocaribe Energy Cooperation Agreement and the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, we
will continue to support various initiatives and projects
that have been given priority by the Government of Haiti
targeting the areas of social development; humanitarian
assistance; infrastructure construction, rehabilitation
and maintenance; and education.
Finally, I should like to point out that the people
of Haiti, the homeland of Pétion, from which Simón
Bolívar drew inspiration to liberate our America, are
dignified and brave people that have fought tirelessly
for their freedom, self-determination and indepedence.
All Haiti wants and needs from the international
community is cooperation, in a spirit of solidarity, free
of conditions or political blackmail — the only kind of
cooperation that will enable Haiti to move forward and
determine its own destiny in a sovereign manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my country, Peru, which has also suffered
from terrorism, we would like to express our solidarity
with and support for the countries that have been
victims of terrorist attacks.
(spoke in English)
I now have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala,
the United States, Uruguay and my country, Peru.
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
for having convened this debate to discuss the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2017/223) and its observations and recommendations
following the strategic assessment mission to determine
the future presence and role of the United Nations
in Haiti.
The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and wishes to thank her for
17-09758

11/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

her comprehensive briefing and for the role that she has
been playing to support the political process in Haiti
and the professionalization of the police and in the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment.
The Group of Friends acknowledges the important
role that MINUSTAH has played in ensuring stability
and security in Haiti, expresses its deep appreciation
and gratitude to the personnel of MINUSTAH and to
all Member States which have contributed to it and pays
tribute to those who have been injured or killed in the
line of duty.
The strengthening of the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive
to democratic stability, and improving socioeconomic
conditions are the key elements needed to achieve
greater security, stability and prosperity in Haiti. In
that regard, the Group of Friends recognizes the major
milestone towards stabilization that was achieved with
the peaceful completion of the electoral process and
the return to constitutional order on 7 February 2017.
It commends the Haitian authorities, in particular
the Haitian Provisional Electoral Council and the
Haitian National Police (HNP), for their efforts
towards ensuring that the elections were conducted in
a credible and inclusive manner and held in a largely
peaceful environment.
The Group of Friends also congratulates the new
President of the Republic of Haiti, Mr. Jovenel Moïse,
and welcomes the new Government led by Prime
Minister Jack Guy Lafontant, and sends its wishes for
success in this new stage.
The Group of Friends emphasizes the importance
of national ownership, inclusivity and the role that civil
society can play to advance national peacebuilding
processes, and reiterates the vitality of the commitment
by the Government of Haiti to strengthen the rule
of law and make further progress in the justice and
security sectors.
The Group of Friends welcomes the ongoing
strengthening, professionalization and reform of the
HNP, while noting the need for continued international
support for the Haitian police, and affirms the
importance of the HNP’s strategic plan for the period
2017-2021, developed on the basis of a joint HNPUnited Nations capacity and needs assessment.
The Group of Friends stresses that no genuine
stability, sustaining peace or sustainable development

S/PV.7920

can take place in Haiti without strengthening
democratic institutions and democratic processes. In
that context, the Group emphasizes the importance of
promoting the rule of law through the strengthening
of Haitian institutions, and further reaffirms the
responsibility of MINUSTAH for supporting the
Haitian State by promoting improved governance
structures, transparency, the independence of the
judiciary, and the promotion and protection of human
rights, in accordance with its mandate.
In that regard, the Group of Friends encourages
the Government of Haiti to make progress in the field
of justice and human rights. The Group of Friends
recognizes that strengthening national human rights
institutions and respect for human rights, including the
rights of women and children, respect for due process
and combating criminality, sexual and gender-based
violence, putting an end to impunity and prolonged
pretrial detention, and ensuring accountability are
essential to ensuring the rule of law and security in
Haiti, including access to justice. The Group of Friends
reaffirms its solidarity with, and commitment to, the
people and the Government of Haiti in their pursuit
of stability, reconstruction, recovery, socioeconomic
development and democratic consolidation.
The Group of Friends welcomes General Assembly
resolution 71/161, entitled “The new United Nations
approach to cholera in Haiti,” which intends to renew
the Organization’s efforts aimed at eliminating the
transmission of cholera and at addressing the suffering
of its victims. The Group of Friends notes that the
implementation of that new approach will fall under
the responsibility of the United Nations country team
under the coordination of a deputy representative of
the Secretary-General, a humanitarian coordinator
or a resident coordinator. The Group of Friends notes
that, while important progress has been made, Haiti
continues to face significant humanitarian challenges,
especially in the aftermath of Hurricane Matthew.
Furthermore, the Group of Friends affirms that
progress in the reconstruction of Haiti and in its
socioeconomic development — including through
effective, coordinated, appropriate international
development assistance, given the increased Haitian
institutional capacity to benefit from such assistance — is
crucial to achieving sustaining peace and stability. The
Group of Friends reiterates the need for security to be
accompanied by sustainable development in its social,
economic and environmental dimensions, efforts in

17-0975829/30

S/PV.7920

The question concerning Haiti

which the Government of Haiti plays a leading role,
with the assistance of the United Nations country team.
The Group of Friends welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General of 16 March 2017 (S/2017/223),
which includes observations and recommendations
by the strategic assessment mission, as requested by
the Security Council in resolution 2313 (2016). It also
welcomes the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
a new United Nations mission be established in Haiti
following the termination of MINUSTAH by 15 October,
in order to continue to assist the Government of Haiti
in consolidating gains by reinforcing Government
institutions and strengthening the national capacity for
the rule of law, police development and human rights.

30/30

11/04/2017

The Group of Friends recognizes the important
contribution of MINUSTAH to the stabilization in Haiti
and that the moment has come to start a responsible
transition to a new phase of United Nations activities
in the country, focused on strengthening the rule of law
institutions in Haiti, prioritizing support and capacitybuilding for the HNP, and engaging in human rights
monitoring and reporting, as set out in paragraph 62 of
the Secretary-General’s report.
The Group of Friends looks forward to a gradual
and responsible transition moving forward in the new
peacekeeping mission.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

17-09758
