S/2005/644

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 October 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 11 October 2005 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1606 (2005) dated
20 June 2005, by which the Council requested me to initiate negotiations with the
Government of Burundi and consultations with all Burundian parties concerned on
how to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the assessment
mission (see S/2005/158) on the establishment of a mixed Truth Commission and a
Special Chamber within the court system of Burundi. I was further requested to
report to the Council by 30 September on details of implementation, including costs,
structures and time frame.
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 1606 (2005), a number of
important developments have taken place within Burundi, necessitating some delays
in the timetable initially envisaged for the start of the negotiations with the
Government. On 18 July, the Transitional Government of Burundi had appointed a
Commission to negotiate with the United Nations the establishment of the Truth
Commission and the Special Chamber. However, with the ongoing electoral process
in Burundi, which culminated in the inauguration of President Pierre Nkurunziza on
26 August, negotiations with the United Nations did not take place. With the
installation of a new Government in Burundi, the Commission established by the
Transitional Government has been disbanded and a new negotiating team has yet to
be appointed.
During meetings in early September with the United Nations Operation in
Burundi, President Nkurunziza and the newly appointed Minister of Justice, Clotilde
Niragira, expressed the Government’s support, in principle, for the establishment of
the dual-accountability mechanism, with the establishment of a Truth Commission
to precede that of a Special Chamber. In this regard, they indicated their intention to
nominate a small committee to liaise with the United Nations on the details of the
proposed legal framework. In these and similar meetings, however, it was made
clear to the Operation that the Government of Burundi would not be ready to engage
in substantive negotiations before 30 September.
In preparation for the negotiations with the Government of Burundi on the
practical implementation of the legal framework for the Truth Commission and the
Special Chamber, a series of consultations among Secretariat Departments and
Offices, and between the Secretariat and relevant non-governmental organizations,
have taken place at United Nations Headquarters. The discussions focused on
coordination among the Departments and Offices concerned and their respective

05-54749 (E) 131005

*0554749*

S/2005/644

roles in the process of elaborating the operational modalities of both accountability
mechanisms, the interrelationship between the two and their sequencing in time. A
legal framework for the dual-accountability mechanism elaborated on the basis of
these consultations will be shared with the Government as a basis for negotiation.
In parallel, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights undertook a preparatory mission to Burundi between 27 September and
1 October to discuss coordination between the Office and the United Nations
Operation in Burundi in the establishment of a Truth Commission, the initiation of
an information campaign, the design of a national consultative process on both
mechanisms, and the organization of a national conference on transitional justice.
In the coming weeks, the United Nations Operation in Burundi will initiate
preparatory discussions with members of the Government. These discussions will
focus on the nature of the Truth Commission and the Special Chamber proposed in
the assessment mission report, and on the negotiation and national consultations
processes.
On the basis of the preliminary results of the consultative process, the
preparatory discussions with the Government of Burundi and its readiness to start
the negotiating process, a United Nations mission will be dispatched to Burundi to
negotiate the practical implementation of the legal framework for the dualaccountability mechanism and will report in due course to the Security Council as
requested in its resolution 1606 (2005).
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
