UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING: 29 JUNE 1977

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/201 7) . . . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . , . , . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . f . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Mozambique :
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12350 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . .

1

S/PV.2017

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplcnzents of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

20 17TH MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
l’f-esident:

Mr. William H, BARTON (Canada).

Me&d
(Egypt), Mr. G. Rawiri (Gabon), Mr. P. Florin
(German Democratic Republic), Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cissd
(Guinea), Mr. C. D. MO&O (Lesotho), Mr. J, A! Garba
(Nigeria), Mr. C B. Djigo (Senegal), Mr. M. Medani (Sudan),
Mr. M. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. B. Mkapa (United
Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. S.G. Mwale (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

??wse?r t: The representatives of the following States:
Belli& Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
or+ Itldia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
1’;111:1111;1,
Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Ullited
KiWJ,dOlll of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Lirlircd States of America and Venezuela.

3. The PRESIDENT: I have received a letter from the
representative of Swaziland in which he requests an
invitation to participate in the discussion of the question on
the agenda. Accordingly, 1 propose, in conformity with the
usual practice and with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the Council’s discussion
without the right to vote, under the provisions of Article 31
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2017)
1. Adoption

of

the agenda

2. (‘onlplaint
by Mozambique:
Letter
dated 72 June 1977 from the Permanent
Representative
of Mozambique to the United Natinns
addressed to the President of the Security
COU~IC~~
(S/l2350 and Add.1)

4. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the represeniative of Swaziland to
take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Councii table when it is his turn to
address the Council.

TllC ?rl eetilrg was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agc?xla

29 June 1977, at 3 pm.

wus adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. IV M Malingu
(Swaziland) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.

Complaint
by Mozambique:
Letter
dated 22 Jmle 1977 from the Permanent Representative
of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2350 and Add.1)

5. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French):
Once again the Security Council is seized of the grave
consequences of acts of aggression committed against
Mozambique by the armed forces of the illegal Rhodesian
regime. The latest aggressive actions of the Southern
Rhodesian racists which have been described in the course
of this debate and which are increasingly in the nature of
acts of war are part of a whole series of armed attacks
carried out by the Smith rCgime against independent
African States.

PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
1. The
take11 at the 2014th meeting, I invite the Minister for
Dcvclopment
and Economic Planning of Mozambique to
take 3 place at the Council table.
or the invitation of the President, Mr. M. dos Santos
(~/oxnzbiquc)
took a place at the Council table.
In accordance with the decisions
-.-I ‘l’lje l>i<ESIDENT:
t:lkcn 3 t previous meetings, I invite the representatives of
Algcrin,
Angola, Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Gabon. the
~;er,,~;~l~ Democratic
Republic, Guinea, Lesotho. Nigeria,
tllc Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United
Sencgnl,
t<cpublic
of Tanzania and Zambia to take the places
reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. The statement made on 18 June by the President of
FRELIMO and of the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
Mr. Samora Machel [S/12350, a/mex ZI], the statement
made yesterday before the Council by the head of the
delegation of Mozambique, Mr. Marcelino dos Santos
/2014th meeting], as well as the participation in our
debates of other outstanding African personages, underscores with the force of proof the particular seriousness of
the case we are considering. The explosive situation which
exists in southern Africa and the danger posed by the
aggressive policy and actions of the Southern Rhodesian

At t/1 c i/Ivitation o.f‘thc President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
(los antes
(Angola), Mr. D. K. Kwelagobe
III/: J. E.
(~~ots,r,u~ra),
fi~r. H. Alarcdn (Cuba), Mr. A. E Abdel
1

racist regime to the People’s Republic of Mozambique and
to international peace and security have rightly been
emphasized.

attainment of their sacred right to a free, dignified and
independent life that the Romanian people reaffirms its
complete support for the just struggle of the Mozambican
people in defence of their freedom and independence and
for the right to be masters of their own country.

7. The Smith regime continues cynically to defy the
appeals of the international community and is endeavouring
to stifle the courageous struggle of the Zimbabwe people
for their independence. In so doing, it resorts to attempts at
intimidating other African peoples and infringes on the
sovereignty
of neighbouring States which are in the
vanguard of the struggle for the elimination of the last
vestiges of colonialism and racism. It is obvious that the
racist regime is seeking to escalate the internal conflict and
carry it beyond the borders of Southern Khodesia, thus
creating a new and dangerous hot-bed of tension.

14. My country considers that firm international action is
required to put an end to the attacks by the Rhodesian
racists and to eliminate all violations of the freedoms and
legitimate national rights of the peoples of southern Africa,
as well as to abolish all forms of colonialist and neo-colonialist policy, oppression, diktat. racial discrimination,
apartheid and foreign domination.
15. The feelings of militant solidarity of Socialist Romania
with the people of Mozambique were reflected in the
material, political and diplomatic support given to that
people in its struggle for independence. From the outset.
the people of Romania have been side by side with the
people of Mozambique, both in its long struggle against
colonialism and in its present efforts to consolidate national
independence. The solemn joint declaration signed by
President Nicolae Ccausescu and President Samora Machcl
established a broad framework for the further development
of friendship, co-operation and solidarity between our two
countries and peoples.

8. Such provocations by the Salisbury racist rigime endanger peace and security on the African continent and
once again show the Southern Rhodesian racists in their
true light not only as oppressors of the African population
of Zimbabwe but also as obstinate enemies of the independence and savereignty of free African peoples. The
actions of the Smith regime are at the same time an
indication of its increased vulnerability when confronted by
the struggle for national liberation; they are acts of despair
in the face of the intensified resistance of the Zimbabwe
freedom fighters.
0. It may logically be asked how it is possible for an illegal
rebel r6gime so cynically and arrogantly to defy the
international community and the unanimous decisions of
the United Nations, including those of the Security
Council. It is certainly not difficult to perceive that that
rCgime remains in power only because of the support it
receives from outside, particularly from South Africa.

16. The entire international community recognizes more
than ever before the imperative need for energetic and
sustained action to promote the exercise of the inalienable
right of the people of Zimbabwe to decide its own fate. The
Security Council, by virtue of its responsibilities and
prerogatives, has the duty to jet by resorting to the means
that are required to put an end to all acts of aggression, to
prevent their repetition in the future and, accordingly, to
safeguard international peace and security.

10. At the same time, WC are entitled to wonder with
legitimate concern about the consequences of the continuation and intensification 01‘ Southern Rhodesian aggressian against neighbouring African peoples. Indeed, at stake
are pence and security in the region and throughout the
wortd, as well as the very credibility of the Organization.

17. The delegation of Mozatnbique has given US detailed
indications elf the direction that the Council should take
and they have the full support of the delegation of
Romania.
18. It is absolutely necessary to organize the modalities
for multilateral assistance to he given to Mozambique to
make good the damage caused by the aggressor and to
enable it to strengthen its defence capability. Measures
must also he adopted to promote the struggle t’or national
liberation and the unconditional transfer of power to the
Zimbabwe people. To that end, further action must be
taken SO as completely to isolate the illegal racist rCgime by
broadening sanctions and ensuring their strict application
by all States, without any exception,

t 1. In an effort to perpetuate their domination in Rhodesia, the Southern Rhodesian racists have begun to turn
their invasions- the so-called incursions and punitive expeditions against neighbouring African States-into
a permanent practive involving human casualties and serious
material destruction. In this connexion, the statement made
by the head of the delegation of Mozambique paints an
edifying picture of the barbaric actions of the troops of the
Rhodesian racist rigime, the massacres of the civilian
population and the destruction of areas of Mozambique by
tile invading forces.

19. The I’KESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan, who wishes to make a statement in
his capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group for the month
of June. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

13-4 Socialist Romania, which has always supported the
just struggle for the national and social liberation of the
African peoples. resolutely and indignantly condemns the
aggressive actions systematically committed by the Salisbury rkgime against Mozambique and against olher neighbouring African States.

20. Mr. MEDANI (Sudan): I thank you, Mr. President, and
through YOU the other members of the C’ouncii for allowing
me, on behall’ of the Arab Group. to address this august
body on a matter of great concern to all of us assembled
here, That is. the question of Rhodesia’s premeditated

13. II is in the spirit of solidarity with the national
liberation struggle of the peoples of southern Africa for the
2

aggression against a Member State. Furthermore, I wish to
seize this opportunity to extend to you our delegation’s
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. for the month of June. We are sure
that, under your wise leadership and guidance, the Council
will be able to take effective measures on the grave matter
which is now before it.

Council’s resolution imposing sanctions on Southern Rho.
desia. Obviously that decision has enraged the Smith clique
and invited its revenge. However, Mozambique was only
complying with the international community’s desire to
isolate an illegal rCgime when it closed jts borders with the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia, Ian Smith, finding
himself unable to face the situation arising from that
action, reverted to suppression and naked acts of aggression
against unarmed innocent people that led to the loss of
1,432 lives, the wounding and crippling of hundreds and
the destruction of towns and most needed infrastructure.

21. It is with great feelings of joy and pride and fraternal
sentiments that we avail ourselves of this occasion to
congratulate the sister Republic of Djibouti and its heroic
people on the happy event of the attainment of their
independence. I am sure that their future part.icipation in
the international community of independent countries will
enhance our sense of responsibility and our confidence in a
better world.

26. Thus Mozambique has become a victim of its own
unconditional support for the oppressed and colonized
people of Zimbabwe. Furthermore, it is increasingly evident
that the atrocities of the illegal rdgime of Ian Smith will
continue. The acts of aggression committed against
Botswana and now Mozambique and the threats received by
President Kaunda of Zambia clearly indicate that the
rebellious rigime of Salisbury has predetermined sinister
designs which it intends to carry out in that part of Africa,
All of us know that, were it not for the huge moral and
materai support that Ian Smith is receiving from the bastion
of apartheid, South Africa, he would never dare to
contemplate such designs.

22. The Arab delegations have listened with great interest to
the statements made by the Vice-President of FRELIMO
and Minister for Development and Economic Planning of
Mozambique and by other representatives who have participated in the Council’s deliberations, The Minister from
Mozambique (2014th meeting/, in his lucid statement, gave
us a true picture of the situation at present prevailing in
that region and brought to the attention of the Council the
provocative and barbaric aggression committed against his
country by the illegal rBgimc of lan Smith.

27. However, more specifically, we have been given a
reminder-indeed,
a warning-by the President of Mozambique of the significance of these crimes. With the insigl!t
and vision of a true revolutionary, he drew the following
conclusion in his statement:

23. Only recently, at the Afro-Arab Summit Conference
Meeting at Cairo, last March, the Arab Heads of State and
Government, together with their brothers, the African
Heads of State and Government, adopted a political
declaration which, inter alia, condemns

“First, they mean that lan Smith’s rCgime is in a state
of open war against Mozambique, with the aim of
carrying beyond his borders his conflict with the people
of Zimbabwe. They mean that he hopes to internationalize an internal conflict and divert the attention of
world public opinion from the central question, which is
the Zimbabwe people’s struggle for national liberation.

“the constant military aggressions as well as other
political and economic manoeuvres carried out by imperialism through the racist regimes of South Africa and
Rhodesia and their allies, against the sovereign States of
Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique and Zambia,
with the aim of politically destabilizing the Governments
of these countries and of sabotaging their efforts for
economic development” (S/12298, m117ex, par& 7f.

“The very existence of the racist Salisbury rCgime is in
itself a threat to peace in this region of Africa.” [See
S/12350, annex IL/

Permit me to reiterate that the Arab countries and peoples,
which have always stood beside their African brothers and
which have time and again condemned the oppressors and
colonizers of the African people of southern Africa, wish
once again to reaffirm their unflinching support lo the
people of Mozambique.

28. This is a crisis situation. It is not a situation which we
can sit by and watch, but a situation with which the
Security Council must immediately cope and which it must
place in its meaningful and right perspective. Therefore, the
Council today is called upon not only to take effective
measures to compel the Salisbury regime to refrain from
such acts of aggression, but also to find ways and means to
strengthen the military capability of Mozambique to defend
its national sovereignty against future threats of racist
aggression. This is a naked fact, if not a moral ideal.

24. This is not the first time that the Council has been
seized of an aggression perpetrated by the racist r6gime of
Ian Smith against a Member State. The continued acts of
aggression by that illegal rigime against the front-line
African States have been escalated to such a point and have
reached such a level of ferocity that they can no longer be
toIerated by the international community.

29. It is imperative that the United Nations and al1 the
countries of the world respond to the justified appeal of the
Mozambican people far international assistance. Indeed, the
Security Council and the international community are duty
bound to render all kinds of assistance to Mozambique to
enable it to carry out its international respOnSibilitieS
in
accordance with the spirit of the Charter.

25. Today the Council is once again called upon to
consider a matter of grave consequence not only for the
African people but for the world at large, namely, the
repeated acts of aggression committed by the illegal
minority rCgime against Mozambique. The People’s Republic of Mozambique has merely started to implement the

30. The military aggression that has been committed and
the tension currently prevailing in that part of the African
3

statement, with the escalation of these actions-which
began as simple provocations on the borders and violations
of the air space of Mozambique-the situation has now
entered on a phase of open aggression.

continent constitute a threat to international peace and
security. Consequently, it is of paramount importance that
the Security Council, the custodian of world peace, should
fulfil certain obligations. Most important among those
obligations is the taking of effective measures, particularly
those provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter, in
order to bring to a speedy end the situation prevailing in
Zimbabwe,
the situation which is the source of the
instability that constitutes a serious threat to world peace.

36. We listened attentively to the statement here yesterday [2014th meeting] by the Minister for Development
and Economic Planning of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique, Mr. dos Santos. He gave us a complete picture
of the actual state of affairs, as well as a’cogent analysis of
the situation which has been created. The head of the
delegation of Mozambique pointed out that, having begun
with individual acts of incursion which lasted for a few
hours and were carried out by limited forces, the militarists
of the Salisbury rCgime have now turned to mass attacks,
with clear purposes, The purposes of the invaders-apart
from systematic destruction of peaceful inhabitants-affect
vital elements of the economic and social infrastructure of
the country.

3 1. While saluting the African front-line countries, which
so gallantly carry the burden of the atrocities of the
minority regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury-to
the great
detriment of their economic development and the prosperity of their peoples-I wish, on behalf of the Sudan
delegation, to call on all Member States to offer all possible
assistance to the Government and people of Mozambique to
enable them to defend themselves against the barbaric
aggression by their outlaw neighbours, and thereby to foil
the attempt of Ian Smith to divert international opinion
from the central question, which is Zimbabwe and its
people’s struggle for national liberation.

37. Numerous armed attacks and raids and constant acts
of provocation against neighbouring African States have
long since become a customary part of the policy of the
Rhodesian racists. The most recent act of armed aggression
by the Smith clique has only added to the list of barbarous
raids into the territory of Mozambique, Zambia, Botswana
and other independent African countries. The patience of
African countries and world public opinion is now exhausted, That is shown by the very presence here of the
leaders of many of those countries. It is shown also by the
whole tone of this discussion in the Council.

32. The Sudan delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to reiterate the firm commitment of the people and
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan to
the people of Southern Rhodesia in their struggle to
liberate themselves from the illegal rdgime of Ian Smith.
33. We wish also to congratulate the President of Mozambique and his people on their gallant role in repelling the
forces of aggression and on the dedication they have shown
in raising the banner of the struggle by the people of
Zimbabwe for liberation.

38. The question of the situation in Southern Rhodesia
and sanctions against the illegal rCgime which usurped
power in that country has been considered by the Security
Council on many occasions. The Smith rCgime has been
outlawed by the Council which has also declared its aim to
be the elimination of that regime and the guaranteeing of
the freedom and independence of the people of Zimbabwe.
However, as has been clearly demonstrated by recent
events, that alone is not sufficient now. Recently, the
Council discussed the question of the need to extend
mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. The extension of sanctions is necessary because the previous
measures, which were limited in scope and fell far short of
fulfilling the requirements of Article 41 of the Charter, did
not yield the hoped-for results. They did nothing to put a
stop to domination by the Southern Rhodesian racists, nor
did they accelerate the full and final liberation of the
people of Zimbabwe. Unfortunately,
the deliberations
which took place did not result in an understanding to the
effect that all measures within the,full scope of Article 41
should be immediately applied against the Smith rbgime.
Nevertheless, the Council did assume the obligation to
resume consideration of the question. That was a step
forward, though an inadequate one.

34. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): We are faced
with yet another incursion by the troops of the Southern
Rhodesian racist regime into the territory of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique. This constitutes a qualitatively
new stage in the development of this situation in southern
Africa. What we are confronted by is infringements by the
racists on the freedom and sovereignty of independent
African States-infringements
which have assumed a
systematic and massive character. The racist rbgimes are
more and more clearly exacerbating the situation in
southern Africa, intensifying the threat to international
peace and security. This is now an undisguised challenge to
African States, to the United Nations and to world public
opinion. It is precisely on those considerations that the
Security Council should base its present examination of the
question of the new acts of aggression committed by the
illegal Smith regime against the People’s Republic of
Mozambique.
35. As is pointed out in the statement of 18 June last
[ibid.] by the President of FRELIMO and President of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique, Mr. Machel, the crimes
committed against that State by the Southern Rhodesian
rCgime mean that racism is now in a state of open war
against Mozambique, in its anxiety to internationalize the
conflict and divert the attention of world public opinion
from the central question: the Zimbabwe people’s struggle
for national liberation, As is also pointed out in the

39. We cannot fail to note that those who have objected
and continue to object to the application against the illegal
Southern Rhodesian rCgime of mandatory sanctions with
the full scope provided for in Article 41 of the Charter are
assuming a very heavy responsibility. It is now obvious that
delays in the Council’s adopting decisive measures against
the Smith rCgime have served only to encourage the racists,
4

‘4. \

--

of the Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation. That Treaty
between two natural alliesin the strugglefor the idealsof
peace, freedom and independence and for social progress
has been correctly judged as an important and timely
political act in support of the revolutionary achievements
of the Mozambique people, particularly in the light of the
continuing attempts on the part of reactionary forces to
undermine the development of Mozambique on its path
towards progress.
50. As was pointed out in an interview of Mr. Leonid
Ilyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and
President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
USSR, recently publishedin Le Mul?cie, the peoplesof the
African continent are waging an active struggle for their
freedom and independence,for their right freely to choose
the path of their own development. They are struggling
againstthe disgracefulphenomenaof racismand apartheid.
That is a just struggleand our country hasalways supported
and will continue to support it.

but also because of the international repercussions which it
might have and which might lead to a generalized conflict
in the region.
55. 1f we seek more just standards of human conduct and
continue to strive 1.0 that end in every international forum,
let us now promote the transformation of traditional
standards so as to arrive at new rules to govern relations
among States and to create a more just world order which
will make the world more habitable.

56. In this case we believe that there are certain western
Powers which must bear a special responsibility in the
region and which should review their standard of conduct.
It is they who, with their influence and economic power
and with a new policy towards the racist rCgimcs, could
prevent the crisis from becoming more serious. We knuw
that the survival of the racist rCgime would be impossible
without economic support from abroad, and it is those
countries that possess the power to prevent further blooclshed. The African peoples have the strength of the justice
of their cause and no one can prevent them from
5 1, Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretatiorz fi’om
continuing their struggle against colonialism and racism
Spa/zBhJ The Republic of Mozambique, a memberof the
international community, has once again suffered aggres- until they attain final victory.
sion at the hands of the illegal rigime of Southern
Rhodesia.
57. Smith is being maintained in power by armed aggression, His attacks against Mozambique have been sys52. The problems of southern Africa will continue to
tematically carried out over the last year and the loss ut
occupy our attention so long as there are factors which lives and the material damage suffered by that people arc
prevent the effective exercise of the rights of its peoples unbearable. He no doubt wants to gcncralize the conllict
and so long as their territorial integrity and sovereigntyare which now affects not only Mozambique but also Botswana
threatened. The situation of the African people who are and Zambia, and LOinstall himself permanently in that parf
still subjected to colonialism and racism must be a matter
of Africa.
of continuous concern to us becauseacts of aggression
againsthuman dignity are still beingcommitted. This isthe
58. The appeal made by President Machel is clear. It calls
subject of our debate and it is our duty to try to arrive at
viable solutions. Unlesswe can formulate specific proposals for political, moral, diplomatic and material support from
the international community for the struggle for national
and unless we can prevent further confrontations, or at
liberation
of the people of Zimbabwe, and for the people 01
least find a way to stabilize the situation in the region, WC
must
conclude that all the decisionsthat we have adopted Mozatnbique who are applying the sanctions imposed
against the British colony of Southern Rhodesia.
arepitifully ineffective.
53. Only a month after the Maputo Conference, at which
we reaffirmed our solidarity wifh the peoplesof Namibia
and Zimbabwe, the racists of Southern Khodesia have
intensified their attacks againstthe people of Mozambique.
The situation in that country, which recently became
independent, has become aggravated as a result of the
organized attacks of the racists against a valiant people
capable of making sacrificesin order to comply with the
sanctions imposed against the illegal r@gimeof Southern
Rhodesia. President Samora Machel affirmed, at Maputo,
the responsibility of the countries which refused to punish
those who still continue to strengthen the power and
promote the sordid interestsof the Fascists,the colonialists
and the racists in Southern Africa, thanks to whom policies
of consent and veiled support-in this case, support for
destabilization and aggressionin that region-can be pursued.
54. The situation being reviewed by the Council at this
time is particularly distressing,not only becauseof the
suffering that it hasbrought to the peopleof Mozambique,
6

59. We trust that the entire international community.
aware of the urgent need of the peoples of southern Africa
to attain full human dignity, will assist in the quest fur
solutions and will support the just claimsof the people01’
Mozambique, who are pursuing the highest aspiration 01
mankind, namely, freedom.
60. The people of Mozambique have reaffirmed heir
decision not to yield in the face of intimidation and
aggressiveattacks on what it haswon through courageous
struggle or on the sovereignty it fought so hard to gain.
That is the responsibility which that people has assun~~l
and it is a most noble one,
61. Lastly, we hope that, at the end of our debate in the
Council, we shall be able to adopt, by consensus,;I
resolution which will expressthe profound concern 01‘tlrc
Security Council and establishrulesfor future action by the
international comtnunity in support or the people ot’
Mozambique and the oppressed
peoplesof southern Africa.

62. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Mauritius has
proposed that the meeting be suspended for half an hour.
As there is no objection, it is so decided.

againstAfricans by resorting to murderousattacks against
neighbouringAfrican States. We have had ampleevidence
of that in the repeated attacks against Botswana,Zambia
and Mozambique.The Smith rkgimeiS well awarethat there
is no way out for it but to surrender to the liberation
movementthat will ultimately be victorious.

63. Mr. RAMPI-IUL (Mauritius): This debate has reached a
crucial stage. Yesterday /2014th meeting/ we heard the
complaint of hlozambique eloquently presented by His
Excellency Mr. Marcclino dos Santos, head of the Mozambique delegation and Minister for Development and Economic Planning. We have also heard the views of a
ministerialdelegationwhich, on behalf of the Organization
of African Unity, presentedthe African position, Yesterday
evening, again this morning and, indeed, up to a few
minutesago.the African membersof the Council have been
engagedin discussingwith other membersof the Council
the termsof an African draft resolution which has the full
approval of the African Group and the Group of NonAligned States,aswell asa numberof other States.

68. However, Smith believesthat his position would be
improved if he could internationalize the conflict. President
Machel mentioned that in his statementat Maputo on 18
June when he saidthat the Smith rCgimewasin a state of
open war against Mozambique, with the aim of carrying
beyond its borders its conflict with the people of Zimbabwe. Evidently, Smith hoped that States sympatheticto
his rCgimewould intervene, The Council would do well to
heed the warning given by the Foreign Minister of Zambia
when he told the Council yesterday: “It is no exaggeration . . . that the situation in southern Africa contains
the seedsof a polarizcd . . . conflict.” [I!.~id., pnva.65./
69. The description given by the Government of Mozambique of the attacks conducted againstits territory by the
armed forces of the Smith rCgimeclearly showsthat the
regime is being supplied with a formidable arsenalof
sophisticated weaponsand aircraft. The recent Commonwealth ConferencecondemnedSouth Africa for the military andeconomicsupport it continuesto give to the illegal
rl”gime.We have no illusionsabout the role of South Africa
and the fact that it is Smith’s principal supporter. But, as
the Foreign Minister of Tanzania has observed[ibid.,
para.88/, someof the equipmentusedby the Smith regime
is not of South African origin; it has been suppliedby
Statesoutside Africa.

64. In keepingwith the traditionsof the Council, we have
endeavoured to cnsurc that each member was given
sufficient time to study the contents of the draft and to
seek instructions from his Government. I am glad to say
that, in most casts,we have received favourable reactions.
After consultations,I feel it safeto say that, at the time 01
introducing this draft rescllutiotl-whicl~ i shall do in a
moment--it hasbeenpossibleto secureagreementon minor
,changesin the original draft. The final draft has been
distributed in English. I should like to make clear that,
becauseof the urgency of the situation, it is the intention
of the sponsorsto put the draft to the vote by Thursday
morningat the latest.
65. With thoseintroductory remarks,I shouldnow like To
addressmyself to Ihe substance of the complaint by
Mozambiquebefore introducing the draft resolution.
66. The chargesmadeby the Government of Mozambique
against the illegal rbgime in Zimbabwe are of the most
serious nature and I’rcsident Samora Machel has aptly
describedthe acts of that rCgimeas crimes against the
Mozambican pcoplc. The repeated violations of Mozambique’sterritory by the armedforces of the Smilh rCgime,
the murderous acts which those forces have committed
againstthe people of Mozambique, the widespreadterror,
the intimidation and Lhc wanton destruction deliberately
and callously caused by the forces of the illegal rCgimeare
acts which constitute, in the clearest possiblemanner, a
threat to peaceand international security. They arc acts
that cannot be ignored by the Security Council and that
must be dealt with in the firmest manner, in accordance
with the provisionsof Chapter VII of the Charter.
67. It is a known fact that the decisions,first by Zambia
in 1973 and then by Mozambiquein 1’976,to closetheir
borderswith the rebel colony of Southern Rhodesiaand to
enforce sanctions in accordance with Security Council
resolutionsincant the end of any hope ol’ survival on the
part of the Smith rdgime. It hasbecome simply a question
of time before the rdgimccollapses.Since then, the Smith
rggime has expressedits frustrations and its vengeance
7

70. The Government of Mozambique has the responsibility of taking whatever measuresit can to protect the
lives and property of its citizens and to safeguardthe State
against armed attacks and violations of its territorial
integrity. Article 51 of the Charter recognizesthat. In
normal circumstances,we would expect eachState to make
whatever arrangementsit considered necessaryfor the
defence of its territory, but we are not dealing with
conditions of normality. We are dealingwith a situation
whereby a State, becauseit has decidedto comply with its
obtigations under the Charter, finds itself the victim of
aggression
asa result of that decision.
71. It is the position of my Government-and this is
indeed a position sharedby the African Group of States,
the non-aligned States and many other States-that the
United Nations has an inescapableresponsibility to assist
Mozambique in defendingitself andto eliminatethe source
responsiblefor suchaggression.
72, it is appropriatethat the Council should alsotake note
of Article 50 of the Charter, which states:
“If preventive or enforcement measuresagainst any
State are taken by the Security Council, any other State,
whether a Member of the United Nations or not, which
finds itself confronted with specialeconomic problems
arisingfrom the carrying out of thosemeasures
shallhave
the right to consult the Security Council with regardto a
solution of thoseproblems.”

independence, and would call for intensified assistance to
the people and their national liberation movement. Here I
mu$t point out that the authors are using the generic term
“national liberation movement”, a term which encompasses
al! those engaged in the struggle for the liberation of
Zimbabwe.

73. Having said that, it is my privilege to introduce on
behalf of the sponsors, namely, Benin,-India, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Pakistan, Panama, Romania and my own
delegation, the draft resolution which has now been
circulated among members /S/123.53/.
74. The preamble is quite straightforward,
In the first five
preambular paragraphs the Council would take note of the
telegram received from the President of Mozambique, the
statement made in the Council by the head of the
Mozambique delegation and the resolution adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
at its twenty-ninth
session; it would express indignation at
the systematic acts of aggression committed by the illegal
rkgime against Mozambique and grave concern at the
deteriorating situation in Southern Rhodesia as a result of
the continued existence of the illegal rigime.

84. Paragraph 6 is a matter of routine.
85. In paragraph 7, the Council would demand that the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mozambique be scrupulously respected.
86, In paragraph 8, the Council would demand that all
States refrain from providing any support to the illegal
regime and, in particular, that South Africa adhere fully to
Council resolutions.
87. Paragraphs 9, 10 and 1I should be read in conjunction
with each other since they are linked. Paragraph 9 deals
with a matter which is quite central to the substance of
Mozambique’s complaint. In if all States are requested

75, In the seventh and eighth preambular paragraphs,
reference is made to resolution 232 (1966), which determined that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constituted
a threat to international peace and security, as well as to
the fact that recent acts of aggression against Mozambique,
Botswana and Zambia have aggravated the prevailing
dangerous situation in the region.

“to give immediate and substantial material assistance to
enable the Government of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique to strengthen its defence capability in order
to safeguard effectively its sovereignty and territorial
integrity”.

76. In the ninth and tenth preambular paragraphs, it has
been considered necessary to recall resolution 2.53 (1968),
which applied sanctions against the illegal rCgime in
Rhodesia, as well as the courageous decision by Mozambique to close its borders and apply sanctions in conformity
with that resolution.

In paragraphs 10 and 11, the Council would request all
States, regional organizations and other appropriate intergovernmental organizations, as well as the organs of the
United Nations system, to provide financial, technical and
material assistance to Mozambique in order to enable it to
overcome the severe economic loss and destruction of
property brought about by the acts of aggression committed by the illegal rigime.

77. In the eleventh preambular paragraph, concern is
expressed at the fact that the Council has so far failed to
bring an end to the illegal rCgime, and the conviction that
sanctions, unless they are comprehensive, mandatory and
strictly supervised, would not be sufficient.

88. Paragraph I2 deals with the question of sanctions.
Here we are expressing the hope that the Council will
request its Committee on Sanctions to examine as a matter
of priority further effective measures to tighten the scope
of sanctions in accordance with Article 41 of the Charter. I
should like to point out that in using the term “as a matter
of priority” we are in no way relegating the importance Of
consideration of the question of enforcement of the
existing sanctions.

78. There is reference also, in the fourteenth preambular
paragraph, to the primary responsibility of the United
Kingdom in the matter and, in the fifteenth preambular
paragraph, to the provisions of the Maputo Declaration
calling for intensified assistance to the liberation struggle,
79. 1 now wish to say a few words in explanation of the
operative part of the draft resolution.

89. In paragraph 13, the Council would request the
Secretary-General to co-ordinate the efforts of the United
Nations system and to prganize immediately an effective
programme of international assistance to Mozambique. We
would expect the Secretary-General to send a .mission to
Mozambique, as he has done in other similar situations and
with great distinction. to ascertain the amount of destruction and other pertinent economic matters, and to submit a
report to the international community which would enable
States to determine how best they can contribute to the
specific needs of the situation.

80. In paragraphs 1 and 3, the Council would condemn
both the illegal rc?girne for its recent acts of aggression
against Mozambique and South Africa for its continued
support of that rbgime.
8 1. In paragraph 2, the Council would declare such acts of
aggression, as well as the attacks and threats against Zambia
and Botswana by the illegal regime, to be a serious
aggravation of the situation.
82. In paragraph 4, the Council would reaffirm that the
continued existence of the iIlegal rCgime in Southern
Rhodesia was not only a source of instability in the region
but also a serious threat to international peace and security.

90. The PRESIDENT: Before adjourning the meeting, I
should like to inform members of the Council that there is
a list of speakers for both the morning and the afternoon
meetings. I understand that the representatives whose
names are on the list wish to speak before the vote on the
draft resolution. Hence, it would appear most unlikely that

83, In paragraph 5, the Council would reaffirm the right
of the people of Zimbabwe to self-determination
and
8

we woirld
afternnon.

he able to vote before some time tomorrow

91. Mr. RAML’L-LUL (Mauritius):
1 should like to ask
whether the representatives whose names are on the list of
speakers will be addressing themselves to the substance of
the issue or speaking in explanation of vote before the
voting.
02. The PRESIDENT:
1 can only say that the names of
thcsc reprcsentativcs
are inscribed on the list of speakers, 1
ass~rn~c that they will wish to speak on the substance of the
question.
In any case, they have made it very clear that
they vvistr to speak before the vote is taken on the draft
resolution.
03. Mr. RAMPI-IIIL (Mauritius): Usually, Mr. Presidentand I stnrtcl to hc corrected -when members inscribe their

names on the list of speakers, they indicate whether they
wish to speak in the debate or in explanation of vote before
the voting,
94. The PRESIDENT:
All the representatives whose
names are on the List have indicated that they wish to speak
in the debate.
95. Mr, RICHARD (United Kingdom): Purely as a matter
of order, 1 would say that, as I understand it, one is entitled
to speak both in the debate and in explanation of vote
before the voting-if one wishes to do so. I would add that
that is not a threat.
96. The PRESIDENT: 1 think that we have now reached
an understanding of the situation.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
or write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
d6pqsitaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
51 : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK.

IIOn[Y.IHTb

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

MBAAHMIF

OPFAHH

PUBLICACIONES

3AQNM

DE LAS

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

UNIES
et les agences
ou adressez-vous

OlKbEAMHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAVIIH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
a su librero
o dirfjase

New

in other

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

y casas distria: Naciones

77-70001-April

1978-2200
