UNlTED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

2496”
NEW

YEAR

*cl- 05 1992
MEETING:

11 NOVEMBER

19#IsA

oQ&&--)f-q

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

... ... .... .. ... ... ... .. ... .... .. ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (S/16036) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2496)

S/PV.2496

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
\++&*:
1 4.‘t ! ..;
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
&arterly Supplknents of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates : the,supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it ,_
is given.
” ’
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2496th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 11 November 1983, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Victor J. GAUCI

(Malta).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2496)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/16036)
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/16036)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item, at the 2480th
and 2495th meetings, I invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the Council table; I invite
the representatives of the Sudan and the Syrian Arab
Republic to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury (Leba-,
non) and Mr. Blum (Israel) took piaces at the Council table:
Mr. Abrialla (Sudan) and Mr. El-Fattai (Qrian Arab Republic) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Before we hear the first speaker, I
have been authorized by the members of the Council to
make the following statement on their behalf:
“The members of the Security Council wish to
express their profound concern at the recent and current developments in northern Lebanon which have
caused and are still causing widespread suffering and
loss of human life. The members appeal to all parties
concerned to exercise the utmost restraint and freely to
seek to attain, and to respect, an immediate cessation of
hostilities, to settle their differences exclusively by

peaceful means and to refrain from the threat or use of
force. The members of the Council highly appreciate
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and of
the International Committee of the Red Cross in providing emergency humanitarian
assistance to Palestinian and Lebanese civilians in and around the city of
Tripoli. The members of the Council will continue to
follow the situation in Lebanon with the greatest attention.” [S/16142./
3. The first speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
4. Mr. El-FAITAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, Sir, I should like to
express our great pleasure at your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. Your well-known
extensive and accurate knowledge of international affairs,
including the problem of the Middle East and especially
the question of Palestine, assures us that, thanks to your
wisdom and objectivity, you are eminently qualified to
conduct the deliberations of the Council in a manner that
will help it to discharge its commitments under the Charter
of the United Nations before the international community.
Your country may be small in area but its contribution in
building a world culture cannot be measured simply by
geographical size. The friendship binding our two countries makes us proud of your presence both as President of
the Council and outside it.
5. I also take this opportunity to express to my colleague,
Mr. Abdullah Salah of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, our great appreciation of the judicious, objective and
courageous manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council at a time when the majority of its membership was
trying to oppose imperialist practices in Latin America,
Africa and the Middle East. We are proud of his presidency. There is a colloquial Arab verse which goes, “If I
am disparaged by a knave, this speaks most eloquently for
my perfection’*.
6. We have heard disparagement today and we are proud
of the Arab representative who represents the Group of
Arab States on the Council. Members know very well who
the critic was who made the disparaging remarks. If you
hear a knave disparaging me, this speaksmost ‘eloquently
for my perfection*.
7. It has beensaid in the Council [2495tb meeting. para.
.32l that the President behaved in a certain way in 1954. In
1954 Israel was not in occupation of the whole of Pales-

tine; it was not in occupation of the Golan Heights; it was
not in occupation of the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and
southern Lebanon. This is the difference. If Charles Malik,
despite our reservations, had been in the presidency
instead of the representative from Jordan he would have
behaved in the same judicious and objective way.

300 sophisticated warplanes. Representatives must have
wondered about what is behind the presence of these large
numbers. We must have all wondered why this should
happen when the Lebanese factions are earnestly doing
their utmost to achieve a national consensus in order to
put an end to the civil war.

8. If there is anything we hold against the Council it is
that we expected the United States, when the question of
Grenada was before the Council, not to take part in the
voting inasmuch as it carried out the invasion and an
invading State cannot participate in the voting. This is our
understanding of the Charter and of, I think, Article 27. A
State that is party to an aggression or conflict cannot vote
in the Council. That is our reservation. Naturally the representative of Zionism here, through his immediate superior,
Mr. Shamir, publicly supported the invasion of Grenada.
The statements are before us. If we are to be objective,
delegations of States that commit aggression should not
participate in the voting and thus demonstrate to us their
objectivity.

13. What is striking is that the American mobilization
and the provocations accompanying it are timed to coincide with Israeli mobilization, in addition to the irresponsible threats that sometimes amount to madness-all of
which are actions designed to undermine the process of
L&anese national consensus, a consensus which is considered a prequisite for reviving Lebanon and saving it from
the anarchy from which it has been suffering in the wake
of the Israeli aggression that started on 4 January 1982 and
still continues.
14. Naturally, I, cannot speak for the representative of
Lebanon, who is here. I was scheduled to speak after him.
15. The show of force, whether by Israel or the United
States, is a threat to the security of Lebanon, Syria and the
Arab region. In addition, it is an attempt to undermine the
independence, unity and sovereignty of Lebanon. It is an
encouragement to Israel to persist in its occupation of
southern Lebanon. Israel has actually taken measures to
separate occupied southern Lebanon from the rest of the
country, even in the theatre of operations, which indicates
that Israel is putting the final touches on its expansionist
schemes in the area. These schemes are not new to representatives; they were laid down during the First World
War and presented as an integrated scheme for expansion
in Lebanon, Syria and Jordan at the Versailles Peace Conference in 1919. The details of this scheme were published
in 1954 in Sharett’s memoirs about the period. We have
already indicated in the Council the details of the Zionist
scheme aimed at the annexation of southern Lebanon and
need not repeat them now.

9. As we said in a previous meeting, the delegation of the
Syrian Arab Republic did not want to speak on the occasion of the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
At the time, we
responded to the Israeli statement made during the 2480th
meeting of the Council, held on 18 October, which was
replete with misinformation.
10. Today, the Syrian Arab Republic is the subject of
another feverish! campaign which is different from its
predecessors only in the determination to create various
pretexts to avoid the implementation
of Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982). Resolution 509 (1982)
demands that Israel withdraw all its military forces forthwith -and unconditionally .from all ‘Lebanese territory to
the internationally recognized boundaries.
11. We have asked to ‘be allowed to speak at a very
critical moment. American circles are unleashing direct
threats at various levels. Those threats presage a joint
Israeli-American aggression against Syria, Syrian forces
and Lebanon. There is no doubt that you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council have been concerned at statements accompanied by acts of aggression
against Syrian forces and Lebanon’s sovereignty. No
doubt, the Council as .the body charged with the maintenance of international
peace and security must have
thought that those threats and provocations against the
Syrian Arab ‘Republic threaten not only our security in
Syria, Lebanon or the region but also international peace
and security as a whole. The Council no doubt realizes that
the threat to international peace and security in the Middle
East region will have direct far-reaching effects on the
interests of all the peoples of the world and especially the
interests of the Western States.

16. In addition to all those facts, which are an open
secret, the representative of zionism sets himself up, falsely
and fradulently, as a defender of Lebanon and of its independence and sovereignty. Thus, he changes the Council’s
demand, in its unanimously adopted resolution 509 (1982).
that Israel withdraw forthwith and unconditionally
into
what he called, in his statement at the 2480th meeting of
the Council, the unconditional and immediate withdrawal
of the non-Lebanese forces. In other words, he arrogates
to Israel the right to occupy parts of Lebanon and place
Lebanon in a subservient status, ,in accordance with an
agreement rejected by the Lebanese and Arab peoples.
That agreement was imposed upon the Lebanese people
by force of arms-and that is no secret.
17. We have repeatedly declared that we will not leave
Lebanon an easy prey. for Israel. We have repeatedly
declared that Syrian forces will not withdraw from Lebanon until the last Israeli soldier has been withdrawn unconditionally, and the independence and unity of Lebanon, as
an integral part of the Arab nation in the full sense of the 1
word, has been guaranteed.

12. Today the Eastern Mediterranean region is witnessing the mobilization of the largest American armada seen
by the world since the Second World War. There are no
fewer than 30 warships that have assumed an aggressive
posture in Lebanon’s coastal waters, 3 aircraft-carriers and
2

18. Actually, the Geneva talks among the Lebanese parties have reached that conclusion, since Lebanon can only
be Arab, in accordance with its real identity, not the American or Israeli identity. which imperialism is trying to
impose upon it by force through occupation and multinational aggression.

or through the use or threat of force is considered null’
and void. In this connection, it must be pointed out that
no attempt of any kind to bring about the implementation of this ill-omened agreement can succeed. We shall
stand by our people in Lebanon in their struggle until
that agreement is thwarted. Fourthly, the multinational
forces must leave Lebanon, because they have gone
beyond their declared objectives and are posing a grave
threat to peace and security in the region. They remind
us of the colonialist expeditions in previous stages of the
history of our region.“’

19. The conspiracy which is being hatched against Lebanon and Syria was recently outlined in the wake of the visit
to Israel of Eagleburger, the Under-Secretary for Political
Affairs of the United States Department of State. There is
a so-called revived strategic agreement with Israel. Israel is
the base for American imperialism, and -America is the
leader of this imperialism. The strategic co-operation
agreement did not die and does not need revival, yet it is
said that it is to be revived. That means escalating the
strategic co-operation to the stage of aggression. That is
our concept of this strategic cooperation and its revival.

22. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): It
is a particular pleasure, Sir, for my delegation to welcome
you, both personally and as a representative of a small but
important Member State of the United Nations, to the
presidency of the Council, for this month. You have so
often and in so many ways demonstrated your prudence,
your wisdom and your skill that we look forward to your
presidency as a productive one and one that will reflect
credit on yourself, your country and the Council.

20. This agreement is based on ‘an understanding
between the two parties to commit an imminent aggression, coordinated between Washington and Tel Aviv,
against the bastion of. Arab steadfastness embodied in
Syria and against the nationalist forces in Lebanon. The
recent American aerial provocations are but a link in the
series of terrorist acts committed in deed and in words
against our Arab people in our area. We say to America
and Israel that Syria is not Grenada, which was an easy
prey, and that we shall defend our Arab land and the
dignity of our nation with all our might. We are certain
that the United States of America, which is behaving in an
irresponsible, reckless manner, will not achieve its aims.
Our history is replete with evidence that all aggressors have
been repelled. We are certain also that all the peoples of
the world will stand by us and support us against this new
imperialist onslaught, and that the new Arab solidarity will
soon emerge and prove itself once more. Our Arab nation
is fullyconscious of‘the risks attendant on the return of-the
Arab homeland to the American sphere of influence. It is
the influence of exploitation, oppression, Zionist expansion, the plunder of Arab riches, the humiliation’ of peoples and the imposition of restrictions on their liberty.

23. I wish also to express the warm thanks and the keen
and genuine admiration of my delegation to your predecessor, the representative of Jordan, who presided over one of
the most difficult, one of the most exhausting, agendas
that has ever befallen the Council in the several years that I
personally have been a participant. As we have so often
said before, you have a tough act to follow and we wish
you well.
24. My delegation had, probably naively, assumed that
the thrust of today’s meeting would be a follow-up and
completion of our consideration last month of the renewal
of the mandate of UNIFIL or that it might concern itself
with certain procedural problems that were left hanging at
the conclusion of the deliberations, or both, but owing to
the tender mercies of, particularly, the representative of the
Soviet Union and also more recently of the representative
of the Synan Arab Republic, ihe ‘focus of our discussion
has gone rather far afield. I wish to comment on only one
or two aspects of their statements.
25. The representative of the Soviet Union spoke this .
morning of the “demonstration of military muscle” by my
Government [ibid, para. 47’j. He and the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic have referred to “threats**, “provocative acts” and “intimidation”
by my Government. We
threaten no one. We engage in no provocative acts. As for
intimidation, of course, intimidation is largely in the eye of
the beholder and indeed in the backbone of the observer. I
leave the question of intimidation to others.

21. In brief, our Foreign Minister speaking in the Gen
era1 Assembly on 28 September this year stated our cleal
position, which is based on the following principles:
“First, Lebanon’s unity, independence and sovereignty
are among the principles whose violation or infringement can never be accepted by Syria and the other Arab
States. The Arab States will keep working towards that
end and assisting the brotherly Lebanese people to recover their national unity and independence and sovereignty over all their territories. In this regard, we
contributed to the. achievement of the agreement concluded a few days ago between the opposing sides in the
civil war in Lebanon.. Secondly, Israel must withdraw
unconditionally
from Lebanon, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 509 (1982). Thirdly, the
agreement imposed on Lebanon must be overturned,
since thisagreement was imposed under the shadow of
occupation. Any agreement imposed under occupation

26. We listened carefully to the statements made by the
representatives of those two Governments as regards
threats, provocation and intimidation, as we always listen
carefully to the words uttered by experts in the matters
that they address, words uttered by those well practised in
threats, provocation and intimidation.
27. I have said that we threaten no one and we intend no
provocation. But my Government -would wish no one to
be misled, would wish no one to misunderstand our intentions in Lebanon. And we would not wish anyone to mis3

understand our resolve in fulfilling our intentions. The
forces of the United States are present in Lebanon at the
express invitation of the Government of Lebanon; their
purpose in Lebanon, along with the forces of three other
countries, is simply stated: it is to work with that Govemment and to assist it in every way possible in the rebuilding
of its domestic institutions and in the extension of its sovereignty throughout its territory, which must, of course, ultimately involve the withdrawal of all-1 repeat, all-nonLebanese forces from the territory of Lebanon.

35. The statement of the representative of Jordan was
predictable enough. As we all anticipated, he did not
address himself to the issues raised in my statement earlier
today [249slh meering]. He told us, very predictably, that it
was beneath his dignity-I
wish he had cared for the dignity of the Chair last month as much as he cares for his
own dignity-and
he left it at that, basically. So in actual
fact he only confirmed what I had to say earlier today. He
certainly confirmed it when he told the Council-he really
had the audacity to tell the Council-that
he thought I did
not have the right to speak here. That is precisely what he
wanted to effect in his abuse of the Chair last month. That
is why he invoked the lateness of the hour, 1.55 p.m. There
was nothing wrong with that. What was wrong was that he
did not set a date for a resumption of the debate-that
afternoon, or the following morning, or the following
afternoon. Well, the reason is now clear: he thinks I have
no right to speak here. That is the proper exercise of the
functions of the Chair. So in fact, by his statement today,
he has only further compounded his misbehaviour. He had
an excellent chance to show some remorse, to apologize to
the Council for what he did last month. He did not utilize
that chance. Instead, he embarked on a discourse on’Israe1
being a non-peace-loving State. This is a favourite theme
-of his.

28. So long as the forces of the United States are present
in Lebanon under these conditions and in order to discharge these tasks-and they will remain there until these
tasks are discharged-they
will defend themselves against
unprovoked attack from whatever quarter and by whatever means are deemed appropriate by the authorities of
the United States.
29. The PRESIDENT:
of Israel.

I now call on the representative

30. Mr. BLUM (Israel): We have heard the two useful
and helpful statements of the representative of Syria, the
first on 18 October [248&h meet&g] and the second today,
and I say advisedly “useful and helpful” because the representative of Syria has finally clarified for all of us, including those who pretended to be ignorant in the past of the
intentions of his Government, that Syria does not intend
to withdraw from Lebanon.

36. Since the resolution he referred to was adopted
before his arrival here, I should.like to acquaint him with
certain facts. The resolution he referred to was adopted by
such peace-loving States as Cuba, Iraq, Libya, the Soviet
Union, its puppet regime in Kabul, Syria, Viet Nam and so
on. Here at the United Nations, in this theatre of the
absurd, all these countries masquerade as peace-loving
States and, as I said at the time, it is indeed a badge of
honour for my country to be branded by these countries a
non-peace-loving State. The fact is that all the 21 States
which voted against that shameful and shameless resolution were democracies, the leading democracies in our
world. Not surprisingly, Mr. Salah’s country was not
among them.

31. In my statement on 18 October I made explicit reference to the demand voiced by the President of Lebanon
from the rostrum of the, General Assembly last year in
which he called for-and I quoted him then and I am
going to quote him again: “the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces from
Lebanon.‘*2
32. I also made reference on 18 October to the letter of 2
September 1983 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Emigration of Lebanon to the SecretaryGeneral of the
League of Arab States [s/15953, annex] requesting the
withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces from Lebanon. The
Minister repeated this demand in his statement in the general debate in the General Assembly.’

37. I should like to say a few words also in response to
the second statement by the representative of the Soviet
Union in this debate.
38. I tried last time-unsuccessfully,
it appears-to
remind the representative of the Soviet Union that what
was on our agenda was the extension of the mandate of
UNIFIL. He departed last time from the agenda, and he
decided to proceed on the same lines today. He raised
certain questions. He knows very well that there are
answers to those questions which are linked to certain
other questions. Indeed, I made him an offer a long time
ago; I have Cemdln
question:, IV ~JK 01 niu1, ana 011~~he
has been good enough to reply to them he can be assured
that our answers to his questions will be instantly forthcoming. He has not obliged me today with answers to my
questions. I should therefore like to repeat some of them.

33. All this is being brushed aside by the representative
of Syria. For us there is no surprise in this because we have
known all along that Syria has had, for all these years,
expansionist and annexationist intentions with regard to
Lebanon. But now the mask has been removed and the
truth is there for all of us to see. Therefore I say in all
sincerity that we are grateful to the representative of Syria
for his statement, and I believe the entire Council must be
very grateful to. him for it.
I,
_. - 34. One who must &rtainlp be. grateful to him for his
* .:; b.j’ statement is the representative of Jordan; because he has
been given a clean bill of health’by the representative of
Syri&nncidentally,
I am also grateful for the Arabic proverb which he brought to our attention. I indeed believe
that if a knave disparages me I must be right.

39. I ask the representative of the Soviet Union, the
leader of the peace camp in our world, when his country’s
peace-loving tanks are going to leave Afghanistan. How
4

many more Afghan civilians will have to be killed by
peace-loving Soviet troops before he will indicate his country’s willingness to leave Afghanistan alone?

46.

Mr. EL-FATTAL

(Syrian Arab Republic) (inferpre-

tation from Arabic): I apologize for speaking once again,

but I do so because I feel, as everyone else here must feel,
that an attempt has been made to ascribe to me words that
I did not use.

40. This is my next question to the representative of the
Soviet Union: when will his country be ready to release
from their bondage the various nations that it has enslaved
over the past 38 years? I do not have to name those
nations-first, because the list is a very long one and I do
not want to detain the Council and, secondly, because the
list is well known to all of us.

47. As usual, the representative of world zionism here
claimed that I had said that the Syrian Arab Republic
would not withdraw from Lebanon. I did not say that. He
would like me to have said it. He would like to interpret
my statement in a way compatible with the expansionist
aims of Israel. But I said no such thing. I quoted from the
verbatim record of the Council’s meeting on 18 October,
where I had read out a statement made by the President of
the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Hafez al-Assad, in an interview with Swiss television. This statement is in the record
for the representative of world zionism to read [248Oth
meeting, para. 87J, but it seems that there is political illiter.acy here-deliberate illiteracy. I shall quote again one passage from the statement by the President of the Syrian
Arab Republic: “Israel must withdraw from Lebanon”-is
that not compatible with resolution 509 (1982)?-“There is
only one foreign army in Lebanon, and that is the Israeli
army” [ibid]. Can anyone deny that the Israeli army is a
foreign army7 If for the sake of argument we agreed that
the Israeli army was not a foreign army, then the multilateral force is not a foreign force but an Arab or an Israeli
force.

41. I should like also to ask the representative of the
Soviet Union-and
this is closer to his home: when will his
Government be ready to grant the peoples of the Soviet
Union their fundamental human rights and freedoms? In
other words, when will his country cease being a totalitarian dictatorship? This is an important question because it
has far-reaching repercussions for the peace of the world,
including peace in the Middle East.
42. My next question is: when will the Soviet Union cease
its attempts to subvert and destabilize various regimes
throughout the world-mainly
through mercenary regimes
that it maintains in various regions? More specifically,
when will the Soviet Union give up the attempts it has been
making for three decades now in the Middle East to destabilize our region? This question, of course, concerns me
most directly as the representative of a country in the Middle East. For, the Soviet Union has been instrumental in
every escalation of tension in the Middle East over the past
three decades, and certainly in recent weeks, through the
introduction of huge quantities of sophisticated weapons
and armaments and through the dispatch of thousands of
“advisers” who now grace with their presence the invading
armies of Syria in Lebanon. So when is this type of peacemaking by the Soviet Union going to cease in our region?
As soon as it does cease, it will become much simpler to
answer the questions he asked of me, because then we shall
be able to sit down with our neighbours, unhampered by
foreign interventionists from outside the region, to negotiate all the outstanding issues between us and them.

48. I repeat what I have already said: Israel must withdraw from Lebanon, since there is only one foreign army
in Lebanon and it is the Israeli army, which came there as
an invading force. Who invaded Lebanon? Did the Syrian
Arab Republic invade Lebanon? Has the Security Council
forgotten and has Israel forgotten that on 6 June 1982 the
Council adopted a resolution calling upon Israel to withdraw all its military forces forthwith and unconditionally
to the internationally recognized boundaries of Lebanon?
[Resolution 509 (1982).]
49. When Israel invaded Lebanon in 1978, was there a
Syrian invasion? In its resolution 425 (1978) did the Council not call upon Israel to withdraw from Lebanon to internationally recognized boundaries? The Syrian forces are in
Lebanon at the request of the Lebanese Government. The
same paragraph of the verbatim report of the meeting of
18 October continues: “Israel has its own language and
systems, in no way linked to Lebanon or any other Arab
country” [2#8Oth meeting, para. 87J.

43. I conclude with two soecific auestions. Could the
representative of the Sovie; Union ‘tell us whether the
Soviet “advisers” currently in Lebanon with the Syrian
army of occupation have obtained the necessary Lebanese
I visas? And, given the vast quantities of Soviet arms and
ammunition
in Lebanon, could he tell this Council
whether the necessary import licenses have been obtained
from the Government of Lebanon; and, if so, would he be
good enough to produce at least one copy of such an
important license?

50. How can Israel be linked to Lebanon or to any other
Arab country7 It is an imported entity, a synthetic entity.
How can it belong to the area when it has nothing to link it
to Lebanon or to any other Arab country7 The same paragraph continues: “The Israeli forces must withdraw from
Lebanon without imposing any conditions on that country. The withdrawal of the Israeli forces will help to put an
end to the Lebanese disputes, with the help of the Arabs”
[ibid.].

44. The PRESIDENT
I believe that I have given all
concerned every opportunity to state their vie&, and I
hope that we shall be able to finish our meeting this evening in good time and in good order.

51. Is there anyone in the world who doubts that the
withdrawal of the Israeli forces will facilitate the solution
of the Lebanese conflict, with Arab assistance? Have not

45. I call again on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
5

,’

the Arab deterrent forces-that is, the Syrian forces-come
to Lebanon in accordance with the wish of the Arabs?

defence from any place we wish? We import them from
the party that- combats expansionism,
racism and
aggression in the world.. We do not import them from
those who commit aggression against Grenada and plan
to commit aggression against Nicaragua and commit
acts of violation of Arab airspace and waters.

52. The President said, with respect to the Syrian
forces-and here I request the previous speaker to listen
well so that he will not misquote me:

57. Moreover, Israel, through the American Government, is now competing with American companies in
the manufacture of American aircraft in the occupied
Arab territories-which
is to say, Israel and the other
occupied Arab territories. The New York Times went on
to say:

“As far as the Syrian forces are concerned, the Syrian
forces are prepared to withdraw at the request of the
Lebanese Government after the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces” -Does that mean that Syria will not
withdraw from Lebanon; did I say that?-“because
then it would be a request resulting from a decision by
the Lebanese Government and not from Israeli pressure
because of Israeli occupation in Lebanon.** [Bid]

“The Lavie issue has been sharply disputed behind
the scenes here. Some American companies, such as
Pratt & Whitney and Grumman, which stand to gain
.from work on the Lavie, have supported the use of
American funds. Other companies, such as Northrop,
which view the Lavie as a competitor, have been
opposed, particularly since the F-20, Northrop’s tighter,
has not been financed by the Government.“*

This is because we do not see that such a request, however
it is made, can come from the will of the Lebanese-not as
a result of Israeli pressure-as long as the Israeli occupation of Lebanon continues.
53. In other words, the text is very clear. The representative of Israel cannot interpret texts in accordance with his
expansionist schemes. The Lebanese decision must be a
free one. The freedom of the Lebanese decision stems only
from the freedom of Lebanon, that is, through the full
Israeli withdrawal and the lifting of the American hand
from Lebanon.

58. The paper, which is not known for its friendliness
towards the Arabs-it is controlled by world zionism, and
this is no secret-continues:

54. It has been said that Syria receives military assistance. Naturally Syria receives military assistance. How can
Syria not defend itself against the war machine, against the
Israeli arsenal, which is nurtured by the United States with
billions of dollars? Is not self-defence, in accordance with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, a natural
right guaranteed for every State? Can Syria produce by
itself the weapons to enable it to defend itself, while it is a
developing State? Can Israel produce the American weap
ons by itself7 No. The proof of this is found in The New
Times of today, 11 November, under the heading “House
Votes Aid for Israeli Plane”:

59. Israel has become a place where American weapons are manufactured under Hebrew names and compete with American
weapons which benefit the
American Government through the sale of the weapons
to other peoples to fight among themselves. This is the
truth.

“The General Accounting Organization, the Congressional watchdog agency, said in a report last
summer that the research and development costs for the
Lavie are estimated in excess of $1.5 billion.***

60. The PRESIDENT:
sentative of Lebanon,

“American aid allocated to Israel for the 1984 fiscal
year totals $2.61 billion, including 1.7 billion in military
credits and $910 million in economic grants. Of the
military credits, $850 million does not have to be
repaid.“*

The next speaker is the repreon whom I now call.

61. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon) .(interprerurion from
Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity
to make my statement and I wish you success in carrying
out your task as President of the Council for the month
of November. Your well-known wisdom and competence will be invaluable to the Council. I wish also to
express our appreciation
to your predecessor, Mr.
Abdullah Salah, for having guided the work of the
Council so skilfully last month.

55. Israel is a mendicant State, which lives off American aid-not
off American loans, but off American
aid-and
off Arab properties and Arab resources and
riches-and
we are told here in the Council not to
defend ourselves. The same article in The New York
Times continues as follows:

62. We asked to speak at the Council’s meeting on 18
October [248&h meering] in exercise of the right of reply
because we wished to put our position on record when
the deliberations
were diverted from the original
subject-the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL-and
developed to encompass other issues which in our judgement have a bearing on the sovereignty of Lebanon.

‘This is the largest amount of aid ever approved for
Israel. Last year, it got $2.485 billion.‘**
56. Can anyone challenge, as the representative of
Zionism did, our right to import the means for our self-

63. Today we note that the insistence on such a diversion still exists. This has strengthened our belief that it is

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

6

necessary to set out the position of Lebanon on what is
being said, and on what has been said in the past, without indulging in polemics-a
practice we hold to except
when we are forced to speak out so that our silence may
not be interpreted as approval of acceptance.

world must be divided into spheres of influence and, furthermore, spheres of influence of the Western Powers. For
this candour we are obliged to the President of the United
States. The second postulate is that the United States has
the right to conduct subversive operations against any
country of the world whose r&ime is not to the liking of
the United States. The author of this postulate is the President of the United States. The third postulate is that the
Charter of the United Nations permits the United States to
intervene, primarily in Grenada. For this postulate we may
thank the permanent representative of the United States.
The fourth’ postulate is that the list of American interventions has only just begun and may be continued. The
authors of this postulate are the President of the United
States and the United States Secretary for Defense.
.,
69. All of this is nothing other than the philosophy of
force, the philosophy of the jungle. The Administration
that proclaims this philosophy and pursues a policy in
accordance with it assumes full responsibility before
mankind.

64. Lebanon’s position can be summarized as follows.
First, Lebanon holds firm to its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and to the ,unity of its
people. Secondly, the events which have taken place on
Lebanese territory and are still taking place today are
unquestionable proof that the war that has been raging
for nine years is not, as some wish to portray it, an
internal war, but a war of regional ambitions and conflicting international interests. Thirdly, the Government
of Lebanon is determined to ensure the withdrawal of all
unauthorized non-Lebanese forces from Lebanon. As
for the multinational
forces, UNIFIL
and the international observers, we confirm that their presence in Lebanon is at the request and with the approval of the
Lebanese Government. Fourthly, the international community and, especially, the Security Council are called
upon-today,
not tomorrow-to
assist the Government
of Lebanon to ensure the withdrawal of those unauthorized non-Lebanese forces, becausi this will relieve Lebanon of human tragedies, destruction and economic
deterioration and protect the security and peace of the
region and the world from the danger of war. Fifthly,
the delegation of Lebanon, and that delegation alone,
has the right to speak here in the name of Lebanon
about Lebanon’s future and about what it wants and
what it rejects.

70. As for the statement of the representative of Israel,
generally speaking, I need not necessarily answer him. After
all, in the strategic partnership between Israel and the
United States Israel is, as everyone knows, the junior
partn$r, and the master has already been answered by me.
71. Nevertheless the representative of Israel intrigued me
with some very concrete points he made about s&me very
concrete issues. In particular, for example, he asked about
the question of visas, and he also raised the question of
permission for the import of arms. I am ready to continue
to discuss these matters with him. But let the representative
of Israel first show me Lebanese visas in the passports of
Israeli soldiers now occupying southern Lebanon; let the
representative of Israel show me the permission issued to it
by the Lebanese authorities for the Israeli imports of the
American weapons that are now to be found in southern
Lebanon.

65. I say this in order to remove any doubt or misunderstanding that may have arisen as we listened to some of the
representatives who appointed themselves caretakers of
the interests of Lebanon in place of the Lebanese themselves, or to representatives w@. consider themselves to be
more sincerely interested ip, the future of Lebanon and its
security and stability than even the people of Lebanon
themselves.

72. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (inferprezurionfrom
Arabic): I
am very grateful for the statement made by the Israeli
representative this afternoon. So as to avoid the impression being given that he has a just cause, I should like to
inform the Council that the best way in which we can
answer Israel and reveal its nature and intentions is to
draw attention to that statement by the Israeli representative himself. His statement this afternoon was explicit in
that regard. Hence we see no need to prevent the Israeli
representative from speaking continuously.

66. There are no, and shall be no caretakers of Lebanon
except the Lebanese themselves, and no one shall be
allowed to speak on behalf of Lebanon except its legitimate representatives.
67. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub4cs) (inrerpretutionfrom
Russian): The representative of the
United States in his statement today said that the United
States was not threaiening anyone and that it had no intention of invading or attacking anyone. Those statements of
his are in contradiction with the words and, more important, the deeds of the United States Administration.

73. As for Israel’s concern regarding the Council’s
importance, and Israel’s respect for the Council, those can
be judged from the Israeli representative’s absence from
the Council chamber to accept the invitation that you, Mr.
President, extended to him to take a place at the Council
table. He continues to abuse the opportunity that has been
granted him. He proved that a short while ago, and in his
last statement.

68. In recent months all of us have seen some pretty
ominous phenomena. As the military machine of the Pentagon is bkginning to get up steam, and as American factories are churning out ever-increasing numbers of missiles,
aircraft and tanks, the American philosophy is becoming
more and more frank and open. In recent months at least
five new postulates-have appeared in the American philosophy. They are the following. The first postulate is that the

74. He once again repeated shop-worn talk about my
person and the presidency of the Council last month in a
7

slander camnairm aimed at diverting the Council from its
agenda. Here I would record my thanks to those who have
had sufficient moral courage to express objectively and
honestly their awareness of that fact in this chamber.

81. We are, of course, not surprised that, in accordance with the custom here, various sneakers today dutifully congratulated him on his many virtues of- last
month, on his fairness, his impartiality,
his honesty, his
decency-any combination will do, especially when certain opportunists join the bandwagon. It was something
different from what some of those representatives had to
say about his behaviour in private.

75. In his last statement the representative as usual
avoided the main problem that is engaging everyone’s
attention and threatening international peace and security.
He merely insulted the Council. I think that it is an affront
to the Council and to its presidency, whoever the President
may be, that he should be allowed to be so bold as to insult
the Council and its presidency in this manner.

82. With regard to the representative of the Soviet
Union, I should like him to be advised that Israel signed
with Lebanon an agreement on 17 May providing, inter
alia, for the full withdrawal of Israel to the international
boundary between our two countries, within the context of
the agreement and subject to the fulfilment of all its provisions. I should like to ask the representative of the Soviet
Union, does his country have an agreement of this kind
with Afghanistan, for example, and, if so, what does it
provide for’? When does his country intend to remove the
Soviet forces of aggression from that country7 And what
about the other countries that have fallen under Soviet
sway all these years? Have they been assured by the Soviet
Union of the restoration of their independence?

76. Israel’s respect for the Council and for the United
Nations-and
Israel was established by the Organization-was evinced long ago. We recall what the Israeli
representative said on the eve of the unanimous adoption
of a resolution condemning the Israeli raid against the
Beirut International Airport on 31 December 1968 [resolution 262 (2968)]. When the Israeli representative submitted
his Government’s response to that resolution. he said:
“The resolution reflects the moral, political and juridical bankruptcy of the Security Council in respect of the
Middle East situation.*‘* r1462nd meeting, para. IIS.]

83. We could go on endlessly with these questions, and I
should like the representative of the Soviet Union to note
that the questions that could be asked of his Government
are indeed legion. And there are many questions for which
his Government
has to answer the international
community.

That was said by the representative of Israel in 1968, and
that is what the representative of this entity has been
repeating now in terms of substance and spirit.
,
77. Lastly, I can objectively make no better response to
the Israeli representative than to m-read paragraph 11 of
General Assembly resolution A/ES-g/l, which I quoted
this morning 12495th meeting] and in which it is stated that
the General Assembly:

84. The PRESIDENT:
As I said this morning, there were
many items that the Security Council had to discuss last
month, and therefore the time of the Council was taken UP
with those substantive issues. I hope that we are now tinished with the procedural aspect of our debate.

“Declares that Israel’s record and actions confirm
that it is not a peace-loving Member State and that it
has carried out neither its obligations under the Charter
nor its commitment under General Assembly resolution
273 (III) of 11 May 1949;“.*
78. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

85. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The representative of
Israel is interested in continuing the discussion, in the Security Council and throughout the world. But we want to put
an end to the discussion. For this, it would suffice that
Israel withdraw its troops from all Arab territories occupied since 1967.

I call on the representative of

79. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Irrespective of the number of
interventions that the representative of Jordan may make,
nothing will erase from the memories of the members of
the Council and of public opinion outside the Council,
which watches the proceedings in this Council, the gross
misconduct that he displayed last month.

86. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
The representative of Israel has given me the opportunity
to apologize for what he calls my bias, I would say that
Israel has missed dozens of opportunities to demonstrate
its love for peace and it intention to withdraw from the
occupied Arab territories.

80. As I have already had occasion to say, he had the
opportunity today to apologize to the Council. Instead he
has posed as the defender of the Council’s interests. He is
apparently unable to justify his behaviour. He hides
behind hollow generalities.

87. As to his remarks, made as though he were divulging
what was said to him in confidence by any other representatives 1 need only recall what has been said in public
about the representative of Israel and about that entity
itself.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

8

NOTES
’ OJficiai Records of the General Assembly,
Plenary
Meetings,
9th meeting, para. 144.

Thirty-eighth

2 Ibid.,
Thirty-seventh
para. 10.
’ Ibid.. Thirty-eighth
315.

Session,

9

Session,
Session,

Plenary

Plenary

Meetings,

Meetings,

35th

meeting,

14th meeting,

para.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et Ies agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

IIOJIYYHTb

W3AAHHR

OPIAHH3AHMH

~3naHHropraHn3atIMt
O6'L.enHHeHHblXHatlHfi
~~e~Tc.~~ax~0~Cexpa~OH~Mtipa.Ha~OmTecnp~~t4
Marasmte
&in&t nmt&iTe
no anpecy:
OpraHti3atILtK
nponaxe
&t3natiHfi,
HbhdiopK
wtsi EeHeBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

.OB%EAMHEHHbIX

HAHI&

MOXCHO

DE LAS

KjwiTbB
KHIIxHbIXMara3HHaX
06 H3naHsinxBBaLueMKHI1x~O~
06benliHeHHbIX
Hauai,
CeKuEin

NACIONES

no

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Con&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

9&%205-August

1992-2,050
