A/RES/72/116

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 December 2017

Seventy-second session
Agenda item 81

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 December 2017
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/72/460)]

72/116.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its sixty-ninth session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its sixty-ninth session, 1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development and
codification of international law as a means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 2
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the
Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to t he International Law
Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development
and codification of international law,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law
which, given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be
suitable for the progressive development and codification of international law and
therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Recalling also the role of Member States in submitting proposals for new
topics for the consideration of the International Law Commission, and noting in this
regard the recommendation of the Commission that such proposals be accompanied
by a statement of reasons,

__________________
1
2

17-22154 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/72/10).
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

201217

*1722154*

A/RES/72/116

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-ninth session

Reaffirming the importance for the successful work of the International Law
Commission of the information provided by Member States concerning their views
and practice,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the special rapporteurs of the
International Law Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with
appreciation the voluntary contributions made to the United Nations trust fund for
the International Law Seminar,
Acknowledging the importance of facilitating the timely publication of the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission and of eliminating the backlog,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of
the International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that
conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt
with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,
Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on
the report of the International Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth
Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the Commission as a
body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialog ue between
the two bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and question
time in the Sixth Committee, as envisaged in General Assembly resolution 58/316 of
1 July 2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the work of the Assembly,
1.
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its sixty-ninth session; 1
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the
work accomplished at its sixty-ninth session, and notes in particular the completion
of the first reading of the draft articles on crimes against humanity with the adoption
of the entire set of draft articles on the topic; 3
3.
Recommends that the International Law Commission continue its work
on the topics in its current programme, taking into account the comments and
observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or expressed orally in
debates in the Sixth Committee;
4.
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their views by 1 5 January 2018 on the
various aspects of the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all
the specific issues identified in chapter III of its report, regarding:
(a)

Protection of the atmosphere;

(b)

Provisional application of treaties;

(c)

Peremptory norms of general international law (jus cogens);

(d)

Immunity of State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction;

(e)

Succession of States in respect of State responsibility;

5.
Also draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their comments and observations by
1 January 2018 on the draft conclusions on the topics “Identification of customary
__________________
3

2/6

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 10
(A/72/10), chap. IV, sect. C.
17-22154

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-ninth session

A/RES/72/116

international law” and “Subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in relation
to the interpretation of treaties”, adopted on first reading by the Commi ssion at its
sixty-eighth session; 4
6.
Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to
include the topic “Succession of States in respect of State responsibility” in its
programme of work, 5 and encourages the Commission to continue the examination
of the topics that are in its long-term programme of work; 6
7.
Also takes note of paragraphs 266 and 267 of the report of the
International Law Commission and notes, in particular, the inclusion of the topics
“General principles of law” and “Evidence before international courts and tribunals”
in the long-term programme of work of the Commission, 7 and in this regard
encourages the Commission to take into consideration the comments and
observations expressed by Governments during the debate in t he Sixth Committee;
8.
Takes note with appreciation of the recommendation of the International
Law Commission, contained in paragraphs 279 to 281 of its report, regarding the
commemoration of its seventieth anniversary, and encourages States to make
voluntary contributions to the trust fund for the Office of Legal Affairs to support
the promotion of international law in order to facilitate the commemoration of the
seventieth anniversary of the Commission;
9.
Takes note of paragraph 282 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify
concrete options for support for the work of special rapporteurs, additional to those
provided under General Assembly resolution 56/272 of 27 March 2002;
10. Welcomes the efforts of the International Law Commission to improve its
methods of work, 8 and encourages the Commission to continue this practice;
11. Invites the International Law Commission to continue to take measures
to enhance its efficiency and productivity and to consider making proposals to
Member States to that end;
12. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to take cost saving measures at its future sessions, without prejudice to the efficiency and
effectiveness of its work;
13. Recalls that the seat of the International Law Commission is at the
United Nations Office at Geneva;
14. Takes note of paragraph 295 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and decides that the next session of the Commission shall be held at
United Nations Headquarters in New York from 30 April to 1 June 2018, which will
coincide with the commemoration of the seventieth anni versary of the Commission,
and at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 2 July to 10 August 2018;
__________________
4

Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/71/10), paras. 60 and 73.
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/72/10), para. 263.
6
The following topics are currently in the long-term programme of work of the International Law
Commission: “Ownership and protection of wrecks beyond the limits of national maritime
jurisdiction”, “Jurisdictional immunity of international organizations”, “Protection of personal
data in transborder flow of information”, “Extraterritorial jurisdiction”, “The fair and equitable
treatment standard in international investment law”, “Settlement of international disputes to
which international organizations are parties”, “General principles of law” and “Evidence before
international courts and tribunals”.
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/72/10),
para. 267.
8
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/66/10), paras. 370–388.
5

17-22154

3/6

A/RES/72/116

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-ninth session

15. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the
International Law Commission and the Sixth Committee, and in this context
encourages, inter alia, the continued practice of informal consultations in the form
of discussions between the members of the Sixth Committee and the members of the
Commission throughout the year;
16. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission, to continue to adhere as far as possible to the
structured work programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider
presenting concise and focused statements;
17. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of
legal adviser during the first week in which the report of the International Law
Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International Law Week) to
enable high-level discussions on issues of international law;
18. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special
attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on
which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in
written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
19. Takes note of paragraphs 296 to 301 of the report of the International
Law Commission with regard to cooperation and interaction with other bodies, and
encourages the Commission to continue the implementation of articles 16 (e),
25 and 26 of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the
Commission and other bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the
usefulness of such cooperation;
20. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts
concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering whether to
make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the International Law
Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
21. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing
assistance to the International Law Commission, including in the preparation of
memorandums and studies on topics on the agenda of the Commission;
22. Also reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the documentation and
summary records of the International Law Commission; 9
23. Takes note of paragraph 284 of the report of the International Law
Commission, recalls the paramount importance of multilingualism as set forth in
General Assembly resolution 69/324 of 11 September 2015 on multilingualism,
underlines the importance of having the documents of the Commission published in
due time in the six official languages of the United Nations, and to this end requests
special rapporteurs to submit their reports within the time limits specified by the
Secretariat;
24. Stresses the need to expedite the preparation of the summary records of
the International Law Commission, and welcomes the continuation of the measures
taken to streamline the processing of summary records during the sixty -fifth session
of the Commission, 10 which have led to a more rational use of resources, and
__________________
9

See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the
annual reports of the International Law Commission to the General Assembly. See also Yearbook
of the International Law Commission 1982, vol. II (Part Two), paras. 267–269 and 271, as well
as all subsequent annual reports of the International Law Commission.
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10),
para. 183.
4/6

17-22154

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-ninth session

A/RES/72/116

expresses its satisfaction that the summary records of the Commission, constituting
travaux préparatoires in the progressive development and codification of
international law, will not be subject to arbitrary length restrictions;
25. Welcomes the institutionalization of the practice of the Secretariat to
include on the website of the International Law Commission the provisional
summary records in English and French relating to the work of the Commission;
26. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat in seeking to ensure timely
and efficient processing of the documents of the International Law Commission and
the institutionalization of the experimental measures taken during the sixty -eighth
session of the Commission to streamline the editing of those documents;
27. Takes note of paragraph 285 of the report of the International Law
Commission, underlines the importance of the publications of the Codification
Division to the work of the Commission, welcomes in particular the issuance of the
ninth edition of The Work of the International Law Commission in English, and
reiterates its request that the Secretary-General continue to publish The Work of the
International Law Commission in all six official languages at the beginning of each
quinquennium, the Reports of International Arbitral Awards in English or French
and the Summaries of the Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders of the
International Court of Justice in all six official languages every five years;
28. Takes note of paragraph 290 of the report of the International Law
Commission, stresses the unique value of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure its timely publication in
all official languages;
29. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that have made voluntary
contributions to the trust fund on the backlog relating to the Yearbook of the
International Law Commission, and encourages further contributions to the trust fund;
30. Takes note of paragraph 291 of the report of the International Law
Commission, expresses its satisfaction with the remarkable progress achieved in the
past few years in reducing the backlog of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission in all six languages, welcomes the efforts made by the Division of
Conference Management of the United Nations Office at Geneva, especially its
Editing Section, in effectively implementing relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly calling for the reduction of the backlog, encourages that Division to
provide continuous necessary support to the Editing Section in advancing the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and requests that updates on
progress made in this respect be provided to the Commission on a regular basis;
31. Welcomes the continuous efforts of the Codification Division to maintain
and improve the website relating to the work of the International Law Commission;
32. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to
be held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and
that an increasing number of participants representing the principal legal systems of
the world, including in particular those from developing countries, will be given the
opportunity to attend the Seminar, as well as delegates to the Sixth Committee, and
appeals to States to continue to make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the
United Nations trust fund for the International Law Seminar;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar
with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to
continue to consider ways to improve the structure and content of the Seminar;
34. Underlines the importance of the records and topical summary of the
debate in the Sixth Committee for the deliberations of the International Law
17-22154

5/6

A/RES/72/116

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-ninth session

Commission, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the seventy-second session of the General Assembly, together with
such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral
statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following
established practice;
35. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after
the conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its
report containing a summary of the work of that session, chapter III containing the
specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to
the Commission and the draft articles adopted on either first or second reading by
the Commission;
36. Also requests the Secretariat to make the complete report of the
International Law Commission available as soon as possible after the conclusion of
the session of the Commission for the consideration of Member States with due
anticipation and no later than the prescribed time limit for reports in the General
Assembly;
37. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to consider
ways in which specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of
particular interest to the Commission could be framed so as to help Governments to
have a better appreciation of the issues on which responses are required;
38. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the seventy-third session of the General Assembly commence on
22 October 2018.
67th plenary meeting
7 December 2017

6/6

17-22154
