42

General Assembly-Fifth Session

Considering, moreover, that the last meeting of the
Sub-Commission was held in January 1950,
Resolves to invite the Economic and Social Council
to reconsider its resolution 336 (XI) of 16 August
1950, with a view to including in its calendar of conferences for 1951 a session of the Suh-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination am! Protection llf
Minorities.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
420 (V). Report of the Economic and Social
Council (Chapter V, section VII, part 2) : 0
proposal for a session in 1951 of the SuhCommission on Freedom of Information and
of the Press
The General Assembly,
Considering it desirable that the Sub-Commission on
Freedom of Information and of the Press should continne the study of the agenda itemsG referred to it by the
Economic and Social Council for consideration,
Rcsoh•es to invite the Economic and Social Council
to reconsider its resolution 336 ( XI) of 16 August
1950, with a view to including in its calendar of conferences for 1951 a session of the Sub-Commission on
Freedom of Tnfo::mation and of the Press.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
421 (V). Draft International Covenant on
Human Rights and measures of implementation: future work of the Commission on
Human Right~
The General Assemhly.
Appreciating the priority which, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 217 (III), the Commission on Human Rights during its 1949 and 1950 sessions gave to the preparation of a draft International
Covenant on Human Rights and measures for its implementation,
Noting the decision' of the Economic and Social
Council at its eleventh session to transmit tht' draft
Covenant together with the relevant documentation
and records of the discussion in the Council to the
General Assembly at its fifth session for consideration
with a view to reaching policy decisions on the point,
listed in Economic and Social Council resolution 303 I

(XI),

Considering it essential that the Covenant should
include provisions rendering it obligatory for States to
promote the implementation of the human rights and
f~ndamental freedoms proclaimed in the Covenant and
to take the necessary steps, including legislation, to
guaran~ee to everyone the real opportunity of enjoying
those nghts and freedoms,
• G See O /ficial Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 3, page 66.
6
See Economic and Social Council resolution 197 (VIII)
an7d document ~/1369-E/CN.4/Sub.l/98/Rev.1.
See Economic and Social Council resolution 303 I (XI).

Having considered the draft Covenant prepared by
the Commission on H urnan Rights, particularly with
reference to certain basic polici<.:s,

A
1. Commends the Commission on Human Rightc;
fnr the important work it has thus far accomplished:
.?. Calls U/'011 the Economic and Social Council to
rcqnc~t the Commi~~irin 011 Human Eights to contmue
to give priority in ih \\'urk to the completion of the
clrait Cun:nant and measures fur its implementation
in order that the Cencral Assembly may have before
it at its cixth session the r<"vis<'d draft of this
Cm-enant:
B

3. Considas.·
( a J That the list of rights in the first eighteen
:trticlcs of the draft Covenant dues not contai11 cert.,in oi the most elemeutary rights:
1. b \ That the present wording of some of the first
t·ightccu articll's of the draft Covenant should be improved in order to protect more effectively the rights
to \,·hich they refer;
(c) That in the drafting of the Covenant account
should be taken of the Purposes and Principles of
the Charter of the United ?\' ations and that these
Purposes and Principles should be consistently applied and assiduously protected;
4. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
rrquest the Co111missiu11 on Human Rights to take
into con~ideration in its \\'Ork of re\ is ion of the draft
Covenant:
l i) The views expressed during the discussion of
the draft Covcnant at the fifth session of the General
Assemhlv and at the ek:venth session of the Economic
and Social Council. including those relating to articles
13 and 14 of the draft Covenant and, with a view to
the addition in the draft Covenant of other rights,
those relating to the rights set forth by the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics in document A/C.3/L.96
and Yugoslavia in document A/C.3/L.92;
(ii) The view, expressed during the discussion ef
the draft Covenant at the fifth session of the General
Assem hly and at the eleventh session of the Economic and Social Council, that it is desirable to define
the rights set forth in the Covenant and the limitations thereto with the greatt:'st possible precision;
C

5. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights to study
a federal State article and to prepare, for the consideration of the General Assembly at its sixth session, recommendations which will have as their purpose the securing of the maximum extension of the
Covenant to the constituent units of federal States,
and the meeting of the constitutional problems of
federal States ;
