UNITED NATIONS

CIAL

R

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2365)

,. ... ... .. ... .. ... ...... . .... .. ,... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . , *, . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry established under
resolution 496 (1981) (S/14905/Rev. 1) . . . . , , . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . , , . , .

1

SlPV.2365

NOTE
Symbols’of
United Nations documents arc composcci of ci\pit;rl kltcP COWbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates ii r~i’~r~:n~~ tl;, :I i’nituli
Nations document.

Documenkof

the Security Council (symbol Sl , , .I ;IW

quarterly Supplements of the Official Rrr~tds

Ilt~r’lllilll~~

of thr’ ,I’~c*~ity

C‘rJ1441t.d.

ptll7li4hctl
T’hc

in
datti

of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears w in H MI
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbcrcd in ;t~cord;~n~:l’ wit 11 ;I
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ~tp.YtJh4~itJ/~.\
tmf
Decisions of the Security Cormcil. The new system, which has Hun ;qrpli~~i
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January IWi, hccame fully rrl,t’r;ttj\‘c
on that date.

2365th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 24 May 1982, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. LING

Qing (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2365)

1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of
Inquiry
established under resolution
496
(1981) (S/14905/Rev.l)
The tnecting

was called to order at 4.25 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda IIUS adopted.

Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry
established under resolution 496 (1981) (S/14905/
Rev.1)
I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
porn Chinese):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [2359th and 236lst meetings],
I invite the representative of Seychelles to take a place
at the Council table; I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Barbados,
Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, Grenada,
Honduras, Hungary, India, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Sao Tome and
Principe, the United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam
and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.
Ar the invitation of the President, Mr. Hodoul (Scyc~hellc~s) took a place at the Councii table; Mr. Zarif
(Afghanistail),
Mr. Ahada (Algeria), Mr. de Figueircdo
(Angola),
Mr. Rota (Argentina),
Mr. Moseley (Barkudos),
Mr. Soglo (Benin), Mr. Mogl~le (Botsllwncr),
Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Lbpez del Atno (Cubu),
WI.. S&I (Czechoslovrrkia),
Mr. Abdel Mcguid (Egypt),

Mr. Ott (German Dcmor*ratic
Republic*), Mr. Tay101
(Grenada),
Mr. Lobe (Honduras),
Mr. Rcju. (Hungamy), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr, Srithirnth (Lao People’s Demowatic
Republic),
Ms. Rabetafika
(Madagascwr),
Mr. Zaki (Maldives),
Mr. Traore (Mali),
Mr. Garlci (Malta), Mr. Lobo (Mozambique),
Mr. Chatnorro
Morn
(Nioaragua),
Mr. Naik
(Pakistan),
Mr. Cassandra
(Sno Tome and Principe),
Mr. Rupia
(United Republic of Tanzania),
Mrs. Nguyen Ngoca
Dung (Viet Nam) and Mr. SiloviC: (Yugoslavia)
took
the p1ac.e.s reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Chinese):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius and
the Syrian Arab Republic in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives
to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.
At thr invilcrtiou of the President,
Mr. Maina
(Kenya),
Mr. Burwin
(Libyan
Asab Jnmahiriya),
Mr. Ramp/w1 (Mauritius)
and Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian
Arab Republic) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the CounL’il chamber.

3.

Mr.

de PINI&
(Spain) (interpretation
fi-om
I should like first to extend a special greeting
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Seychelles,
Mr. Jacques Hodoul, and thank him for his presence
at this debate, which naturally enhances our deliberations.
Spanish):

4. We are met here to consider the report of the
Security Council Commission
of Inquiry established
under resolution 496 (1981), report contained in document, S/14905/Rev. 1. As the members of the Council know, after considering the complaint presented
by Seychelles we decided to send a Commission
of
Inquiry made up of three members of the Council to
consider the origin, background and financing of the
25 November
1981 mercenary aggression against the
Republic of Seychelles, as well as to assess and evaluate economic damages, and to i-eport to the Council
with recommendations
[resolutiun 496 (/98/j, paw. 31.

5. T,he delegation of Spain wishes to congratulate
the Chairman of the Commission, Mr. Carlos Ozores
Typaldos
of Panama, and the representatives
of
Ireland and Japan on the diligence with which they
carried out the Council’s mandate, visiting Seychelles,
Swaziland and South Africa and holding many interviews with various high officials of those countries,
witnesses and even mercenaries in the custody of
Seychelles,
The information
given by the mercenaries constitutes an important part ofthe report. Were
it not for the underlying reality, which is tragic. I should
say that the report was so interesting that it read like
21 novel. As the Commission itself said, small though
the number of persons participating in the attack may
have been. the attack was, bearing in mind how
small the islands are, a serious threat to the country’s
sovereignty and independence and it seriously disrupted daily life. Such operations constitute a real
tragedy. disrupting international relations.

should be extended to enable it to complete its inquiry
and to submit a supplementary report to the Council
[ihid. ) ptrrtr . 52 1.

9. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to support
the recommendations
of the Commission of Inquiry
and most vigorously to reject the actions of the mercenary forces. against whom the international
corn.
munity as a whole must adopt measures of all kinds
so that such forces cannot continue to disrupt the
peaceful development of nations.
IO. Mr. WYZNER (Poland): The Council is reconvening today to consider the report of the Commission
of Inquiry it has established under its unanimously
adopted resolution 496 (198 I), following the complaint
by the Republic of Seychelles that a band of mercenaries invaded its territory on 25 November.
11. The circumstances of that abortive invasion were
outlined by the representative of Seychelles at the
2314th meeting of the Council. preceding the adop.
tion of resolution 496 (1981). Further details are given
in paragraphs 60-65 of the Commission’s
report. WC
have also listened with great interest to the succinct
summary of events presented on 20 May by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles.
Mr. Jacques Hodoul [235(lrh ~nrcfirza].

6. We have studied with particular care the Commission’s findings and conclusions, and WC are concerned
that, as the representative of Panama, who introduced
the report, said in his statement [2359rh meeting], the
Commission
is not fully informed about the origin of
or background to the mercenary aggression. Furthermore, the Commission
points out that it would be
premature to make a final assessment of the damage
to the economy of Seychelles, but the figures for the
damage given in the report and the loss of income to
the tourist industry. with its multiplier
effect on the
rest of the economy. seem to us serious enough to
justify our support for action in this respect.

12. A careful study of the main body of the reporl
and of the annexes thereto makes it abundantly clear
to an objective reader who the real culprit is. Addi.
tional light on this point has been shed by the press
dispatches on the invasion and its aftermath: here
I shall mentioqjust
three of them, which appeared in
The Nell York Tijnes of 22 April, 4 May and 10 May
1982. under the respective headings of *.South Africa
Tied to Abortive Coup’:. “Testimony
Links South
African Arms to Coup” and “Trial Gives Peek at South
Africa Intelligence Web”, plus those attached to Press
Release No. 5 of the Permanent Mission of Seychelles
dated 29 March.

7. As the representative of Panama said in his statement. although the Commission received the full cooperation
of the Governments
of Seychelles and
Swaziland,
it was not, unfortunately,
allowed to
interview the group of mercenaries who fled the country and returned to South Africa in the hijacked Air
India aircraft. Since the Commission itself says that
it cannot reach final conclusions for that reason,
and since important further information
may emerge
in the future, especially from the trials being held in
South Africa. we fully support the suggestion that the
report be completed when appropriate and then presented to the Council.

13. It is evident that the racist rkgime of South Africa
knew well in advance of the plans to invade Seychelles
in order to overthrow its legitimate Government.
explicitly
approved those plans and provided substantial material assistance for their realization-in
short. it had orchestrated this criminal act of armed
aggression against the territorial integrity and political
independence of a State Member of the United Nations. in flagrant violation of the provisions of Artitle 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter.

8. My delegation fully supports the Commission’s
recommendations.
We listened with great interest to
the statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Seychelles, who. in his conclusion,
summed up those recommendations
as follows: there
should be an appeal to the Members of the United
Nations
to provide. through an appropriate
fund.
financial,
technical
and material assistance to the
Republic of Seychelles to enable it to deal with the
problems
arising from the mercenary
aggression:
Member States should be called upon to co-operate
fully in the preparation of an international
convention
against the recruitment.
use, financing and training
of mercenaries:
and the mandate of the Commission

14. In this context, one understands why, as stated
in paragraph 272 of the report, the Commission was
unable to have an interview with the leader of the
invading mercenaries. “Mad” Mike Hoare, although
we do not believe that the handicap thus created
should have been very serious in view of other testimony available.
2

-

15. But as some might say, what else is new? The
ody really new element in this sordid affair is, indeed,
its victim, the Republic of Seychelles-a
new name
added to along list. How many times in the past have
the rulers in Pretoria violated with impunity the Charter
of the United Nations? How many of its provisions
have they brutally trampled? I think we all know the
answer. I also think we know why South Africa has
been able to get away with its policies of crpnl.theid,
colonial exploitation and armed aggression.

(intcrpr’ettrliUl2
j%W? Chi23. The PRESIDENT
,zLj,YL’): The next speaker is the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to take a
place at the Councif table and to make his statement.

16. I might add at this juncture that we see a clear
organic link between the case of aggression against
Seychelles and another matter regarding South Africa
which the Council is bound to take up soon: namely,
the question of implementation
of its resolution 418
(1977) imposing a mandatory arms embargo against
the upurtheid rCgime.

25. we are naturally glad to see you assuming the
presidency at a time when the world is beset with profound conflicts. We have been impressed by the able
and exemplary manner in which YOU have conducted
the work of this body during this month. For Tanzania, which maintains steady and close relations with
the People’s Republic of China, your presidency gives
us confidence.

24. Mr. RUpIA
(United
Republic
of Tanzania):
Mr, President, I should like at the Outset
to eXprk%S
the gratitude of my delegation to the members of the
Council for having allowed us to participate in this
important meeting.

17. My delegation has studied with interest the
Commission’s report, which we consider to be comprehensive, enlightening
and useful. We appreciate
the efforts of the Commission to produce as balanced
and objective a document as possible. We also understand its cautious and dispassionate approach to certain very sensitive issues and its unwillingness
to
depart from two fundamental legal principles: uudiinm
et altera pars and in dubio pro reo. We would be
remiss if wk failed to express our gratitude to its members for their dedication and toil. At the same time,
I would be less than completely candid if I did not
also say that we would have wished the Commission
to Ibe less circumspect in some of the findings and
conclusions contained in Chapter VI of the report.

26. I should equally like to congratulate Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda who. as President for the month of April,
so ably presided over the work of the Council. I pay
a tribute to him, as I have had the personal privilege
of working with him and have appreciated his distinguished contribution
in the service of Africa.
27. The Council is once again meeting to consider
the complaint by Seychelles arising out of the naked
act of aggression committed by the crpat~lzeid
regime
of South Africa against the pence-loving people of
Seychelles.
In that regard, my delegation is most
appreciative
of the lucid, factual and informative
statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Seychelles [ihid. 1. The Council has before
it the report of the Security Council Commission
of
Inquiry
established under resolution 496 (1981) and
contained in document S/l4905/Rev. I, We commend
the members of the Commission, Mr. Ozores Typaldos
of Panama, Mr. Sezaki of Japan and Mr, Craig of
Ireland, for compiling such important data.

18. My delegation can easily endorse the part of the
report concerning the assessment and evaluation of
economic damages, based as it is on information provided by the most knowledgeable source, namely, the
Government of Seychelles.
19. We also wish to join others in supporting the
extension of the Commission’s
mandate in order to
enable it to prepare an update which would take into
account the additional evidence now available and,
in particular, that which emerged during the trials of
the mercenaries involved.

28. The events of 25 November
1981 epitomized
South Africa’s unfolding general policy of aggression
against independent
African States. Hence, for the
Republic
of Seychelles.
a non-aligned
country, an
ardent supporter
of the liberation
struggle against
lrpaUhcid,
to be targeted as a victim of the mercenary
adventure was not inconsistent with that policy, Seychelles, strategically located in the Indian Ocean, has
taken on added significance, especially in the wake
of the resurgence of the so-called strategic alliance
with South Africa.

20. We likewise consider the second recommendation, in paragraph 293 of the report, calling for a
speedy conclusion of the work on an international convention against the recruitment,
use, financing and
training of mercenaries, to be very useful and timely.
21. The Council can surely take all the necessary
steps, long overdue as they are, in order once and for
all to bring South Africa and its “dogs of war” to heel
in order to prevent it from launching yet another aggression in the future.

29. South Africa, which has arrogated to itself the
role of gendarme in the region, has committed numerouS: acts of aggression against the neighbouring States
of Angola, Zimbabwe.
Botswana, L,esotho, Mozambique and Zambia. Therefore for South Africa the
toppling
of the revolutionary
Government
of Seychelles. leading to the installation of a puppet regime,
was Part of the grand design against the opponents

22. MY delegation stands ready to contribute
to
whatever action the Council might decide to take in
this respect.
3

quent official silence on the matter and the refusal to
grant permission to the Commissioners to interview
the mercenaries, on the pretext that evidence given to
the United Nations Commission might be prejudicial
and that regard must also be had to the sub judice
rule, serve to underscore the extent to which the clpartheid regime was involved.

of rlparrheid. What is also disturbing to all peaceloving people is the realization that certain countries
find comfort in South Africa’s self-prescribed
role,
adding a new dimension to the entire conflict in the
southern African region. Naturally,
the immediate
result has been the intensification
by the clpcirtheid
regime of efforts to destabilize the region and the area
beyond.

32. Evidently
the racist Government
could not
charge the mercenaries with illegal possession of
firearms, because it supplied them. It could not charge
them with conspiracy to commit an offence outside
South Africa, because the whole expedition
was
planned and financed by that regime.

30. The extent to which South Africa can go against
the opponents of apnrtheid is unparalleled.
Its constant armed incursions into Mozambique
and its perpetual policy of intimidation and blackmail of the neighbouring States, including its continuing occupation of
southern Angola, using the international
Territory
of Namibia, which is occupied illegally, as a platform
for that aggression and for numerous other terrorist
activities, are all part of that policy. This should not
be allowed to continue, least of all to find sympathy
in certain quarters of the Council. The arguments
adduced to prevent indictment of South Africa cannot
be considered as sound propositions
in the light of
the overwhelming amount of evidence which is before
the world and which places South Africa squarely in
the guilty position. Since that heinous act against
Seychelles, the revelations through the international
press and the testimonies of the mercenaries themselves have all been self-evident. What happened in
Seychelles on 25 N,ovember 1981 is a continuation
of South Africa’s policy of installing
well-tailored
puppet regimes in order to enhance the destabilization
of independent African States. The use of puppets in
such criminal adventures did not start with Seychelles.
The traitor Savimbi, who has been on the pay-roll of
South Africa since before Angola gained its independence, has not stopped his conduit role against his own
country. The Savimbis and Manchams pride themselves on being on the same pay-roll as the internationally acknowledged soldiers of fortune led by
Mike Hoare. As far as we are concerned, all puppets
stand as condemned as their masters and co-conspirators-the
third dogs of war. We should like to
submit as forcefully as we possibly can that the Seychelles dlbicle of 25 November 1981 was the work
of the uprwtheid regime of South Africa.

33. Taking all these factors into account, my delegation wonders whether what is going on now in South
Africa is anything like a trial, for what can be expected
of a system which is itself an accomplice in the crime?
What can be expected of a system which, in the first
instance, chose to ignore the crime altogether and set
the mercenaries free? Obviously, the South African
“legal” system, being the total embodiment
of the
obnoxious system of aprrrtheid, cannot be expected
to punish those who commit offences in the service
of the racist regime.
34. The Seychelles raid by a band of mercenaries is
not the first raid on an independent, peace-loving
African country. Since the early 196Os, numerous
mercenary plots have been hatched and carried out.
To date, the possibility of mercenary aggression remains a serious threat to the sovereignty and independence of many small States in Africa, and indeed elsewhere in the developing world; therefore the Council
must categorically pronounce itself against mercenarism. It must condemn South Africa. Short of that,
the Council may run the risk of appearing to be acquiescing in this evil system.
35. The Government of Tanzania opposes all mercenary activities, since we believe they are manifestations of crimes against peace. The international
community
must urgently enact an internationally
accepted instrument that will proscribe all acts leading
to the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries.

3 11 The international community is being presented
with evidence to prove that South Africa was privy
to, and actually sanctioned, the expedition.
The
behaviour. of the South African authorities and their
uneven-handedness in the handling of the whole affair
leave no doubt that they were involved. The mercenaries came from South Africa and most of them
are members of the security forces. That is why, when
in the face of defeat at the hands of the gallant Seychelles defence forces and in their panic retreat and
the subsequent hijacking of the Air India airliner, the
mercenaries did not hesitate to go to South Africa,
where they had come from. The swift act of clemency
and the prompt release of most of the mercenaries
cast initial light on the total involvement of the South
African Government in the whole affair. The subse-

36. We have noted with distress the counter-initiatives by some countries during the consideration of
this item both in the Sixth Committee and in the Ad
Hoc Committee on the Drafting of a International
Convention Against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. We find it strange that
the very countries that have labelled the national
liberation movements “terrorist groups” have found
logic in going into partnership with regimes that finance
and use mercenaries in Africa and elsewhere.
37. Let US therefore come to grips with the realities
of the day and declare that the activities of mercenaries
are contrary to the fundamental principles of inter4

That trenchant sentence contains the vital elements
of the subject before the Security Council.

national law. Nations should denounce the whole
concept of mercenarism as a crime against humanity,
threatening the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.

43. In the past few days, speaker after speaker has
praised the valour of the people and Government of
Seychelles. Speaker after speaker has condemned
the mercenary attack which shattered the peace, disturbed the life, damaged and destroyed the property
and disrupted the economy of this island State of
some 63,000 people. And that is not all, for the attack
also resulted in injuries and loss of life.

38. As the Commission anticipated, there is a strong
need for the Council to examine once again the complaint submitted by the Government of Seychelles
as more evidence comes to light, and indeed, to issue
a supplementary report. This is especially necessary
in view of the inadequate probe into the political
aspects, for they relate significantly to the background
and financing of the mercenary aggression, which
were part of the Commission’s
mandate under Security Council resolution 496 (1981).

44. The valiant people of Seychelles stood up,
fought against aggression and made short work of the
attack in defence of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of their country. Botswana salutes them;
the OAU Council of Ministers congratulates them.
As the current Chairman of that Council, I am particularly gratified that the solidarity displayed in the
condemnation
of the mercenary aggression against
this African country transcended whatever differences
there might be in other areas of our political endeavours.

39. My delegation,
however, welcomes the economic aspects of the recommendations,
especially
those which relate to the serious economic dislocation caused by the mercenary aggression. We hope
the international
community
will respond positively
to the appeal for assistance to Seychelles, ‘to enable
it to rebuild its damaged structures and equipment
and, more significantly, to rehabilitate its economy,
by contributing generously to the special fund. In this
regard we note with appreciation
the willingness
expressed by the Government of France to play a
special role in co-ordinating the resource mobilization
for this purpose,

45. The world has been informed that the objective
of the sinister and ignominious plot foiled on 25 November 1981 was to capture the entire leadership of
the country, overthrow the Government and reinstate
the former head of State. “Capture the entire leadership”, I said. Bloodless coups are a rarity and, let us
admit, the adventure would have resulted in loss of
life.

40. W’e cannot conclude this statement without
paying special tribute to the gallant people of Seychelles for what they have done on behalf of Africa.
South Africa’s defeat at the hands of the revolutionary
forces of Seychelles is the act of a courageous people
who love their independence and are willing to defend
it. Tanz:ania has already pledged total solidarity with
the people of Seychelles. We would like to assure them
that we will always be with them, even during these
difficult moments of economic reconstruction. To that
end Tanzania is ready to make a modest contribution
to the voluntary fund to be established by the Council.

46. The Government of Seychelles, the members of
the Security Council Commission of Inquiry in their
report and the news media have all identified the
mercenaries, their country of permanent or temporary
residence, their designations, their mode of operation
and the haven of their escape. The roll of dishonour
names, among others, the notorious mercenary Mike
Hoare, Dolinschek-by
his own account an intelligence officer in the National Intelligence Service of
South Africa-and
Puren, a Congo-crisis graduate.
There are others, too, who seem to be associated with
South African security forces in roles that go beyond
the concept of mere involvement
in the. military
routine of compulsory National Service. What about
Mr. Steyn de Wet and Mr. van Huysteen? What about
the statement by Commandant van der Spuy concerning his unit? These questions cry out for answers.

4 I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtior? from Chinese):
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Botswana, Mr. Archibald Mogwe, who wishes to
make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU). I welcome him and invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
42. Mr. MOGWE (Botswana): The first paragraph
of resolution CM/Res. 906 (XXXVIII)
on the mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles,
which was adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
OAU at its thirty-eighth session, held at Addis Ababa
from 22 to 28 February 1982, reads:

47. We have here not just a motley group of louts,
but experienced mercenaries, professional men, some
still in the active service of their country. And the
holding of regular planning meetings: the assembling
of exotic military hardware: the issuing of passports
under false names and the promptness with which
Puren’s was issued; the use of the firing range to test
weapons: the ease with which such a large body of
men passed through customs, immigration and security without being searched-in
short, the facility,
blatancy and brazenness with which the mercenaries

“Co/zRnctl//ates
the valiant people of Seychelles
and their Government on their resounding victory
over the vile mercenaries in the pay of international
imperialism.“’
5

53. We congratulate the valiant people of Seychelles
and their Government on their resounding victory over
mercenaries in the pay of international
imperialism,

carried out their coup preparations
within South
Africa-all
serve to inspire incredulity about South
Africa’s protestation
that it had neither initiated,
approved nor known about the attempted COUP.

54. It has been reported by the Commissioners and
acknowledged by all speakers that the Republic of
Seychelles has, as a result of the invasion, suffered
extensive material damage. The Foreign Minister of
Seychelles has catalogued
his country’s
requirements. What must be said, and said very loudly for
even the deaf to hear, is that as a result of the repro.
hensible attack on Seychelles, the Government of that
country is being compelled to divert its slender le.
sources from essential development
projects to the
work of repairing the damage done and to strengthening
its security and defence systems.

48. We recognize and appreciate the unanimity with
which the Council supports the recommendation
that
the present report should be considered an interim
one and that the mandate of the Commissioners
be
extended in order for them to pursue their meticulous
and methodical search for truth and to prepare and
submit a supplement, a complementary
report. The
area of investigation has now been narrowed down to
mercenaries
inside South Africa itself. The Council
should expect from the Government of South Africa
all the possible assistance the Commissioners
may
require. It should seek South Africa’s co-operation
and facilitation of the inquiry.
.

55. The international
community is renowned for its
generosity in times of dire need. We have no reason
to believe that the plea of the people and Government
of Seychelles will go unheeded and their valour unsung
and unrewarded.
We therefore support the recommendation that a voluntary fund be set up with the
objective of alleviating in some measure the plight
and suffering of the people of Seychelles.

49. Our concern here at this moment is tirst and
foremost the question of Seychelles. But the larger
question of mercenarism is a matter of concern to
nations across the African continent.
50. The GAU has adopted a Convention which, by
definition,
excludes members of the enlarged international community. Our ultimate objective, however,
is the adoption by the international
community
of a
global convention. Mercenaries from other nations
and continents can best be dealt with under a United
Nations convention. We are aware that some Western countries have enacted legislation forbidding the
recruitment of their nationals for foreign wars. However, the fact that mercenaries are still being recruited
openly in the West through magazine advertisements
shows that legislative measures such as the Neutrality
Act in the United States and the Foreign Enlistment
Act in the United Kingdom, to mention but two examples, are extremely inadequate, For that reason we
welcome the recommendation
relating to the establishment of an international convention against mercenarism I

56. On behalf of the OAU Council of Ministers, and
on behalf of my own country, Botswana, I thank the
Council for having permitted me to participate in this
debate. I violated convention by not congratulating
you, Sir, on your occupancy of the presidency for the
month of May. This was no oversight on my part,
but a deliberate act-not
because you are not worthy
of the kind words that have been addressed to you,
but because all of the distinguished
personalities
who have preceded me have paid you every tribute in
the book and left none for me, save to associate my
delegation and the OAU Council of Ministers with
everything that has been said here about your person,
your country and the confidence you enjoy from US
all.
57. The PRESIDENT
(intcqmrcrtion
,@/n C/iinrsc): The next speaker is the representatrve of Vitd
Nam. I invite her to take a place at the Council table
and to make her statement.

51. Yesterday mercenaries were in the Congo and
Angola, in Benin and Zimbabwe. Today they are in
Seychelles. Tomorrow is anybody’s guess.
52. What is no guess, however, is that if the international community genuinely accepts and upholds the
principle of the inalienable right of peoples to selfdetermination
and their right to embrace, without let
or hindrance,
the ideological
and socio-economic
systems of their choice; if the fundamenta1 prerequisites of statehood-independence,
sovereignty,
territorial
integrity, non-interference
in the internal
affairs of other States-are held sacrosanct and inviolable; if the hegemonistic designs and hankering after
spheres of imperialist
influence cannot merely be
curbed, but completely outlawed: and if no country
provides a haven for mercenaries and each enacts
legislation prohibiting its nationals from enlisting for
mercenary service, then the death knell of mer-cenarism
will have tolled.

58.

Mrs.

NGUYEN
NGOC DUNG
(Viet Nam)
f,.c.)nz French):
The delegation of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam would like, first of all,
to extend to you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council, its sincere thanks for providing
it with this opportunity to participate in the work of
the Council on the important subject of the attempted
armed corfp d’c’rar against the Republic of Seychelles
in November 198 1.

(irttoprefrttion

59. My delegation listened attentively to the clear
and convincing statement of Mr. Jacques Hodoul, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Seychelles [ikid.], and
we fully share his evaluation of the results of the
investigation
by the Commission
of Inquiry and (he
measures to be taken in the future.
6

-

60. Like the representatives of countries which have
spoken before me, we regret that in spite of the efforts
of the distinguished members of the Commission of
Inquiry the result should have proved to be so limited
with regard to determining the origin, financing and
organization of that aggression. This major lacuna is
due to the fact that the Commission was refused by
the South African authorities any contact with the
mercenaries who returned to South Africa after carrying out their mission, and therefore coulcl not interrogate them.
61. This obstructive attitude on the part of South
Africa did not succeed in suppressing the truth. The
press, despite its limitations, has already made cleal
the essential fact-that
those in charge of this oper<ation intended to overthrow the Government of SeyIchelles-with information about the plan which had
lbeen drawn up, the source of financing, the supply of
arms-everything,
including details as to the undeniable role of a service of the South African armed
forces, the Military Intelligence Service, and of the
National Intelligence Service.

65. In our region, South-East Asia, there exists at
the present time a new type of mercenary which reactionary hegemonistic
forces have recruited from the
ranks of nationals of the countries of Indo-China.
in
particular from among refugees who have left theit
countries following
war or economic
difi‘iculties.
Under various disguises-particularly
as refugee
camps-military
mercenary
training
centres have
been set up and are fully operational in the territory
of neighbouring
countries of Indo-China with the aim
of destabilizing
those countries. This type of mercenary activity ib particularly dangerous because it gives
rise to a permanent state of insecurity of half peace,
half war, and causes indescribable
suffering to the
countries that are victims of these activities.
66. That is why Viet Nam is acting, in full awareness, in fully endorsing the proposal of Foreign Minister Jacques Hodoul for the preparation and rapid
adoption of an international
convention with effective provisions to combat this infernal scourge of
the mercenary.
67. It is to be hoped that this juridical instrument
will be drafted in such a way as to be applicable not
only to mercenaries but especially to States which
recruit them, finance them and use them and which
have on their territory training camps disguised in
various ways. We would hope that this convention
would provide for severe punishment
both of the
mercenaries and of the States which employ them as
an instrument
of their policy of interference in the
internal affairs of other States.

62. International
public opinion is agreed that the
abortive act of armed aggression was indeed planned
and prepared in South Africa and that most of the
mercenaries had served in the armed forces of South
Africa. This revelation is a surprise to no one, since
this is a racist rCgime which persists in pursuing its
odious policy of npurrheid
and oppression against
neighbouring countries, despite the chorus of international condemnation.
63. This abortive act of force against the young
Republic of Seychelles is not an isolated case; far
from it. In terms of the African continent alone, the
same scenario has been acted out, with some variations, in Conakry, in Cotonou, in the Congo, in Zaire,
im Zimbabwe, in the Comoros and against Angola,
Mozambique, Togo and so on. In other continents
t(Do, this form of armed intervention, of destabilizatlion by means of mercenaries, has become a dangerous
scourge to the young, newly independent
States
already sorely tried by so many years of effort in the
liberation struggle.

68. We consider mercenarism to be an international
crime, an act of international
terrorism which poses
a grave threat to sovereignty, the territorial integrity
and, in some cases, the very existence of many newly
independent States.
69. With regard to the case of the Republic of Seychelles which is now before this Council, my delegation would like to associate itself with all non-aligned
and other countries in expressing our respect and
admiration
for the people and Government
of Seychettes, who dare to defy all imperialist
intrigues,
firmly and valiantly supporting all just causes, in spite
of all threats, and who work so tirelessly and so consistently to make the Indian Ocean a zone of peace,
a nuclear-free zone without military bases. Perhaps
it is this courageous position of the Republic of Seychelles that has made it such a thorn in the side of
the warmongers whose target it has become. The
Republic of Seychelles may be sure that all those who
cherish justice are on its side.

64. This proliferation of violent attempts at coups
attacks and armed interventions,
which are now becoming more generalized, is no
accident. It is to be explained by the plans for stemming the tide of the national liberation movements and
by the hegemonistic policies pursued by international
imperialist and reactionary forces that cannot tolerate
the idea of their former colonies or vassal States becoming independent, enjoying self-determination
and
daritig to choose a path of development which is not
their own. In the world context where acts of open
war are not always rewarding, those in imperialist,
colonialist and reactionary circles often have recourse
to underhand and disguised methods such as the use
of mercenaries.
d’c’tar, political

70. We should like to take this opportunity
to quote
a passage from the telegram sent by the President of
the Council of State of our country, Mr. Truong Chinh,
to the President
of the Republic
of Seychelles,
7

Mr. E,.ance Albert Rene, immediately
in question:

ularly in the African region, have become more frequent and more serious.

after the event

78. It is obvious that these acts all fall within the
framework of the attempts of imperialist and reactionary circles to suppress by force the struggle of
the peoples for their national liberation or to divert
them from their freely chosen course of economic and
social development.
That is a new manifestation of
the absurd aspiration to restore, at the end of the
twentieth century, in one form or another, colonial
or semi-colonial
domination over those peoples and
territories. Moreover, acts of aggression against the
territorial integrity of the Republic of Seychelles cannot be dissociated from the negative processes that
are developing in the region of the Indian Ocean as a
result of the dangerous intensification of the military
presence of certain imperialist Powers.

“The great victory of the armed forces and )he
people of Seychelles over the attempted aggression
against the Republic of Seychelles once again
demonstrates that they are capable Of foiling all the
designs of the imperialists
and reaCtiOnarieS
and Of
effectively defending the national independence
and integrity of their country.
“Viet Nam reaffirms its whole-hearted solidarity with and its energetic support for the people and
Government of Seychelles in their fight for the
defence and construction of a developed and prosperous Republic of Seychelles.”
71, My delegation, in conclusion, urges members of
the Council to follow up appropriate1y the just and
logical proposals submitted by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles, in particular
these concerning the establishment of a special emergency assistance fund to compensate for the considerable damage caused by this aggression, the
preparation as soon as possible of an international
convention on mercenarism and the prolongation
of
the mandate of the Commission of Inquiry in order to
create the necessary conditions for bringing this case
to trial, as the international community has the right
to expect.

79. My delegation has carefully examined the report
of the Commission of Inquiry and found it to be a very
useful one. At the same time, we associate ourselves
with the view expressed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles, Mr. Jacques
Hodoul, when he emphasised in his clear and precise
statement that
“the report, in spite of the evident desire of the
Commission fully to carry out the mandate entrusted
to it, does not wholly elucidate the origin, background and financing of the aggression against the
Republic of Seychelles” [2359rh meeting, partr. 461,

72. The PRESIDENT
(ilztfrpr~talion
.f>om ChiIX~SP): The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement,

80. In this regard, I should like to express the hope
of the Bulgarian delegation that these omissions will
be repaired and that the Council will give the Cornmission
a mandate to supplement its report by new
73. Mr. TSVETKOV (Bulgaria) (intc/pr’c’frrfiol?~/.~~~~~ji~~/7
.fiom
facts,
thus
making it possible to obtain a full picture
Fr~rch): First of all, Sir, I should like to congratulate
of
the
situation.
Nevertheless, the facts available
You warmly on your assumption of the presidency
for
have
demonstrated
undeniably that the attack against
the month of May and to express my conviction that
Seychelles
was
inspired,
organized and carried out
under your competent leadership the work of the
with
the
direct
participation
of the racist regime of
Council will prove successful,
Pretoria. It was prepared with the approval of the
South African Special Services and carried out with
74. 1 wish also to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
weapons
supplied and mercenaries recruited by the
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda of Zaire, for the comSouth
African
armed forces. According to the revelapetence with which he carried out his functions.
tions of the gang’s leader, the racist Government had
decided in principle in September 1981 to carry out
75. 1 am very grateful for this opportunity to take
this invasion plan, the specific objective of which Was
Part in this debate on behalf of the Bulgarian delethe overthrow of the legitimate Government of Sey
gation.
chelles.
76. The Council has already had occasion once
81. What is particularly serious is that this act is not
l2314rh ~n~~etiflglto deal with the question of the attack
an isolated one. It falls within the framework of an
bY a EYouP of terrorists against the Republic of Seyextremely dangerous pohcy on the part of Pretoria
che11es3an attack that failed thanks to the vigilance
which is well-known to the international community.
of and the effective measures taken by the armed
It
is one more link in a long chain of crimes committed
forces of that country.
by the racists, who are continuing their illegal &cupation of Namibia and their acts of aggression against
77+ MY delegation notes with profound concern that
neighbouring States.
cases of the use of mercenaries in pursuit of a policy
of destabilization and terror against newly liberated
82. In the circumstances, there can be no doubt that
‘ountries and national liberation movements, particthe full and direct responsibility for the mercenary
8

attack and for the acts of aerial terrorism and the taking
of hostages which followed that attack rests with the
Government of South Africa. Full responsibility, under
the norms of international law, includes responsibility
for direct and indirect damage caused to the Republic
of Seychelles as a result of this act of aggression. It
should also be stressed that this is not the first time
that the use of armed force and terrorism encouraged
by those in imperialist
and reactionary circles has
proved detrimental to the economic development of
newly liberated countries, which are already confronted with complicated social and economic problems inherited from the colonial era.
83. Examination of the report of the Commission of
Inquiry provides further confirmation
of the fact
that the attack committed
against Seychelles constitutes a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law. The racist
rigime of Pretoria is politically and juridically
fully
responsible for these illegal acts.
84. In the context, it is clear that all those that encourage that country in its policy of international
adventurism and terrorism by openly demonstrating
their friendship with it also bear their share of the
responsibility.
85. I should like to reaffirm here the whole-hearted
support of my Government and the Bulgarian people
for the just cause of the Government and the people
of Seychelles. We hope that, on the basis of the report
of the Commission of Inquiry and the conclusions that
will emerge from this debate, the Council will take
appropriate effective measures to compile an even
more complete record of all the aspects of the events
of 25 November 1981, with a view to the final elimination of the negative consequences of this barbarous
attack.
86. The mercenary attack against Seychelles is
further proof that it is necessary to complete work
on an international
convention against the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries.
87. In the Bulgarian delegation’s view, appropriate
and effective action by the Council would undoubtedly
contribute decisively to the prevention of similar acts
in the future; it would also help to strengthen the
Charter of the United Nations and the effectiveness
of the Organization.
88. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion
.fiom Chincse): The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia,, I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
89. Mr. SILOVIC
(Yugoslavia): Sir, at the outset
1 should like to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of May. I am convinced! that your known skill and vast experience will
significantly
contribute to the work of the Council,

as has already been amply proved during the deliberations on two very sensitive and important issues.
I also wish most sincerely to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, the representative of Zaire, on his successful performance of
this responsible duty during the month of April, which
was no less difficult.
90. I should like also to express my gratitude to the
members of the Council for allowing me to present
my country’s views regarding the complaint by Seychelles on the assault against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that small non-aligned State.
91. We listened attentively to the detailed account
of the event and its consequences presented to the
Council by Mr. Jacques Hodoul, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Seychelles, for which we are grateful.
92. A particular tribute goes to the members of the
Security Council Commission of Inquiry for the work
accomplished and the comprehensive
and detailed
report prepared pursuant to resolution 496 (1981),
which was ably presented by the representative of
Panama.
93. I shall now comment briefly on the basic results
of the work of the Commission of Inquiry and the
messages emanating from its report, which is contained in document S/14905/Rev. 1,
94. It is obvious that the action carried out by mercenaries on 25 November 1981 in Seychelles represents a classic example and an illustration
of the
manner in which acts of aggression and overthrowing
of so-called undesirable Governments are performed,
especially against small, independent and, most frequently, non-aligned countries. We have witnessed
similar cases in Africa, Latin America, Asia and elsewhere. During the talks with the members of the
Commission of Inquiry, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information of the Republic of South Africa
stated that in Africa itself there had been 55 coups
&&tat in the last 30 years [S/14905/Rev.I, pm-a. 1861.
Mr. Botha forgot to state how many of them were
inspired and assisted by his country.
95. The goal of the mercenary action in Seychelles,
covertly planned, organized and equipped by the
country which has so many times in this forum been
condemned for the use of force and acts of aggression against its neighbours, was evidently aimed at
overthrowing the legal Government
of Seychelles.
In our view, the report of the Commission of Inquiry
and the talks held by the members of the Commission
with the South African authorities
unequivocally
reveal that the mercenary action was planned in South
Africa itself. There is no doubt that the South African
racist rigime was not only aware of the action and
made it possible but was also directly involved in its
organization and performance. Official denials made
by ministers and officials of South Africa during the

talks with the members of the COmmiSSion
could not
stand up against
the facts which point to the validity
and justification of the accusatlOnS
against South
Africa, Testimony given by captured mercenaries and
the fact that most of them are South African citizens,
and some even intelligence and military OffkidS
Of
the racist rigime, is further evidence of South Africa’s
involvement in this aggressive act.

jeopardizing
the security of countries in the future,
which constitute a threat to international
peace and
security in the regions involved and beyond them.

96. The mercenary attack on Seychelles is a Case Of
a double crime, a twofold Violation
Of illkIwdiOnid
law: first, the aggression against the sovereignty of
a country, and secondly, the hijacking of an aircraft
and the taking of hostages. Neither of them can nor
should be tolerated by the international community,
and particularly
by this United Nations forum. The
Council should react in fulfilment of its responsibilities and finally make South Africa obey the norms of
international behaviour.

103. Mr. MOSELEY
(Barbados): I should like to
begin by thanking you, Sir, and through you the other
members of the Council, for affording me the oppor.
tunity to address the Council. I also wish to add my ‘own expression of pleasure at seeing you preside over
the Council’s affairs during the month of May, At:
this most trying time we have seen ample evidence:
that the Council’s work benefits from your widely
demonstrated
diplomatic
skills and the wisdom for
which your country has been renowned from time
immemorial.

102. The PRESIDENT
(irztc~p/‘cttrtion jiwn Ckirzcsc): The next speaker is the representative of BW
bndos. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

97. Yugoslavia cannot remain passive when a small,
non-aligned country becomes’ the victim of outside
aggression and the flagrant use of force. This act of
terrorism constitutes aggression not only against the
people of Seychelles and its legal Government
but
also against all freedom-loving peoples in the world,
against the basic principles and norms of international
conduct and against the Charter of the IJnited Nations.

104. My country has been faced on more than one:
occasion with threats of insurrection and invasion by :
mercenary forces. In consequence, the Governmenl of’
Barbados feels a special sympathy with Seychelles
with respect to the traumatic ordeal experienced by.
that country on 25 November 1981.
105. Barbados has at every possible opportunitg
made it quite clear that it abhors mercenary activity
in any form or guise. Barbados was one of the dele.
gations calling on the General Assembly, at its thirty.
fourth session [wsolution 341140 of I4 Dcwrnbrr
19791 to include the item “Drafting of an international T
convention against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries”
in the agenda of its thirty
fifth session. Barbados was among the sponsors of:
General Assembly resolution 3.5/48 of 4 December
1980, which established the Ad Hoc Committee.
Barbados has been an active member of that Corn-,
mittee.

98. The aggression against Seychelles cilused considerable material. financial and economic damage,
which should be compensated. Undoubtedly.
South
Africa bears full responsibility for this damage.
99. We support the recommendations
of the Commission of Inquiry calling for financial. technical and
material assistance to Seychelles by Member States
and the specialized agencies in order to eliminate the
consequences of the aggression, and for such assistance to be directed through a special fund. The Yu.goslav delegation considers that international assistance
to Seychelles should in no way lessen South Africa’s
obligation to compensate the damage caused by its
subversive and illegal activities, not only in Seychelles
but also in other neighbouring countries which have
become victims of the impudence and brutality of
the racist rCgime.

106. The Government
and people of Barbados
regard mercenarism as a crime against humanity. It is
a crime which, in my country’s view, ought to be
regarded as being the more dangerous because of the
legalistic loopholes that tend to frustrate its punish.
merit. Barbados is convinced that peace-loving na.
tions and civilized peoples everywhere should take all
possible action to eliminate this menace from the
international
arena.

100. In this context, the Yugoslav delegation would
like Particularly to underline the need for speedier
and more efficient work on the finat elaboratioa of an
international Convention against the recruitment, use
financing and training of mercenaries. We hope that thi
attack on Seychelles and the report of the Commission
of Inquiry will stimulate the exertion of utmost efforts
in this direction and that an agreed text of the convention will be adopted as soon as possible,

107. The dastardly assault on the Republic of Seychelles by a band of marauders operating out of South
Africa underscores the vulnerability
of small Stales
to attacks by mercenaries. I need not belabour this.
point. since the arguments in support of this contem:
tion have been clearly enunciated by several delega
tions time and again. It is the hope of my delegation,
however, that heed will be paid to the second recom
mendation in paragraph 293 of the report of the Come

lOI* The Yugoslav delegation expects that, after
consideration of the report of the Commission
of
Inquiry, the Council will take the necessary
measures
to Prevent similar attempts aimed at destabjlizjng and
IO

mis,sion of Inquiry.
follows:

The recommendation

reads as

“As the possibility of aggression by mercenaries
rlemains a grave threat to the sovereignty and independence of States, particularly small developing
countries. the Commission recommends that the
work at present under way on an international convention against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries be brought to a speedy conclusion so that the convention may be opened for
signature as soon as possible.”
108. My delegation
unreservedly
supports that
recommendation.
We feel very strongly that every
effort must be made to complete the convention with
as little delay as possible, and certainly no later than
the end of next year.

113. My delegation therefore agrees whole-heartedly
with the Commission of Inquiry in respect of its Second, third and fourth recommendations.
We also
strongly urge compliance with the fifth recommendation, which calls upon the International
Civil Aviation
Organization
(ICAO) to give further consideration
to preventive measures with regard to the checking
and examination
of baggage on commercial
airlines.
With regard to the first and sixth recommendations,
my delegation is particularly happy to lend its support
-moral
as it can only be, in keeping with our limits
in this forum-to
the proposals so eloquently
presented by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Seychelles, Mr. Jacques Hodoul.
114. The PRESIDENT
(inrcrprctafion
jktn
ChiIZCSLJ):The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan, I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

109. We appreciate the concerns of those delegations
wishing to avoid the complications that would inevitably flow from the existence of more than one definition of “mercenary”
in international law. We also
appreciate the concerns of those delegations that seek
to ensure that those of their nationals who might be
eng,aged in mercenary activities are guaranteed humane treatment if and when captured. My delegation
is not unaware that some delegations-even
some of
those serving on the r/d hoc Committee-would
prefer
that a convention not be elaborated at all. My delegation once again appeals to all members of the international community to safeguard the principle of sovereign equality by taking necessary action to eliminate
mercenary activity by their nationals and from within
their borders.

115. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to extend to you our most sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of May. We deeply cherish our ties of close
friendship with your great country which, upholding
principle, has always stood by Pakistan in its hour of
crisis. Relations between our two countries are an
example of good neighbourliness
and a most positive
factor for the peace and stability of our region. I am
confident that your wide experience and understanding
of international
relations and your sagacious leadership will enable the Council to carry out its important
responsibilities during this month with distinction and
success.
116. I also wish to avail myself of this opportunity
to express the deep appreciation of my delegation for
the admirable manner in which Mr. Kamanda wit
Kamanda of Zaire guided the work of the Council
during the past month.

110. In its issue of March 1982, the magazine NU
AjXcnn quotes British journalist and author Tony
Ger,aghty as having said: “it is doubtful whether any
military
entrepreneur,
however influential,
could
engineer a risky political venture without Government help”. The article in the magazine then proceeds
to cite instances in which Mr. Geraghty has uncoveredl governmental
links of one kind or another with
mercenary activities perpetrated in African and Arab
countries,

117. In its resolution 496 (198l), the Council condemned the mercenary aggression of 25 November
1981 against the Republic of Seychelles and established
a commission to investigate the origin, background
and financing of this aggression as well as to assess
and evaluate the resulting economic damages.

1II.
It is not enough for delegations to pay lip service on such an important matter: it is not enough for
Governments
of powerful nations to shed crocodile
tears when mercenary activity, such as was attempted
in Seychelles, results in failure; nor is it enough for the
international
community to turn a blind eye in cases
in which mercenary activity does in fact succeed.

118. We now have the report of the Commission of
Inquiry before us, in document S/14905/Rev. 1. On
behalf of the Pakistan delegation, I should first like to
pay a sincere tribute to the Chairman of the Commission, Mr. Ozores Typaldos of Panama, and to its
two members, Mr. Craig of Ireland and Mr, Sezaki
of Japan, for the detailed report they have presented
on the various aspects of the mercenary aggression
against Seychelles. We have noted with dismay, however, that owing to the refusal of South Africa to permit it to interview the mercenaries, the Commission
has been unable to provide complete information
on
the origin and background
of thk mercenary aggression. We therefore feel that the mandate of the Com-

112. It is my delegation’s view that States must
assume some responsibility for eliminating mercenary
activity, and we also believe that in this case the
international
responsibility must override the State’s
resp~onsibility to protect its citizens when they are
planning to commit, are in the process of committing
or have already committed any form of mercenary
activity.
11

mission should be extended so as to enable it to submit
a supplementary
report to the Council.

125. In its report, the Commission has provided some
details of the loss suffered by the Republic of Seychelles as a result of that aggression. An adverse
impact on the tourism industry and damage to the
airport in Seychelles have been cited by the report.
More details about short-term and long-term adverse
effects of this mercenary aggression on the economy
of the Republic were given in the lucid statement by
the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Seychelles
[235Yrh m~~eting]. Sharing the view that Seychelles
should not be left to bear the burden of this loss alone,
we support the recommendation
of the Commission
that financial, technical and material assistance should
be given to Seychelles to enable it to overcome the
difficulties it is facing as a result of the mercenary
aggression. A special voluntary fund should be established immediately
for that purpose, and it is the hope
of the Pakistan delegation that Member States will
contribute generously to that fund,

119, The Commission of Inquiry’s report, incomplete though it may be, leaves little doubt however
that this mercenary operation was hatched and prepared in South Africa with the knowledge and support
of the racist rkgime there.
120. The report has highlighted revealing information about the planning of the mercenary aggression,
the recruitment of mercenaries and their background.
A number of the recruited persons were reservists in
the South African defence forces under call-up notice.
The weapons were delivered to and tested by them
in South Africa. One of the mercenaries, now in custody in Seychelles, is a serving member of the National
Intelligence
Service of South Africa. Accordingly,
in paragraph 282 of its report, the Commission
has
rightly concluded that:

126. The mercenary aggression has underlined the
urgent need for the speedy conclusion of an international convention
against the recruitment,
use, financing and training of mercenaries. This convention
would no doubt address itself, among other matters,
to the recommendations
of the Commission
that
States make every effort to prevent mercenary operations and that Member States having information
relating to mercenary activities should without delay
communicate the same to the Governments concerned.
The Committee’s
recommendation
that the ICAO
should give further consideration to preventive measures against the clandestine transportation
of arms
in baggage checked on commercial airlines also needs
urgent attention.
A concerted effort is required to
bring under control the scourge of terrorism and
mercenary activity in the world.

“Given the tight and effective control exercised
by the security authorities in South Africa, and the
nature of the preparations for the mercenary operation of 25 November I98 1 in South Africa, particularly the procurement and test-firing of the weapons. the Commission finds it difficult to believe that
the South Africsn authorities did not at least have
knowledge of the preparations in this matter.”
121. Subsequent to the compilation of the report by
the Commission, more light has been shed on the matter, particularly at the trial of the 43 mercenaries in
South Africa accused of hijacking the Air India plane.
The testimony of mercenary leader Mike Hoare is
particularly revealing.
122. The findings of the Commission based on the
available information and the testimony of the mercenaries in their hijacking trial clearly point to the
complicity
of South African authorities in this sordid
episode. We feel that at the appropriate time the Council should have no hesitation in clearly placing the
responsibility
for this aggressive act on the racist
rkgime in South Africa,

127. Before I conclude, I should like to extend to
the people and the Government of the Republic of
Seychelles-a
sister Republic of the Indian Oceanthe full support of the people and the Government of
Pakistan in safeguarding their territorial
integrity,
national sovereignty and political independence.
128.

The PRESIDENT
(interpwttrtion
,fhm
ChiThe next speaker is the representative of Sao
Tome and Principe. I invite him to take a’ plrce at
the Council table and to make his statement.

123. South African involvement
in the mercenary
aggression against the Republic of Seychelles should be
seen in the context of the racist rtgime’s policy of
ruthless aggression, interference and destabilization
perpetrated against neighbouring independent African
States.

~PSLJ):

129. Mr. CASSANDRA
(Sao Tome and Principe):
Mr. President, first of all I am grateful to you and to
the other members of the Council for giving my delegation this opportunity to participate in this important
debate,

124. In conformity
with Pakistan’s total opposition to mercenary activities anywhere in the world.
we condemn South Africa for its abetting of the mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles.
Such acts of violence and overt or covert attempts
aimed at undermining the sovereignty, independence
and territorial
integrity of States constitute serious
contraventi.ons
of the Charter of the United Nations.

130. Since it is the first time that I have addressed
the Council, I should like, on behalf of my delegation,
to extend to you our congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for this month and to wish you
success.
I2

13 1. I should also like to express the most sincere
appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Kamanda wa
Kamanda of Zaire, who so skilfully and effectively
guided the work of the Council during the month of
April.
132. ‘The question under consideration is very clear,
and I am not going to recall the facts because they
have been amply and exhaustively
set forth in the
relevant documents before the Council. However,
my delegation would like simply to note that the conduct of the mercenary operations, their careful preparation and their timing and objectives all strongly
indicate the direct or indirect responsibility
and involvement of South Africa.
133. Sao Tome and Principe, like many other African
countries, is profoundly concerned by this aggression
against. our sister islands of Seychelles, not only
because we are both small and economically fragile
but also because evidence is mounting to suggest that
this type of mercenary aggression forms part of a
world-wide strategy by international reactionary forces
to destabilize and reconquer independent and sovereign States, especially in Africa. We are concerned
also because we were very nearly the victim of a mercenary mission in 1977, and because we recognize
that the rapidly growing mercenary trade challenges
national sovereignty in a fundamental way.
134. National sovereignty in a democratic system is
really the sovereignty of the people. The covert use of
mercenaries for foreign-policy
goals undermines the
public’:s hard-won right openly to govern the conduct
of international
affairs. I should like to cite a good
example: in 1976, representatives of the American
people in the United States Congress passed the Clark
Amendment,
which makes it illegal for United States
agencies to aid rebels in Angola without the prior
public ,approval of Congress. My delegation believes
that the use of mercenaries undermines national sovereignty in a most dangerous and unlawful way in both
the perpetrating and the victimized countries. Hence
it is the responsibility
of the Security Council, the
OAU a,nd our Governments to take concrete action on
the Seychelles question in order drastically to increase
the risks and costs of using mercenaries in the future.

137. So far my delegation has suggested that two
forms of action are in order as a result of the mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles.
138. First, information about the extent and character of mercenary activity should be centralized and
disseminated.
139. Secondly, action should be taken to outlaw the
operations of mercenaries in an effective manner. In
this regard we should like to draw attention to OAU
resolution CM/Res. 906 (XXXVIII)
on mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles, adopted
by the Council of Ministers at its thirty-eighth session,
held at Addis Ababa last February which, in paragraph 9, appeals:
“to the United Nations to speed up the drafting of
the International
Convention against the security,
financing and granting of hospitality to mercenaries
and guarantee its subsequent signature and ratification by all Member States;“’
140. The third type of action my delegation supports is the commissioning of a more detailed followup report by the Commission of Inquiry which on
15 March issued its findings concerning the mercenary invasion of Seychelles. The follow-up report
should, in our view, aim at determining the financial
backing enjoyed by the mercenaries in question and
the sources and implications of such aggression,
141. In conclusion I wish to say that my Government
condemns that act of piracy which aimed at destabilization and the attempt at a u~up d’Ptat in Seychelles.
We believe that what happened on that day in Seychelles could happen to us tomorrow, and the only
effective way of stopping that is for each country to
have laws which clearly prohibit those activities and
unequivocally
demonstrate the political will to enforce them.
142. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jkrn
Chincsc): The next speaker is the representative of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
143. Mr. SRITHIRATH
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (interpretation
from
French): Mr, President, I should like first of all to address to you and
to all members of the Council my sincere thanks for
allowing me to participate in the debate on the question of the armed aggression against the Republic of
Seychelles.

135. A great deal of information
on mercenaries
exists. ‘These data need to be centralized and disseminated so as to leave absolutely no loopholes for those
Governments which are using mercenaries or allowing
them ta’ be recruited within their frontiers.
136. It could hardly be argued that a mercenary is
capable of fighting for a good cause. However, one
should contrast the sinister image of the mercenary
with that of the freedom-fighter-the
man or woman
who takes up arms only when convinced that all else
has failed and when the unbearable oppression of
others compels the moral decision to use retaliatory
force,

144. The severe condemnation by the Council on
15 December 1981 [resolution 496 (198/)] of the shameless aggression by a gang of mercenaries against the
Republic of Seychelles, a non-aligned sovereign country, clearly reflects the serious concern of the international community regarding the dangerous spread
of the scourge of the criminal activities of merce13

naries. This unanimous, just and vigorous action by
the Council, which the Government
of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic endorsed, was a harsh blow
to the practice of using mercenaries as a treacherous
instrument
of subversion resorted to by racist, colonialist and imperialist
circles to replace the legitimate
Government
by a Government
favourable to them:
selves.

Security Council Commission
of Inquiry established
under resolution 496 ( 198 I), which carried out honourably its mission to assess the economic damage caused
by this invasion and then consequently adopted spccific recommendations
for compensation, in particular the proposal to create a special fund. Considering
the urgency of the circumstances, the speedy establishment of such a fund would benefit the entire population of Seychelles, who continue to suffer the harmful consequences of this odious attack.

14s.

Although at that time no official proof had yet
established,
my delegation
expressed the certainty that this criminal coup was part of a cynical
plot by the clprrrthcid authorities
of South Africa in
connivance with certain imperialist
circles. As regards
the aEiies of the racist rdgime in Pretoria, while pretending to ignore the origin of the aggression, they
tried to juggle all kinds of suppositions,
such as: .‘Was
this a purely internal affair? Is it legitimate for a Government surviving a cwp d’btcu to ask that an inquiry
be conducted by the United Nations?“,
and so on.
They do that in order to minimize the importance of
armed aggression and to play it down as an internal
affair of the country against which aggression was
been

149. However, we must note that the Commission of
Inquiry confined itself to an account of the facts preceding and following the aggression without carrying
out a thorough inquiry, in accordance with its mandate, into its origin,
background and financing. It
follows that it presented to the Council, as it pointed
out, a report containing incomplete information, and
consequently it was not possible for it to formulate
concrete political recommendations
that would have
enabled the Council to take the necessary action
against those responsible for the criminal coup.

committed.

150. For this reason, my delegation fully supports the
proposal in the report that the Commission of Inquiry
should continue its work until resolution 496 (1981)
has been fully implemented
and that it should present
a further report to the Council as soon as possible.

146. However, these attempts have come to naught,
for the statements by the leader of the mercenaries
during his trial for the hijacking of an aeroplane that
was held recently in South Africa have clearly revenled that the authorities
in Pretoria and the imperialists are directly implicated.
147.

15 1. There is much irrefutable proofjustifying
severe
condemnation
of the South African rigime of trl~rrtht>id for its political aggression and policies of destabilizatron against the Republic of Seychelles and other
countries in the area. Failure by the Council to take
such action would only encourage the Pretoria authorities and their accomplices to commit similar acts in
the future.

This testimony

has made it perfectly clear that
by the mercenaries against Seychelles had been decided by high governmental authorities in South Africa and executed with the full knowledge of the intelligence
services of that country and
its defence forces, which had supplied the personnel
and weapons necessary for the carrying out of the
operation. This revelation should dispel any lingering
doubts for those who might still hold them regarding
the danger of the South African Government’s
policy
of qmrrhrid to the territorial
integrity and political
independence
of the countries of the area and regarding its role as a faithful executing agent for the
sinister designs of imperialist
circles. Relevant to this
is the report that, according to Thr Neltg York Times
of 10 May, the leader of the mercenaries had kept
the agent of the United States Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) informed of the plan of aggression and
that he had played an important
role in the carrying
out of the plan against the Republic of Seychelles. If
that is true it should surprise no one, considering the
important
geographical
position
of Seychelles for
United States strategy in the Indian Ocean.
the plan for invasion

152. The Government
of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic wishes to pay a tribute to the people
and the Government
of Seychelles for the vigilance
and courage with which they successfully thwarted
this criminal action, and we would assure them of out
unshakeable
solidarity
in their struggle to defend
their national independence and their sovereignty.
153. The PRESIDENT
(irztc~p,.Pt~ltic)l?
from
ChiULJS~): The next speaker is the representative of Grenada. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
154. Mr. TAYLOR
(Grenada): Mr, President, at the
outset I wish to congratulate you on your accession
to the presidency for the month of May and to express
the hope that under your wise leadership the COUP
cil will successfully carry out its onerous duties. I am
grateful to you, Sir, and the other members of the
Council for affording my delegation this opportunity
to make a statement during the discussion of the
report of the Commission
of Inquiry on the mercenary attack against the Republic of Seychelles.

148. The mercenary aggression of 25 November 1981
against the Republic of Seychelles not only caused loss
of human life and considerable
material destruction
but also had serious repercussions on the economic
situation of this developing
country. In this connection, my delegation
wishes to pay a tribute to the
14

\
[
;
i

155. The delegation of Grenada also wishes to
express its gratitude to Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda
for the excellent work he did while he was President
of the Council during the month of April.
156. My delegation decided to address the Council on the item before us not only because the sovereignty and political independence of a sister country
is threatened but also because it is evident that the
phenomenon of mercenarism is exercising the minds
of peace-loving peoples of conscience the world over.
157. Today soldiers of fortune are virtually holding
their guns at the heads of legitimate Governments in
various parts of the world. Furthermore,
the ability
of such vagabonds to wreak havoc is enhanced by the
fact that they are invariably in the service of powerful
interests.
158. Several of the mercenary attacks in the recent
past appear both ludicrous and comical. They therefore have elicited gargantuan laughter in some quarters. For millions of people, however, the threat of
mercenary invasion is not a laughing matter. The presence of a single mercenary, even in an obscure corner
of the world, destabilizes and intimidates certain Governments and peoples. The apprehensions of those
Governments and peoples are justifiable and legitimate when we consider the fact that the use of mercenaries appears to be an instrument of foreign policy
of certain Governments. I wish to point out also that
it is the view of my delegation that the mercenary is
the product of a certain political and economic environment.
159. It is no accident that the racist Government of
South Africa has connived with mercenaries to overthrow the Government of the Republic of Seychelles.
The Government of the Republic of Seychelles, by
virtue of its militant and uncompromising
stand against
the genocidal system of clpcrrtheid, constitutes a pebble
in South A:frica’s boot.
160. Mercenarism is as immoral as it is criminal. The
practice is a cardinal transgression agarnst the Charter
of the United Nations. The Organization must therefore adopt a convention that stipulates very harsh
measures against those who organize, finance, train,
equip, promote, support or employ mercenaries. We
cannot go on piously reaffirming our undying faith in
the principles of the Charter, nor can we uphold the
Charter as sacrosanct, if we fail to punish the paymasters of these modern-day buccaneers. The support
of mercenarism is an invitation to revert to the law of
the jungle.
161. My delegation speaks on the matter under consideration with some measure of authority because
we know how debilitating it is to live in fear of mercenary invasion. Some months ago, one of the leaders
of a mercenary group that planned the overthrow of
the Government of Dominica pointed out, in an inter-

view with Tl?c Gloh~~ md Muil of Canada, that the
ultimate ambition of his group is the overthrow of the
Government of Grenada. The same mercenary leader
also revealed that his group had had several discussions with Eric Gairy, the former Prime Minister of
Grenada, who now resides in the United States.
162. The Grenada delegation listened very attentively to the statement made to the Council by the Ministerfor Foreign Affairs of Seychelles [2359th meeting].
At this juncture, we wish to associate ourselves with
the Minister’s appeal to the United Nations and other
organizations to provide without delay, through an
appropriate United Nations fund, financial, technical
and material assistance to the Republic of Seychelles
to enable it to deal with the problems arising from the
mercenary aggression. The Government of Grenada
will contribute to such a fund.
163. In addition, however, we call upon the United
Nations to make an inventory of individuals and groups
that support, equip, hire, train or encourage mercenarism. Special note must be made of Governments
that might allow the training or hiring of mercenaries
to be carried out in any territory under their jurisdiction or in any place under their control, or that afford
facilities for transit, transport or other operations of
mercenaries.
164. In conclusion, I wish to recommend to this body
the words written by Machiavelli on the question of
mercenarism. Some 500 years ago he wrote:
“The mercenary and auxiliary are unprofitable
and dangerous, and that Prince who founds the
duration of his Government upon his mercenary
forces shall never be firm or secure. For they are
ambitious,
undisciplined,
unfaithful,
divided,
insolent to their friends, abject to their enemies,
without fear of God or faith in men . . . In time of
war they desert you, and the reason is because it is
not love, or any principle of honour, that keeps
them in the field; it is only their pay, and that is not
a consideration strong enough to prevail with them
to die for you. Whilst you have no service to employ
them in, they are excellent soldiers, but tell them of
an engagement and they will either disband before,
or run away in, the battle.”
165. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretrrtiorr
jlv/n
Chinese): The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
166. Mr. ZARIF (A~ghonistan):
I should like al the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of May. We are hopeful
that the Council, under your able guidance, will achieve
positive results. Our words of appreciation go to you]
predecessor, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda of Zaire, fol
the manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council during the turbulent month of April.

167. Permit me also to express our thanks to the
Council, through you, for allowing this delegation to
speak before it on the item under discussion.

173. Seychelles had also been long preceded as a
victim of the mercenary offensive by Angola and
Mozambique.
It is truly amazing that the rrpa~*theicl
regime should, so late in the twentieth century, claim
the right to invade sovereign neighbouring
States in
this fashion. It is even more outrageous that such a
claim should be implicitly
backed by the rulers and
ruling forces of the West, which, so late in the day,
still insist on carrying the “white man’s burden” of
loot in the dark continent.

168. Because of its aggressive nature, international
imperialism, headed by United States imperialism,
is
nurturing and hatching various plots and conspiracies
through its intelligence services in various parts of
the world, which are designed to aggravate tension
and to fish in troubled waters. In order to implement
their heinous designs, the imperialists have recourse
not only to their own means but also to those available to their surrogates around the world. They extend
financial, political and military support to the antipeoples’ regimes and forces and use them as a tool
to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries,
to destabilize and overthrow their progressive and
independent Governments and to suppress national
liberation movements.

174. Scores of identified criminals and professional
terrorists from the United States, Canada, the United
Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, Australia,
Italy, Israel and Chile have quite openly participated
in similar operations.

169. The racist rtgime of South Africa is one of
the stooges of imperialism in this chain, assigned the
task of toppling the legal Government of the young
Republic of Seychelles.

17.5. The notorious 32nd Special Battalion of the
South African forces, the so-called Buffalo Battalion,
is made up of veterans of the dirty war of Viet Nam,
former soldiers of the “Green Berets”, the special
subversion units of the United States Army, and of
men from punitive detachments of the former Rhode.
sian regime.

170. The reasons this small but awakened nation
appears on the imperialist hit-list are quite obvious:
because Seychelles has adopted a socialist path for
its socio-economic development; because, out of a
firm commitment
to peace and to the relaxation of
international tension, the Government of Seychelles
vigorously supports the turning of the Indian Ocean
into a zone of peace and calls for the immediate dismantling of the imperialist military bases there: because, as a non-aligned and anti-imperialist
nation,
it stands by the side of all nations and liberation movements in their struggle to attain and preserve theii
independence; and because it opposes imperialism,
colonialism, neo-colonialism, npa/*theid and Zionism.

176. It is a thief shouting “Thief!”
when the imperialists and their assorted allies raise a boring chorus
about “international
terrorism”.
It is they who increasingly resort to terrorism in defence of their last
crumbling bastions. It is terrorism on an international
scale, which respects no national boundaries and
whose practitioners have taken up arms against progressive, peace-loving
countries. Examples of the
crude terrorism practised as a fine art by these forces
are too numerous to need listing. But one among them
that is perhaps most illustrative of the utter unscrupulousness of its nature is the increasing, and increasingly open, employment of mercenaries in the last-ditch
battles against national liberation movements.

171. AS a matter of fact, this is not the first time
that the imperialists have attempted to overthrow the
Government of Seychelles. Following its independence, Seychelles faced a series of conspiracies
engineered by the imperialists and the racist regime
of South Africa. On 29 April 1978, a coup was attempted against the Government, which was successfully suppressed% Only seven months later, another
attempted coup was discovered. On 16 November
1979, the Government of the Republic of Seychelles,
with the direct participation of the Seychellois people,
foiled another collp which was attempted with the
help of mercenaries. Thus, the last mercenary invasion
did not come as a surprise at all.

177. The topic at present under discussion is but
the latest major instance of mercenary aggression.
The details of the story bring out the diabolical nature
of the operationdoubly so because of the open official Pretoria admission of the regular use of Western mercenaries by the racist regime in its bid to stifle
all African protests,
178. It is significant that the “free world”, far from
cutting it off, actually encourages aid to the gangsters
of the allied racist regime. Recruitment of the dogs of
war is openly conducted in the Western press. The
only pretext that Western officials use in their defence
is that there is no legislation barring the citizens Of
their countries from service in the armies of other
States. The medieval throwback to the recognition of
the right to kill for money is thus sanctified as an
integral part of the philosophy of the ‘*free world”
that is hardly negotiable. Presumably it is the “freedom
of the individual”
that provides for a free play of
market forces with which considerations
of other
nations’ freedom cannot interfere.

172. The dogs of war had been unleashed before in
many countries, as well as against many liberation
movements. The hounds of imperialism followed the
bloody trail left by their masters in Congo a]I the way
to the assassination of African leader Patrice Lumumba.
16

:
k ,

179. After their Seychelles misadventure,
imperialists tried hard, through futilely, to portray the
invasion as an internal incident. Hours later, however,
irrefutable facts regarding the direct involvement of
the intelligence services of the United States and
South Africa surfaced. In his testimony before the
Se:ychellois
authorities, Dolinschek, a ranking officer
of South Africa’s secret service, the National Intelligence Service, who had been captured at Victoria,
revealed that the Government of South Africa had not
only been aware of the planned invasion of the islands
but had also provided arms, training facilities and
forged documents to the band of hired killers. According to the Johannesburg newspaper, The Star,
the’ notorious Colonel Michael Hoare, who led the
gang, recruited the mercenaries in South Africa with
money received from the United States. The revelations of “Mad Mike” before the court have erased
any doubt that might have existed about the direct
Un.ited States and South African involvement.
Speaking before the court, he admitted that the Govern.ment of South Africa had approved the invasion
and that the arms used in the invasion had been provided by the South African army. He provided the
court with the delivery invoice of those arms as a piece
of evidence.

of the CIA in the developing countries. Nor was it
an accident that the United States Ambassador in
Kenya, William Herrop, also accredited to Seychelles,
was present on the island at that time.
183. The overwhelming majority of nations have
condemned in the strongest terms the aggression of
imperialist hirelings against Seychelles. The massive
march of thousands of people through the streets of
Victoria served as a true demonstration of the indignation of that people at, the evil designs of imperialism.
According to the newspaper Beeid, published in the
Transvaal, the organizers of the attack on Seychelles
have not relinquished their ominous plots. There is
yet another large group of mercenaries in South Africa
being trained for another attack on Seychelles. It is
eloquent testimony to the desperation of the imperialists that they should cherish the illusion that hired
professional terrorists can halt the advance of a whole
nation.
184. It is time that an international initiative was
taken to end this medieval practice which the world
is being made to accept as a fact of modern life. We
strongly call for the speedy preparation of an international convention against the use of mercenaries.

180. Hoare’s connection with the CIA of the United
States is a matter of record and goes as far back as
the early 1960s when he was commander of the mercenary forces in the Belgian Congo. According to
him, the CIA had been consulted about the plan and
was following it through one of its agents in South
Africa. Eschel Rhoodie, former Information Secretary
of South Africa, stated in an interview with the Durban
Srrrzday &p~c.ss that “no one will believe that the
secret services of South Africa did not co-ordinate
with across-the-ocean partners in the landing of mercenaries in Seychelles”. Perhaps the Reagan administration’s policy of “constructive
engagement”
between South Africa and the United States could best
find its explanation in this context. Rhoodie said that
in the framework of the existing so-called “gentleman’s agreement”,
the British, French and American secret services have constantly exchanged information of mutual interest. He also pointed to the role
being played in the invasion by British, French and
Netherlands firms which have interests in Seychelles.

185. With regard to the report submitted by the
Commission of Inquiry, all we can state at this stage
is that the mandate of the Commission should be
extended in order to enable it to gather more facts
about the imperialist South African involvement in
the aggression and to report on the implementation
of the decisions of the Council pertaining to economic
assistance to Seychelles.
186. The people and Government of the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan are on the side of the people and Government
of Seychelles. We strongly
demand the extradition of all mercenaries to the Government of Seychelles. We support the setting up of
an international tribunal to consider the crimes committed by the gang of hooligans. We support also the
establishment of a special fund to assist the Government of Seychelles in repairing the damage caused
by the invasion. For our part, we are prepared to make
a contribution, though very modest, to this fund.
187. The PRESIDENT
(irztcrprctation from Chinese): The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

181, The more time that elapses, the more evident it
becomes that the intelligence services of the imperialist,s, in close collaboration with the National Intelligence Service of the apartheid regime of South
Africa, master-minded the whole operation, which was
intended to install in power their subservient puppet,
James Mancham.

188. Mr. LOB0
(Mozambique):
Mr. President,
at the outset, the delegation of the People’s Republic
of Mozambique wishes to congratulate you on the
skilful manner with which you have conducted the
work of the Council during the month of May, In addressing the Council today, my delegation cannot but
recall here the bonds of friendship and solidarity that
have united our two peoples in the course of many
years of struggle. The People’s Republic of China has

182. It did not surprise anybody when it became
known that Petty, a leading official of the Peace Corps
of the United States, had been staying in Seychelles
at the moment of the aggression, The Peace Corps is
known to provide a cover for the subversive activities
17

been in the forefront of the struggle Of colonized Peoples for independence and dignity.
189, ~~ &legation wishes also to extend our respects
to Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda of Zaire, whose Pt’esidency of the Cotincil during the month of April was
marked by his professionalism and dedication to
peace and justice.

190. It is the feeling of our delegation that we are
a threat to international peace and security
resulting from the violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Seychelles by
a band of mercenaries based in the Republic of South
Africa. That country, South Africa, has let loose a
flood of threats, provocations and acts of destabilization throughout the entire southern African region.

facing

191. The aggression by the mercenaries, aiming at
the overthrow of the progressive Government of
President France Albert Reni, constitutes the most
recent of a series of acts of destabilization undertaken
over the past four years by the Republic of South
Africa.
192. Since the People’s United Party of Seychelles
took power on 5 June 1977, the archipelago has been
the target of several attempts of aggression by mercenaries based in South Africa.
193. In April 1978 and November 1979, there were
attempts to overthrow the Government 3f Seychelles.
Those attempts failed because of the pre-emptive
actions taken by the local authorities, On both occasions, large quantities of weapons and ammunition
were found in the possession of the elements arrested
by the authorities. Those weapons were smuggled into
Seychelles from South Africa. James Mancham’s
complicity became evident. The aggression of 25 November 1981 was the largest and best planned operation carried out by the enemies of the Republic of
Seychelles and reflected the increasing aggressiveness
of imperialism in the region, It was the third attempt
to install in Seychelles a pro-Pretoria rkgime since
1977, when the present Government achieved power,
194. It is not by mere coincidence that the Republic
of Seychelles has been the victim of attempts at cor,ps
d’4tat and destabilization. The strategic location of
the ~mhipelago, placed at the crossroads of the Indian
Ocean. the Persian Gulf and the southern African
region-the routes of the oil tankers-has transformed
that region of the world into one of the major hotbeds
of tension confronting the international community
today.
‘95. It is not surprising, therefore, that the Republic
of Seychelles, a country in the forefront of the NonAligned Movement, should be the target of imperialism in the Indian Ocean region,
196. Of the countries of the Indian Ocean the Republic of Seychelles is one of the most co;eted on

military grounds by the imperialist circles. It is for this
reason that we have witnessed continuing attempts
at the installation of forces from outside the region in
the Republic of Seychelles. Those attempts are part
of the strategic plans of the United States and some
of its allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
to extend the siege of the countries of the Indian
Ocean and to secure for themselves control of the
routes of the oil tankers and of other raw materials
produced in the region. Today, Seychelles is no longer
only a paradise for tourists. From a mere exotic paradise, it has become a coveted prize for some Western
Powers, with a view to the installation of military bases,
197. The case of Seychelles must also be viewed
from a political perspective. The constant attempts at
destabilization of the Republic and the ever-increasing
pressures on the Government of President France
Albert Reni are but a response to the progressive policies in every domain, domestic and external, carried
out by President Reni since he took office. The political orientation of the Government of Seychelles, if
seen against the historical background marked by the
last four years of British colonial rule in Seychelles
along with attempts at neo-colonialism
and dismembering of SeychelIes, is necessary for its own survival as an independent sovereign State,
198. The encouragement
and organization of mercenary activities against sovereign States is a breach
of the principles of international law and runs counter
to the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
which enshrines the aspiration of all States to live in
peace and security, free from threats by outside
forces.
199. Our own experience of revolutionary
struggle
and the history of resistance by the Mozambican
people have taught us to respect the dignity of other
nations, because for us freedom is not a giA or a paternalistic concession. Freedom is a conquest achieved
through the immense sacrifice and bloodshed of the
peoples in the struggle against oppression.
200. This being so, the People’s Republic of Mozambique vehemently
condemns South Africa and its
collaborators for planning, organizing and financing
the mercenaries’ aggression against the Government
of President France Albert Ren6. Mozambique reiterates once more its profound support and solidarity
with our valiant brothers, the people of Seychelles,
who are fighting with the rest of Africa and the progressive people of the world against every concept
and objective for which npartheid stands. The victory
of Seychelles last 25 November
is considered a victory for Mozambique
as well. The mercenary attack
at the airport in Seychelles is an extension of the
cowardly and criminal attacks in Matola on 30 January 1981 and in Ponta de Ouro on 17 March 1981.
The victory there represents a priceless contribution
to the combat in which we are all engaged on a broad
front in that confrontation zone between freedom and
oppression in southern Africa.

201, The people of Mozambique
wish to live in
peace. Of paramount importance for the region is our
strenuous and concerted effort, with all other countries of the region, to transform the Indian Ocean into
a nuclear-free zone and a zone of peace. Therefore,
we repuldiate any manoeuvre for the establishment of
foreign military bases in the region or of any military
presence that would threaten peace in the region and
the sovereignty of the Indian Ocean States.
202. We view the 25 November aggression against
the Republic of Seychelles as a direct serious threat
against the territorial integrity of a State Member of
the Unit’ed Nations and against the internal security
of other countries of the region. The mercenary invasion of the Republic of Seychelles was an act of armed
aggression against a State Member of the United
Nations.
Therefore, we call upon the international
community
to take the appropriate action provided
for in the Charter.
203. The international community cannot stand idly
by when an act of armed aggression is perpetrated by
a band of international outlaws against a non-aligned
country, State Member of the United Nations. The
judicial organs of South Africa have proved to be a
docile instrument in the hands of the crpo/.thc~id rdgime.
The criminal aggressors who violated South Africa’s
own dom#estic laws were set free after a farcical trial,
which has only further blackened the reputation of
South Africa for its grotesque involvement
in the
mercenary invasion of the Republic of Seychelles.

209. My delegation has asked to speak not only to
condemn the armed aggression against the Republic of
Seychelles but also to express its solidarity with the
Government and the people of Seychelles. In the light
of the report before us and the additional information
published since I5 March, we hold the Pretoria rigime
responsible for the 25 November 1981 mercenary
invasion. This invasion constitutes a grave breach of
the Charter of the United Nations, for it was perpetrated in stark violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a non-aligned and developing country. The purpose of the invasion was definitely to
topple the Government of the Republic of Seychelles
and to reinstate a puppet rlgime subservient to the
racist rigime of Pretoria and its allies. Thanks to the
vigilance and the resistance of the Republic of Seychelles. the mercenary expedition was unable to realize
its sinister designs, concocted in the dark and carried
out in the open.
210. We cannot make a sound assessment of the
motives behind this open act of aggression against a
small State in a strategic area unless we remember
the wider strategic context as well as the timing of the
invasion. for it coincided with United States military
activities within the framework of a major master plan
called the “strategic alliance”, and the activation of
the rapid deployment forces in the area stretching from
South Africa to the Middle East. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles drew the
attention of the Commission of Inquiry established
under resolution 496 (1981) to a possible link between
the military operation against his country which took
place on 25 November 1981 and the “Bright Star”
operation carried out by United States armed forces
on Egyptian soil. This is stated in paragraph 129 of
the report of the Commission of Inquiry as follows:

204. The Government of South Africa continues to
pretend that it was not aware of the plans of the mercenaries. The Commission of Inquiry was not given
access to the mercenaries in South Africa. The South
African Government
failed to co-operate with the
Council. This can only stand as proof that the Government of South Africa had full knowledge of, and indeed
co-operated in, the abortive invasion of the Republic
of Seychellles.
205. The Mozambican delegation registers its appreciation of the Commission’s report and fully supports
its recommendations.
In this context, we join in the
appeal for financial, technical and material assistance
to redress the considerable material damages resulting
from the mercenary aggression against the Republic
of Seychelles,
206.

your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
We are sure that under your wise and dynamic leadership the Council will be able to shoulder its responsibilities at a particularly difficult juncture. We should
like also to thank the outgoing President, Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda, for his diplomatic skill during the month
of April.

“The Minister suggested that perhaps the Commission could ask the intelligence services of some of
the big Powers if they had any knowledge about it.
especially since the attempt had taken place while
the -Bright Star’ operation was still on.”

A Ir~i’rr continltrr.

21 I. It is fitting to recall that the mandate of the Commission of Inquiry was to investigate the origin, background and financing of the 2.5 November mercenary
aggression, as well as to assess and evaluate the economic damages sustained by Seychelles as a result of
that aggression. While we commend the Commission
for its recommendation
relating to the damages incurred by the Republic of Seyclielles-a
recommendation which has been accepted by the victim-the

207.

The PRESIDENT:
(intcJrprctr!tion
jwm
ChiIWSPJ: The next speaker is the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
208. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
Sir, I should like first of all to convey our heartiest
congratulations
to you and to your great country on
19

!,

‘/

9
‘.

c,thcr

z,spects

Of the inVeStif&on

remain

to

“had met a representative from the Central Intelligence Agency in Pretoria and informed him of the
coup plans. The United States was interested . . ,
because of ‘the strategic value of the Seychelles,’ ”
(SW S/1.5065, ~nne.~.]

be ‘Orn-

pleted, on 20 May, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Seychelles stated the following in the Council:
~~~~~~~~~~ in the view of my Govemment3 the
report, in spite of the evident desire of the Commission fully to carry out the mandate entrusted to it,
does not wholly elucidate the origin, background
and financing of the aggression against the Republic
of Seychelles,
For that matter. the Commission is
well aware of this, as can be seen in paragraph 274
of its report, which states:
. I . the information available to the Commission
is far from complete. The Commission does not
have full knowledge of the origin and background
of the mercenary aggreSSiOn'."
[2-75!&/? V?PPti/Z\q,
ptllw . 46.1
212. The Commission itself has never claimed that
it has discharged all its fact-finding responsibilities.
paragraph 274 of its report to the Council reads as
follows. in its entirety:
“In these circumstances, the information available to the Commission is far from complete. The
Commission does not have full knowledge of the
origin and background of the mercenary aggression. The Commission cannot exclude that further
significant information relating to its mandate may
become available. particularly during the course of
the trial on the hijacking charges under way in South
Africa.”

2 14. The question
.-.
_ before _ us. is not a perfunctory one,
for South Aft-ma has made the use of mercenaries an
institution
to carry out armed aggression not only
against Seychelles but against a number of African
countries. South Africa encourages mercenaries as a
means to promote its aggressive designs against neighbouring countries. The Minister of Justice of South
Africa is reported to have said that he was not aware
of any law, either statutory or common, which as such
prohibited
people from conspiring against another
Government. Such statements prove beyond any doubt
that South Africa was and remains a haven of mercenary activities. Therefore, the full responsibility of the
South African white minority regime should be in the
forefront of the priorities of any investigation.
An
organized international
riposte to the constant challenges of the trparthcid
regime is more than a necessity
for the survival of small States in those parts of
Africa which are vulnerable to the long-arm policies
and practices of the Pretoria regime.
215. Mercenarism must be eradicated once and for
all. Therefore, we support the second recommendation in paragraph 293 of the Commission’s
report,
that:
*-the work at present under way on an international
convention against the recruitment, use, financing
and training of mercenaries be brought to a speedy
conclusion so that the convention may be opened
for signature as soon as possible.”

213. It is therefore incumbent upon the Council to
request the Commission. which has exerted its best
possible efforts, to continue its search in order to
establish the origin. background and financing of the
25 November mercenary aggression against the Rep~blk of Seychelles. The pursuance of the inquiry is
imperative. for since 15 March 1982, many new elcmcnts have come to the surface, including the testimony of Colonel Michael Hoare. the leader of the
mercenaries. who is on trial in South Africa, but only
on hijacking charges. According to T/rr ,vrJr,# yo,.k
T~u~P.vof 4 May. Michael Hoare is reported to have
testified that:

216. Meanwhile, nothing prevents the Council from
addressing a demand to the Pretoria regime to extradite forthwith to Seychelles all those who participated
in the mercenary attack against the Republic of Seychelles. We firmly believe that the ongoing trial in
South Africa of the hijackers is but an attempt at circumventing the real issue-that
is, the original crime,
the crime of mercenarism.
217. Let me conclude by repeating what was said
in the Council a few days ago by the representative
of Benin [2359th mreting, pmo. 1381, that we consider
mercenaries to be anonymous special units, part of
the regular troops of the imperialist armies, because
they are recruited. financed, led, trained and armed
by officers of the regular army of South Africa, and
that we. cannot denounce and fight international mercenarism without exposing those forces that organize
it and set it in motion. The use of armed mercenary
groups is a new weapon of mass destruction which has
entered into the global strategy of international imperialism for the colonial reconquest of the third world
States.

“the South African Government had approved the
attempted takeover and supplied the weapons
(HeI submitted as evidence an invoice . . , from’the
South African Dcfense Force certifying
the delivery
to his home Of weapons and ammunition to be used
in the COQJ.” l&c S//SOS~, IIIIIzc.r, J
There are other press reports relating to possible
involvement of foreign Powers. In order not to prejudge
the issue,
it SUffiCeS
to recall the article published
by T~JCNell’ Yolk Times of 10 May, which reported
hat the mercenary [Hoare]:
20

218. We third world countries cannot remain without
an adequate riposte to the new challenges posed by
mercenarism, for mercenarism is one of the most perfidious forms of warfare today.

corners of the globe with the specific task of killing,
destroying and spoiling, without hesitation or scruples.

219. We should all remember Viet Nam. We should
remember the Zionist gangsterism against the people
of Palestine as well as against the people of Syria,
carried out by Zionist gangs collected from the four

NOTE
’ A/37/161,

21

annex.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

SE PROCURER

in United

Nations.

New

PUBLICATIONS

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

et Its agences
B : Nations

COMO

UNIDAS

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

York

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estan en vcnta en lib&as
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dam les librairics
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&de
votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
des ventes.
New York ou Centre.

LAS publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas panes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva
York o Gincbra.

Litho

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Ventas.
