S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8011th meeting

Tuesday, 25 July 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana
Mr. Tayel
Mrs. Yusuf
Ms. Charrier
Mr. Carlucci
Mr. Takeda
Mr. Kermkulov
Mr. Volgarev
Ms. Gueye
Mr. Skau
Mr. Ilnytskyi
Mr. Kinna
Mr. Ward
Ms. García Moyano

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-23042 (E)
*1723042*

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank the Chinese
presidency for having organized this open debate.
Every time we meet here to discuss the situation in
the Middle East, we are constrained to lament it further.
The spiralling violence, the looming humanitarian
catastrophe, the untold pain and human suffering are
surely not sustainable. And nothing epitomizes this
better than the plight of the Palestinian people, who,
for the past 70 years, have suffered dispossession,
displacement and deprivation at the hands of the
occupation forces.
On the fiftieth anniversary of the illegal occupation
of their homeland, it is unfortunate that the aspirations
of the Palestinians to live a life of freedom and dignity
remain a distant and elusive ideal.
The escalating tensions and violent clashes
that have taken place in and around the Old City of
Jerusalem during the past few days are a reminder of
the fact that we are sitting on a tinderbox. As the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East, Nickolay Mladenov,
has rightly noted, the fallout from events taking place
over a few hundred square metres affects hundreds of
millions of people around the world. These people have
only one demand: that the sanctity of Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the status of Jerusalem be respected.
While the Security Council has taken cognizance
of the gravity of the situation, words must be
complemented by concrete actions. Israel must not only
take immediate steps to defuse the situation, but also
desist from taking any provocative measures in future.
A viable, independent and contiguous State of
Palestine on the basis of the internationally agreed
parameters and the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, is the only sustainable
guarantee of enduring peace in the Middle East. There
is nothing more inimical to this vision than the illegal
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories. Yet there
2/33

25/07/2017

has been a substantial increase in settlement-related
activities in the occupied lands.
This trend is emblematic of the blatant Israeli
disregard for international law and the collective will of
the international community, including resolution 2334
(2016). It is also a setback for peace and a retreat from
the two-State solution to a one-State illusion.
Meanwhile, in its eleventh year, the suffocating
Israeli blockade of Gaza is not only a humanitarian
tragedy but also a moral outrage. The region can reap
the dividends of peace only if such peace is predicated
on the foundation of justice, an imperative that demands
an end to illegal Israeli occupation and the realization
of the legitimate Palestinian aspiration to statehood. A
just solution for Palestine is not just a matter of regional
significance; it is a primary precondition for global
peace and security.
We are also concerned that the activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are facing serious
resource constraints, hindering the commendable work
that UNRWA is doing for Palestinian refugees.
The fight against terrorism in the Middle East has
been long-drawn and protracted. Wars and foreign
occupations have compounded these challenges. The
liberation of Mosul is an important milestone in Iraq’s
fight against Da’esh and its affiliates and, we are
confident, towards an inclusive Iraqi State, recognizing
and reconciling the interests of the Iraqi people.
The intra-Syrian talks are central to the process
of political reconciliation in that country. Successive
rounds of talks have yet to deliver a major breakthrough,
but the parties, major Powers and the international
community in general must persist, for a military
solution is neither achievable nor sustainable.
Finally, what we need for lasting peace and
stability in the Middle East is firm resolve, concerted
action and, above all, justice and the rule of law. This
can be achieved only when all sides are willing to make
difficult choices. We hope that we are willing to take
that test.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru welcomes the holding of this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

question. We are also grateful for the briefing provided
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General.
However, we deplore the ongoing deterioration of
the situation on the ground, including the recent events
that took place in connection with the mosque in the Old
City of Jerusalem. Peru reiterates its appeal to all of the
parties directly involved to temper their actions and to
move towards a constructive dialogue in a framework
of respect for international law and humanitarian law.
Since 1947, the year in which Peru joined the
United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, our
position on this issue has been clear and unchanged.
Peru supports the two-State solution, with secure
and mutually agreed borders, as the basis for
peaceful coexistence. In that regard, Peru encourages
and supports the various initiatives carried out by the
international community, which are aimed at resolving
the Palestinian question and would allow for the
implementation of the agreements reached in Madrid
and Oslo. Peru believes that renewing the commitment
to resuming peace talks on the basis of the two-State
solution at the summit of the League of Arab States is
a positive step forward. Likewise, it believes that the
visit undertaken by the President of the United States
of America to the region on his first trip abroad could
foster the conditions necessary for a resumption of the
political dialogue. We also highlight the good offices of
various European and Asian States.
Peru emphasizes the importance of complying with
resolution 2334 (2016), adopted in December 2016,
which urges Israel to cease settlement building in the
territories it has occupied since 1967. That practice,
which has become more intense in recent months, is
contrary to international law and poses a serious threat
to the territorial integrity of the Palestinian State and to
the prospect of the two-State solution.
In addition, Peru recognizes Israel’s inalienable
right to preserve its own security and existence,
including by exercising its legitimate right to selfdefence, while emphasizing that it must do so under the
principles of proportionality and legality. In accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016), Peru strongly condemns
the commission of terrorist acts against the civilian
population and the motivations of the perpetrators of
such acts.

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

Peru notes with concern the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The extreme
divisions among Palestinian leaders themselves, along
with the scarcity of basic services and restrictive
measures imposed by Israel, lead to despair, a greater
proclivity for hate speech and additional and more
serious outbreaks of violence. There is an urgent need
for the international community to provide greater
support to those who face such a tragic situation.
The scant progress made in the peace process
and growing differences make it imperative for the
international community to address the Palestinian
question with a renewed sense of urgency. The United
Nations and the Security Council, in particular, have a
very important role to play. As a non-permanent member
of the Council in 2018 and 2019, Peru will continue to
support the facilitation of a minimum framework of
understanding for the resumption of direct negotiations
between the parties and to improve the situation on
the ground.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for having convened today’s
open debate.
Argentina has always maintained a principled
position in favour of resolving disputes and conflicts
by peaceful means; respect for international law,
sovereignty, independence, national unity and
territorial integrity of States; the rejection of the
acquisition of territories by force; and confidence
in the constructive role and persuasive power of the
international community in order to pave the way for
peaceful, just and lasing solutions to conflicts.
The situation in the Middle East, in particular
the Palestinian question, has been addressed by the
Security Council since 1947 and remains one of the
longest-running and most intractable conflicts on the
international agenda. In the light of that situation, we
should ask ourselves what we can do as members of the
international community to help find a just and lasting
solution within the framework of the Council. In that
regard, Argentina believes that overcoming differences
is a priority so that the parties can resume negotiations.
My country strongly supports all efforts to achieve
peace and stability in the Middle East, both in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and in the no less serious
situations in other countries of the region.

17-230423/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of
historic resolution 242 (1967), we again reiterate our
firm support for a peaceful, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question on the basis of
the two-State solution, based on 1967 borders and on
what was agreed by the parties during the negotiations
process. Argentina reaffirms its support for the right
of the Palestinian people to establish an independent
and viable State, recognized by the entire international
community, as well as the right of the State of Israel
to live in peace with its neighbours, within secure and
internationally recognized borders.
Similarly, Argentina reiterates its concern
about the persistent and continued construction of
illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and calls for an end to their expansion, as set
out in resolution 2334 (2016), adopted by the Council
in December 2016 . The international community, as a
whole, has made it very clear that the settlements are
contrary to international law, hamper peace, weaken
the prospect of a two-State solution, with both States
living in peace and security, and therefore perpetuates
an untenable status quo. We also believe that it is
necessary for Palestinian leaders to earnestly address
Israeli security concerns. Argentina believes that it is
unacceptable for Hamas and other Palestinian groups to
carry out attacks against Israeli civilians. My country
strongly condemns all terrorist acts.
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and rejects any unilateral
measure aimed at changing it. My country believes that
the holy city should be a place of assembly and peace,
and that the members of the three major monotheistic
religions — Judaism, Christianity and Islam — should
be guaranteed free access to the holy sites.
Regrettably, over the past few days the security
situation in the city of Jerusalem has deteriorated
considerably. The Republic of Argentina is concerned
about the spike in violence and repudiates the slew of
acts that have claimed the lives of several Palestinian
citizens and members of the Israeli security forces. The
escalation of fanaticism and the violence that ensues
cannot be allowed to undermine the right of societies
to live in peace and freedom, in full enjoyment of their
civil rights. Our country therefore believes that none of
the parties should take unilateral measures that could
affect the status quo.
4/33

25/07/2017

Unfortunately, that is not the only issue that
concerns us in the Middle East. Argentina notes with
concern developments in the situation in Syria, in
particular the humanitarian situation and condemns
all acts of violence, particularly those targeting the
civilian population. Our country rejects terrorism in
all its forms and condemns in the strongest terms the
terrorist activity of the organization that refers to itself
as the Islamic State, and the Al-Nusra Front.
We also strongly condemn the use of chemical
weapons in any situation, under any circumstances
and by any actor. We also firmly believe that all those
responsible for their use should be brought to justice. In
that regard, we support the impartial and technical work
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism.
Argentina supports a political solution in Syria,
through dialogue and diplomacy, as well as respect
for international law and the principles of sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We therefore
attach particular importance to the negotiations in
Geneva and Astana. Considerable progress has been
made because these two initiatives complement each
other. We also welcome the agreement reached between
the United States, the Russian Federation and Jordan on
9 July to bring about a ceasefire in south-eastern Syria.
With regard to the situation in Iraq, we are pleased
to note that the Iraqi army has recently retaken control
of Mosul. We regret the many lives lost as a result of
the terrorist acts carried out by the self-proclaimed
Islamic State.
We would also like to make mention of the crisis
among the countries of the Gulf, which is a new
source of tension in the region and cause of concern
for our country. Argentina hopes that all of the parties
involved, with whom we have close cooperation links,
can find a solution, through dialogue and diplomatic
negotiations. We support Kuwait’s mediation efforts
and the initiatives taken by various actors within the
international community to improve relations among the
parties. We call for restraint and stress that all decisions
and actions should be in line with international law to
prevent an escalation of the situation and any social and
economic consequences that would have an adverse
effect on the civilian population. We condemn terrorism
in all its forms and view it as a common enemy that we
must defeat.
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peace in the Middle East will be possible only
through greater diplomatic efforts and negotiation.
The Council should spare no effort in encouraging
the parties concerned in that direction, consistent
with the parameters recognized by the international
community in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, a two-State solution based on
agreements between the parties, the Quartet road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as a mutually
acceptable solution to the situation in Jerusalem and a
just settlement of the refugee issue.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to align myself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Israeli occupation of Palestinian lands is
central to every conflict in the Middle East. That
injustice has continued for more than seven decades
and has been exacerbated by Israeli expansionism and
aggressive policies towards the Palestinians and the
region. Any attempt to exclude the issue from Security
Council debates is simply a denial of obvious facts and
the suffering of innocent people.
The Israeli regime’s entire history has been defined
by acts of aggression towards its neighbours and other
countries in the Middle East and beyond that have
occurred at least 14 times since 1948. Emboldened by
the support of the new United States Administration,
the Israeli authorities have been questioning and
challenging the Palestinians’ inalienable right to
their homelands as never before. That aggression has
continued on a daily basis, the latest episode being a
brutal crackdown on the oppressed nation of Palestine
under the pretext of preventing Palestinian worshippers
from entering the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Israeli regime
has continued to arrogantly and flagrantly violate
dozens of Security Council resolutions, from resolution
54 (1948) to resolution 2334 (2016), as well as many
other resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council and specialized United Nations
agencies on illegal settlement activities. The violations
are made possible by the international community’s
irresponsible granting of total impunity to the regime.
Israel also continues to flout all the international
regimes designed to govern weapons of mass

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

destruction by refusing to adhere to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention. The nuclear weapons in its hands represent
the most serious threat there is to the security of every
State in the Middle East. World Powers, especially the
United States, are undermining the stabilization and
counter-terrorism efforts that they claim to champion
by dumping untold amounts of beautiful military
equipment in the hands of irresponsible State and
non-State actors in the service of adventurist projections
of power. The profits that these wealthy countries reap
from such transfers have come at a tremendous cost to
the region’s security and its people.
The United States and its allies are bombing Syria
and Yemen, using cluster munitions or enforcing
blockades of humanitarian aid under the guise of
restoring legitimacy. Such actions are the seeds of new
conflicts. The world remembers vividly how the last
United States invasion in the Middle East, launched on
false pretences based on allegations of the existence
of weapons of mass destruction, resulted in the deaths
of more than half a million people in Iraq and in the
rebirth of Da’esh. When is the Council is going to seek
accountability for those who created and support the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da’esh and its affiliated groups,
or for their role in the proliferation of terrorist activities
in the Middle East and around the globe?
Iran has always supported efforts to resolve the
Syrian conflict diplomatically and has advocated for the
self-determination of the Syrian people. Our assistance
to the Syrian Government is geared towards counterterrorism and de-escalation. Our participation in the
Astana, International Syria Support Group and Geneva
processes is testament to that. We continue to welcome
any genuine effort to help stabilize the situation on the
ground, as a prerequisite for any political process that
will enable the Syrian people to decide their own future.
Today we heard some unsubstantiated allegations
about my country that I categorically reject as part of
the misinformation and propaganda campaign against
Iran that has been designed and perpetrated with
hysteria by Israel and various countries of the region,
including some that wholeheartedly supported Saddam
Hussein’s aggression against Iran.
I would like to conclude on a rare happy note by
offering our heartfelt congratulations to the brave
people and Government of Iraq on the liberation of

17-230425/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mosul from the takfiri Da’esh terrorist group that has
wreaked havoc not only in Iraq but in the entire region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
Ms. Adamson: The candidate country Albania, the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.
The Middle East peace process remains a key
priority for the European Union (EU), whose positions
have not changed. We see no viable alternative
to a negotiated two-State solution that fulfils the
legitimate aspirations of both parties — including
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty — and that
ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves
all permanent status issues. Resolution 2334 (2016),
while reaffirming all of the Council’s relevant previous
resolutions since 1967, reiterated the key threats to
the viability of the two-State solution, notably the
continued Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. It also
clearly condemned acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror, as well as all acts of provocation,
incitement or destruction.
The latest developments in and around the Old
City of Jerusalem and in the West Bank pose a real risk
of further escalation. Three Palestinians were killed
during violent clashes with Israeli security forces on
Friday. These incidents must be fully investigated. In a
terror attack in the West Bank during the night of Friday
and Saturday, three Israelis were murdered at their
Shabbat dinner table by a young Palestinian. Nothing
can justify such a despicable crime. Since then, there
have been further attacks in Israel and Jordan, and
two Jordanians have lost their lives. The EU strongly
condemns acts of terror, expresses its regret for all the
losses of innocent life caused by the violence and hopes
for a speedy recovery for the wounded.
We appreciated President Abbas’s condemnation of
the attack on Israeli police officers in the Old City of
Jerusalem, sacred to three religions, and the assurances
by Prime Minister Netanyahu that the status quo at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount will be preserved.
It is now vital to ensure that all political, religious and
community leaders act responsibly, restore calm and
6/33

25/07/2017

avoid any acts or rhetoric that could further increase
tensions. Continued cooperation between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority is crucially important if we are to
prevent further violence and loss of life. We encourage
Israel and Jordan to work together to find solutions and
ensure security for all, respect the sanctity of the holy
site and uphold the status quo, noting the special role
of the Hashemite Kingdom, as recognized in its peace
treaty with Israel.
The EU also strongly opposes the recent Israeli
decisions to proceed with plans for thousands of
settlement units in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and stresses the Security
Council’s repeated demand that Israel cease all
settlement activities immediately and completely.
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and
a major obstacle to peace, and threaten to make a twoState solution impossible.
The EU has been following the worsening
situation in Gaza. We commend the efforts by the
United Nations and Egypt to mediate and provide and
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
fuel to the Gaza Strip. The EU will continue to provide
humanitarian and development assistance to Gaza. A
single, legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority,
with full control over Gaza, is critical for achieving a
viable Palestinian State.
The EU stands ready to support all serious
peacemaking efforts. We welcome ongoing United
States efforts and those of the Quartet, including the
holding of a meeting of envoys on 13 July. We recall
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative, which
provides key elements for a comprehensive settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Let me turn to Lebanon and the endorsement of a
new electoral law by the Parliament on 16 June, on the
basis of which parliamentary elections will take place
by May 2018. Conducting peaceful, fair and transparent
parliamentary elections will be key to ensuring the
functioning of Lebanese democratic institutions. In
last week’s Association Council between the EU and
Lebanon, the EU recognized Lebanon’s extraordinary
and exceptional effort in hosting more than 1 million
Syrian refugees. We are committed to maintaining
the level of our support in 2018 and 2019. The EU and
Lebanon agreed that the only sustainable long-term
solution for refugees and displaced persons from Syria
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

into Lebanon is their safe return to their country of
origin in accordance with all norms of international
humanitarian law, while taking into account the
interests of the host countries, as conditions for such a
return are met.

conflict remains the core challenge to lasting and
regional peace. The recent developments in Jerusalem
should remind all of us that we should never lose sight
of that fact. In that regard, we regret all loss of life and
condemn all violence.

In Syria, we hope that the implementation of
de-escalation arrangements towards a nation-wide
cessation of hostilities and unhindered humanitarian
access will help facilitate the intra-Syrian talks
under United Nations auspices in Geneva. Thus far,
Damascus has refused to engage substantially in
those negotiations. The EU continues to call for full,
unhindered humanitarian access and for accountability
for all violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The EU has just allocated
€1.5 million to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. Only when
a credible transition is firmly under way will the EU be
ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria.

The immediate priority must be a rapid
de-escalation and exercise of restraint by all parties.
We should not see this as another perennial round of
skirmishes and stand idle until the situation calms
down. At the same time, we all should acknowledge the
importance of the preservation of the historic status and
sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif for the Islamic world.
Attempts to change the status quo jeopardize peaceful
coexistence. Jerusalem, a city sacred to Islam, Judaism
and Christianity, should be treated with the utmost
respect. The closure of Al-Haram Al-Sharif for days
and the subsequent decision to place metal detectors at
its entrances along with other restrictions on Muslims’s
entry there are unacceptable. Those mistakes, as well
as the disproportionate use of force against Palestinians
who were on the streets for prayers, cannot be justified
by any means.

In Iraq, the liberation of Mosul was a highly
symbolic step in the defeat of Da’esh, although it does
not mark the end of military operations. Several very
sensitive areas remain to be recovered from Da’esh. But
even then, the territorial defeat of Da’esh is only one of
the challenges. Winning the peace with the population
is an equally challenging and urgent task for the Iraqi
Government. The EU calls on the federal Government
of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to
build on their successful security cooperation in the
campaign to liberate Mosul and engage in a constructive
dialogue on all issues across the political and economic
spectrum, including the disputed internal boundaries.
Unilateral steps must be avoided.

We expect Israel to listen to the calls of the
international community, fulfil its legal obligations as
the occupying Power in East Jerusalem and lift all the
restrictions that limit access to Al-Haram Al Sharif.
In that regard, Israel’s decision to remove the metal
detectors was a step in the right direction. Return to
the status quo in its full letter and spirit is essential for
the restoration of calm. This is a matter of freedom of
religion and worship.

Lastly, Iraq is in need of international support to
face all these huge challenges. The EU is committed to
providing such support and is stepping up its efforts.
More than €200 million is programmed for 2017. A
Common Security and Defence Policy mission will
be deployed to advise and assist in the reform of the
security sector, as well as in delivering on humanitarian
needs and stabilization.

The grim situation reflects the far-reaching effects
of the absence of real hope for peace. Only a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace, which would lead to
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine
within the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its
capital can ensure peace and security for both sides. In
that regard, measures in contravention of international
law, in particular settlement activities, which are an
obstacle to the two-State solution, must be discontinued.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

To reach a lasting peace, it is also important for the
Palestinians to voice their legitimate demands in unity.
Turkey is determined to continue to carry out its efforts
to that end and supports the initiatives that respect the
established parameters, including the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Mr. Begeç (Turkey): We have repeatedly underlined
at the Security Council that the Israeli-Palestine

Fully aware of the dire humanitarian situation in
Palestine, especially in Gaza, Turkey also continues

17-230427/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

its efforts to improve the living conditions of the
Palestinians through development assistance and
reconstruction projects. The third Turkish shipment of
10.000 tons of humanitarian aid reached Gaza in June.
While working on possible ways to remedy the grave
scarcity of water and electricity in Gaza, Turkey has
allocated $500,000 to the occupied Palestinian territory
Humanitarian Fund for the purchase of emergency
fuel to maintain the delivery of essential services
in response to the appeal of the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process. Furthermore, we continue to support the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East given its essential
role in the lives of Palestine refugees.
Since the very beginning of the Syrian conflict,
Turkey has undertaken intensive efforts to end the
violence in Syria and reach a political solution based
on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), as
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). While a genuine
political transition is the only way to end the Syrian
conflict, negotiations to that end cannot bear fruit if
the fighting continues. For that reason, we facilitated
and became the guarantors of a nationwide ceasefire
with the Russian Federation and Iran. The Astana
meetings, which are complementary and supportive
to the United Nations-led Geneva political process,
aim at strengthening the ceasefire and adopting
confidence-building measures.
At the fourth round of high-level meetings held
in Astana on 3 and 4 May, a memorandum on the
establishment of de-escalation areas in certain parts of
Syria was adopted. Issues related to the delineation of
the de-escalation areas, as well as to their administration
will be finalized by the joint working group formed
among the three guarantors. The significant reduction
of violence achieved on the ground has established
an environment conducive to holding the last three
rounds of the Geneva talks. The opposition once again
demonstrated political maturity and demonstrated its
credibility by engaging in real talks, as well as increased
the interaction among various groups. The regime’s
representatives should not be allowed to continue their
intransigent stance and poison the upcoming talks with
both violations on the ground and harmful rhetoric at
the table.
Only a multidimensional strategy can achieve
the dual objectives of eliminating terrorism and
stabilizing Syria. Turkey’s resolve to fight Da’esh and
8/33

25/07/2017

other terrorist organizations such as the Democratic
Union Party and the Kurdish People’s Protection Units
remains firm. Unilateral steps threatening the unity,
the territorial integrity and the demographic structure
of Syria and efforts to seek territorial expansion for
political leverage are unacceptable. We cannot afford to
repeat the mistakes that were made in Manbij, only this
time, in Raqqa. Together with its partners, Turkey will
continue its efforts to address the plight of the Syrian
people and find a solution to the conflict that will meet
their legitimate aspirations.
We would like to congratulate the Iraqi security
forces for their success in liberating Mosul from
Da’esh. We are confident that permanent peace and
stability in Iraq will be achieved through inclusive
national reconciliation. Unilateral moves that
challenge Iraq’s territorial integrity and political unity
will only additionally lead to instability and entail
negative consequences.
In the near future, Turkey is ready to contribute
to the reconstruction efforts of Mosul and to the
elimination of the conditions that led to the emergence
of Da’esh and other radical organizations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Ms. Scott (Namibia): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the assumption of your country,
China, of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July 2017, and thank you for organizing
the debate on the important topic of the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestine question. We also
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
These five decades of occupation in Palestine
have seen ongoing violence in seemingly unending
cycles. Our debate here in the Security Council keeps
us focused on seeking a peaceful resolution to this
complex situation. During the United Nations Forum to
Mark Fifty Years of Occupation, held on 29 and 30 June
under the auspices of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, the
Secretary-General was on point when he stated that, by
bringing an end to this conflict situation, a major driver
of violent extremism and terrorism in the Middle East
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

region would be removed. There are few who would
disagree. Indeed, the Secretary-General’s call must
be taken as a call for a return to direct negotiation to
resolve the status issues contained in United Nations
resolutions, agreements and international law, and also
by resolutely establishing the two-State solution as a
basis for peace.
Namibia calls on Israel to comply with Security
Council resolutions and to implement agreements it has
reached on the two-State solution, based on the 1967
borders. Namibia has stood alongside the rest of the
United Nations membership in calling for peace and
dialogue in order to seek a just solution to the question
of statehood in Palestine. Namibia therefore welcomes
the decision of Israel to withdraw the metal detectors,
and calls for respect for the holy sites in Jerusalem.
Namibia also calls on Israel to desist from building
settlements in violation of previous agreements and
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), which is a continued affront to the dignity and
property ownership of the Palestinian people.
Namibia is also apprehensive about the continued
tensions which seem to be causing dangerous and global
polarization and violent extremism. The conflicts
in Syria and Yemen, coupled with terrorism across
the Middle East, are causing untold suffering and a
humanitarian crisis equivalent to some of the worst this
world has seen. We urge all parties in the Middle East
to work with seriousness to silence the war drums.
Once again, we call on the Israeli Government
to end its ongoing punitive destruction of Palestinian
homes and infrastructure, and to cease its illegal
construction of settlements on occupied territory. We
call on all parties to move towards rather than away
from the tables of dialogue and compromise in order to
seek a just peace and solution to the conflict. Namibia
once again calls for Israel’s complete an unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. We urge the international
community to facilitate the creation of a Palestinian
State based on the 1967 borders.
Namibia stands with the people of Palestine
in their determined efforts for the pursuit of their
inalienable right to self-determination, justice, freedom
and independence through political, diplomatic,
peaceful and non-violent means. We call on all other
States Members of the United Nations to support
any deliberation that would result in an end to half a

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

century of occupation, to see the Palestinian people
exercising their inalienable rights in an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and as a rightful member of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): The delegation of Indonesia
is pleased to join this Security Council open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
We thank the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.
This year, we mark the fiftieth year of the Israeli
occupation of Palestine. But it is no happy anniversary.
Day by day, the blockade of Gaza, the illegal Wall
in the West Bank, the aggressive illegal settlement
expansions, the collective punishment being inflicted
on Palestinians, the perpetual use of violence, the
rejection of the self-determination of the Palestinian
people, and their lack of access to natural resources
all continue to worsen the situation on the ground.
As a result, the conflict poses a continuing threat
to international peace and security. In that regard,
members of the international community should
commit to pursue a just and lasting solution, one that
the two-State solution envisages.
Today, once again, we reaffirm our faith in
resolution 2334 (2016) of December 2016, and call for
its full and unfettered implementation. One should
recall that, in the quest to eliminate obstacles on the
road to peace, the Council in its wisdom has rejected
Israel’s establishment of settlements in the Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967. It has declared the
settlements not simply to be illegal and a flagrant
violation of international law, but also a major obstacle
to the achievement of the two-State solution and to a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Regrettably, not
only has Israel continued to defy the Council, but we,
as Member States, have yet to receive the substantive
published report of the Secretary-General concerning
the implementation of the resolution. We join all
those who believe that this is a minimum standard in
moving forward.
It is matter of record that just three months after
the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), the Government

17-230429/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Israel announced the construction of the first new
settlement in two decades in Emek Shilo in the West
Bank, as if to challenge the Council. Nonetheless, as we
marked the fiftieth anniversary of the occupation here
at the United Nations last month, it was remarkable to
observe the increased interaction among stakeholders,
particularly between Palestinian and Israeli youth,
and greater support not only from the younger Jewish
community within the United States and Israel. We
believe this is a good sign for the future. We strongly
believe that Palestinian children deserve the same right
to be free in their own land, no less than the Israeli
children in their land.
We need to continue our support for the Palestinians
so they are not left behind, hence the importance
of supporting the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its
work, including ensuring continued resources.
It is a matter of great significance that this debate
follows yet another unmasking of a new face of Israeli
aggression on Palestinians in the occupied territory,
in the form of the closure of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Essentially, any attack on the Al-Aqsa Mosque is to be
considered a very dangerous red line. The Government
and people of Indonesia strongly condemn it, as we do
any act of aggression capable of harming any holy site.
The closure of Al-Aqsa not only worsens the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, it signals to the
world how strongly Israel wishes to distance itself
from the two-State solution. The closure of Al-Aqsa
constitutes a blatant move of Israel in its continuing
effort to alter the geographic and demographic character
of Jerusalem.
The international community must prevail over the
attempts by the occupation force to alter the status quo
in the Holy City, in violation of its international and
humanitarian law. The closure is a flagrant violation of
the freedom of religion and the right to pray. Continuous
efforts to curtail and hamper the ability of worshippers
to enter the mosque not only contradict all the basic
tenet of decency, but will also worsen the situation,
not only in Jerusalem but in the rest of the world. It
will create more division and mistrust and further
animosity that will lead to radicalism and extremism.
My delegation therefore urges all sides to make an
honest effort to reduce tensions, restore calm, end the
crisis and seek a solution that would ensure public
safety and the security of the site, while maintaining
the status quo of the Holy City.
10/33

25/07/2017

If need be, the international community could
explore the possibility of ensuring that the holy
Mosque of Al-Aqsa remains under United Nations
international protection and supervision so as to ensure
that all worshippers are able to conduct their religious
activities in peace and harmony. We have to ensure
that an international mechanism exists to forestall any
recurrence of impulsive actions by Israel, such as the
closure of the holy Mosque.
Although my delegation will not condone the
use of violence, but we also cannot — and I repeat,
cannot — tolerate the systemic violation and abuse
of the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to observe their religious practices
and the very existence of their dignity as human beings.
No human rights are human rights, unless and until the
occupying Power yields to the Palestinians their human
rights. In that regard, I once again say that enough
is enough.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing the message
that, unless there is a genuine intention by Israel to
find a lasting two-State solution, we will continue to
have countless crises on our hands. The world cannot
survive ever-more crises. Do we have to wait another
50 years to see a free and independent Palestine? Like
any peace-loving country with a conscience and a
measure of humanity, Indonesia will remain relentless
in its support for the Palestinian cause.
Finally, it is sad to see the reality of Palestinian
lives in Jerusalem. People have lost children, families,
belongings and lands. Now, they have lost the right to
pray in the most holy of mosques. What more is left of
human dignity?
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
the Chinese presidency for having arranged such an
important open debate. We would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his very important briefing
to the Security Council.
We echo the statement made by the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as the
statement delivered by the representative of Uzbekistan
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Today’s periodic meeting is taking place at a time
when sad events have recently occurred. We have seen
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

an unfortunate escalation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in Jerusalem — an escalation in
the situation that has served to raise awareness among
the international community. Given the will of Israel to
transform the conflict into a religious conflict and the
arbitrary and constrictive security measures that have
been imposed by the Israelis on the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound, we declare those actions to constitute a
violation of international norms and standards. It goes
without saying that there will be further violence in the
future as long as the Palestinian cause remains without
a solution, given that the occupation continues. If the
Council does not end Israeli practices, then it is as
if we are encouraging Israel to continue its practices
and aggression.
The State of Kuwait roundly condemns Israel’s
violations of international agreements as an occupying
Power in Jerusalem. Furthermore, my country
categorically rejects any policies or plans on the part
of Israel that aim to Judaize the holy city, including
isolating the city’s environment and manipulating
the city’s demographics. Those are violations of
international peace and security. That is why we
call on the international Community to take on its
responsibilities and face up to Israel’s criminal actions
in Jerusalem, particularly under the relevant Security
Council resolutions, which reject any change in
Jerusalem. Furthermore, we call on the international
community to block any attempt by Israel at any time
to change the historic status quo of the holy sites. It
is necessary that we safeguard the religious status of
those religious sites, which would allow worshipers to
pray far free violence and provocations. Israel should
remove the difficulties and obstacles.
All the measures taken by the occupying Power
up to this point are not acceptable because they are
insufficient. Israel needs to take additional measures.
The practices of the occupying Power, Israel, on the
occupied Palestinian territories, including in East
Jerusalem, run counter to its legal commitments that
have been established through international agreements
and treaties, including the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949. We should condemn those practices in the
international community and through the Security
Council. We should reject what Israel is doing in its
closing of the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound and putting
obstacles in place that prevent the Palestinian people
from exercising their religion.

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council should protect the Palestinian
people. Their fundamental rights have been violated by
the occupying Power. Palestinians are suffering from
religious terrorist attacks that are being carried out by
the settlers and others. There are measures attempting
to change the situation on the ground and impede the
search for a two-State solution. I want to reiterate that
peace should begin with the end of the occupation,
which is entering its fiftieth year. The peace should be
based on the legitimacy of international agreements
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which was adopted by
all Arab countries in at the Beirut Summit in 2002.
The Initiative calls for Israel’s withdrawal from all
of the Palestinian territories that have been occupied
since 1967, which would guarantee the final status of
Palestine and allow the Palestinian people to exercise
their rights. It would allow for the creation of an
independent State with East Jerusalem as the capital. We
call on the international community to implement the
relevant resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016)
and those resolutions that condemn land-grabbing and
settlements and call for an end to Israeli occupation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Monsigneur Kassas (spoke in Arabic): The Holy
See commends the presidency of the People’s Republic
of China for bringing today’s topic to the attention of
the Security Council and the international community.
Notwithstanding the multiple challenges facing the
Middle East today, the Israeli-Palestinian peace process
cannot be allowed to slip out of the top priorities of
the international community and the Security Council.
The Holy See wishes to reiterate its firm support for
the two-State solution, which would allow the State of
Israel and a Palestinian State to exist side by side in
peace within internationally recognized borders. If both
Israel and Palestine are to enjoy security, prosperity
and peaceful coexistence, there is no alternative to a
negotiated settlement leading to a mutually agreed
solution directly negotiated between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, with the firm and even-handed support of
the international community.
For that process to take place and succeed, Israelis
and Palestinians must agree on substantial steps to
reduce tensions and de-escalate the violence on the
ground. Both sides must refrain from actions, including

17-2304211/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with regard to settlements, that contradict their stated
commitment to a negotiated solution.
The two-State solution will also require all the
Palestinian factions to show united political will and
work together to address the needs of their people. A
united Palestinian front would prove the commitment
of the Palestinians to a peacefully negotiated settlement
and would be key to the economic prosperity, social
cohesion and political stability of a Palestinian State.
The Holy See deeply regrets the loss of life and
property in many parts of the Middle East caused
by wars and conflicts, particularly in Syria, Yemen
and in the northern region of Iraq, where the tragic
humanitarian situation calls for renewed commitment
by everyone to arrive at a political solution to those
conflicts. Pope Francis deeply appreciates the tireless
efforts of those who are working to find a political
solution to the conflict in Syria. He encourages all
actors to work towards a Syrian-led political process
leading to a peaceful and inclusive transition, based on
the principles of the Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
Christian communities have existed for more than
2,000 years in the region, and they have peacefully
coexisted with other communities. In that context, the
Holy See urges the international community, through
the Security Council, not to forget those communities.
The Holy See believes that the rule of law, including
respect for religious freedom and equality before the
law, based on the principle of citizenship and regardless
of one’s race, ethnic origin or religion, is fundamental
for the achievement and maintenance of peaceful and
fruitful coexistence among individuals, communities
and nations.
We must not forget Jerusalem, a city sacred to Jews,
Christians and Muslims. The historical status quo of the
holy sites is a matter of profound sensitivities. The Holy
See confirms its position in line with the international
community and renews its support for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the question of the city of
Jerusalem. In that regard, the Holy See reiterates the
importance of an internationally guaranteed special
status in order to ensure the freedom of religion and of
conscience of all its inhabitants, as well as secure, free
and unhindered access to the holy places by the faithful
of all religions and nationalities.
Only last Sunday, during the Angelus prayer in
Saint Peter’s Square, Pope Francis, who is deeply
12/33

25/07/2017

concerned about the situation in Jerusalem, made a
strong appeal for moderation and dialogue, praying
that all may be inspired by the resolve to work for
reconciliation and peace.
We appeal to the Council to act urgently on its
obligations in order to restore hope in the possibility of
peace and to make that peace a reality.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expressing our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and the Chinese delegation for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestininian question.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
This year marks 50 years of Israel’s occupation of
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. The vast majority of
Palestine’s population have lived their entire lifetimes
under Israeli occupation. In the past 50 years, civilians
have been denied their dignity and fundamental rights
to free movement, education, health care and even
the right to life. With each passing day, the number
of Palestinians in need of humanitarian assistance
increases. The situation in Gaza is even more dire.
The conclusion in the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development that the area
could be uninhabitable in less than five years if current
economic trends were to continue is becoming all the
more real.
The Security Council has been seized of the
matter of the Middle East, in particular the question of
Palestine and Israel, for over 70 years. The people of
Palestine continue to look to the United Nations, notably
the Security Council, to help them realize their right to
self-determination. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has
become entrenched over the decades. It is long overdue
for the Council to assume its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security, and to work to reverse the negative
trends that threaten peace and the two-State solution.
The Security Council must renew its commitment
to keep to its mandate and contribute to resolving
the conflict.
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It has become clear that the conflict between Israel
and Palestine feeds into the wider regional dynamics
by having a negative effect on peace, economic
development, socio-political progress and security
throughout the entire region. The Middle East peace
process therefore remains one of the central issues
shaping international relations within the region and in
the world.
South Africa calls for the effective and immediate
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
reaffirms that Israeli illegal settlements have no legal
validity, that they constitute a flagrant violation under
international law and that they are a major obstacle to
the vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security, within internationally recognized borders. We
call on Israel to immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities, as demanded by the resolution, and
remind Israel that no changes to the 1967 lines will be
recognized, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed by the two sides through negotiations.
My delegation is intensely aware that the
opportunities for a two-State solution are being
eroded The ongoing Israeli settlement activity in the
occupied territories is a fundamental obstacle to a
return to negotiations and a grave threat to the very
existence of a future Palestinian State, as well as to
a safe and secure Israel. Every settlement takes land
away from Palestinians, who need homes, farmland and
other infrastructure.
South Africa has a long-standing record of solidarity
with the Palestinian people and supports the Palestinian
cause. We firmly believe that the only just solution to
the Palestinian question is an independent, sovereign,
viable and united Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, functioning within recognized and secure
borders and living side by side in peace with Israel and
its other neighbours, as endorsed in the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
South Africa is concerned about the arrest and
subsequent imprisonment, without charge or trial, of
Palestinian Legislative Council member Ms. Khalida
Jarrar, who was arrested in Ramallah on 2 July by the
occupying Israeli military, and calls for her immediate
release. Israel is a signatory of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which stipulates the right to a fair trail and
the right of an accused to defend himself or herself. We

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

call on Israel to abide by, and respect the provisions of,
the Convention as an occupying force.
South Africa is also deeply concerned about the
escalating tensions and violent clashes taking place
in and around the Old City of Jerusalem. Given the
particular sensitivities surrounding the holy sites in
Jerusalem and the need to ensure security, the Quartet
have called on all parties to demonstrate maximum
restraint, refrain from provocative actions and work
towards de-escalating the situation.
We strongly believe that the situation on the
ground cannot be allowed to continue unchanged, as it
remains an impediment to the security, peace, stability
and development of the broader Middle East region.
South Africa believes that ending the occupation is
in the interests of both Israel and Palestine, and we
call on both parties to take concrete steps to that end.
The recent past has seen no movement on the peace
process. The international community must recommit
itself to restart the stalled peace process on the basis of
international legality and accountability.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to begin by congratulating China, a country with
which we enjoy friendly relations, on its presidency. We
also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority,
for his efforts in connection with the mandate entrusted
to him.
The crisis in the Middle East has been ongoing
for 70 years. There is no fair or lasting solution on
horizon, and the peace process is at a standstill. The
people in our region aspire more than ever to peace
and stability. At the same time, they are faced with a
new cycle of escalations in violence. The international
community should work as quickly as possible to put
an end to the violence and to restore hope and faith in
the peace process to the people in the region. The entire
world must work to bring about peace by countering
authoritarianism and extremism.
While the Security Council continues its efforts
to address the complicated issues in the Middle East,
we must also reinvigorate the peace process. All the
parties should demonstrate restraint and respect for

17-2304213/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international law in order to create the necessary
conditions for a comprehensive, fair and lasting solution.
We recently witnessed the closure of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, which was declared a military zone. The
faithful faced numerous obstacles, and that impedes
peace and stability and prevents a solution to the
Palestinian question. Any attempt to undermine the
status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif must stop. The State
of Qatar has explained its grave concerns to Israel with
regard to the closure, for the first time since 1967, of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
The international community should also shoulder
its responsibilities in the face of all of these violations.
They are a provocation for the millions of Muslims
around the world and only serve the cause of terrorism
and fundamentalism around the world.
The escalation in violence must stop. We face an
explosive situation. We need to work very seriously to
achieve a peaceful solution to the Middle East problem.
That would have a positive impact not just for the
security of the Palestinians and the Israelis, but also
for establishing peace and prosperity in the region as a
whole. That would also make it possible to better fight
terrorism and extremism.
When we talk about the solution that we want, we
mean, of course, the solution that we have all known
of for a long time, that is, the two-State solution: a
Palestinian State and an Israeli State living side by side
in peace, in respect of the right of Palestine to create an
independent State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and in strict respect of Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The State of Qatar has spared no effort to find a
fair and lasting solution. We have made significant
efforts in political and humanitarian terms to create the
necessary and useful conditions that would allow for
progress in the peace process. Within that framework,
we have supported inter-Palestinian dialogue. In
addition, we have worked in coordination with the
United Nations because we know that this can have a
very positive impact for the achievement of peace.
The suffering of the Syrian people continues. The
Syrian people are paying a high price for the situation
in the country. We have not been able to achieve peace
thus far, and the Security Council resolutions on Syria
have not yet been implemented. The State of Qatar will
continue its efforts with various stakeholders and its
14/33

25/07/2017

international partners. Let us use all of the necessary
resources to provide all of the aid that we can to the
brotherly Syrian people.
The State of Qatar is facing unilateral measures
from certain parties in the region. We will continue our
efforts in strict compliance with the principles of goodneighbourliness, and we will do everything within our
power to strengthen peace and stability in the region
and around the world. We are working within the
United Nations and also bilaterally to fight terrorism.
We are pleased to see that the Emir of the State of
Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, continues
his mediation efforts to provide his support in the
ongoing crisis. We remain hopeful that all of the crises
in our region will be resolved in the framework of
international law.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give
the floor to the Vice-Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the excellent manner in which you
are conducting the work of the Security Council this
month, and to thank you for your presence throughout
this debate. It demonstrates your own interest, as well
as that of your country, in the subject under discussion.
In recent weeks, tensions in the holy city of
Jerusalem, caused by the closure of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the imposition by Israel, following an incident, of
restrictions on the faithful, was another demonstration
of how easily the situation can escalate and approach
the point of no return.
The Committee aligns itself with other statements
made today reiterating the call to respect the sanctity of
these sites and the right to worship there. The Committee
regrets all loss of human life. In its joint communiqué
with the Organization of Islamic Cooperation of 21 July,
the Committee called on the international community
to urgently reaffirm respect for the historic status quo
and to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to rescind
all measures that violate this status quo, including
the installation of metal detectors, and to fulfil its
obligations under international law. The restoration of
the status quo at religious sites must be accompanied by
urgent efforts to end the Israeli occupation of the State
of Palestine.
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the 1967
war and the Israeli occupation of the West Bank, Gaza
and East Jerusalem. The question of Palestine continues
to be the topic on the United Nations agenda that goes
back the furthest in time, and the Israeli occupation is
the longest lasting occupation in contemporary history.
As the Committee has repeatedly pointed out, this is
an unacceptable and unsustainable situation that must
end immediately.
Faced with the five decades of continuous
occupation, and in order to consider concrete ways to end
it, the Committee has been holding events throughout
2017. Last month, on 29 and 30 June, we organized
here at Headquarters the United Nations Forum to
Mark Fifty Years of Occupation, which was opened by
the Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, who delivered a message from
the Secretary-General. The Forum was attended by
experts, politicians, civil society representatives from
Israel, Palestine and other countries, as well as by a
Nobel Prize winner. The Forum served as a platform,
without a doubt, for deliberations that were perhaps
more ground-breaking, balanced and far-reaching
than any that have taken place in a long time under
the auspices of the United Nations on the question
of Palestine.
While the views expressed were diverse, there
was a clear consensus among the participants: the
occupation is illegal, must end and must end now.
I urge the Council to study the report of that Forum,
which will be published in early August. It contains
thought-provoking observations and recommendations,
including on the need for the international community to
redouble its efforts to achieve a viable and just solution,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, as
well as on the need for States to distinguish, in their
relations, between the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967. In addition, with regard to the
situation in Gaza, the participants called for a shift
from a humanitarian focus to a political and human
rights focus that takes into account the legal obligations
of all parties.
The Committee has continued to fulfil other aspects
of its mandate in support of Palestinian aspirations
to statehood and sovereignty, including promoting
capacity-building for Palestinian civil servants. For
example, the Committee organized a capacity-building
workshop in Beirut in April on the theme “Goal 17 for

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

Palestine: South-South and Triangular Partnerships for
Sustainable Development”. The workshop promoted a
common understanding of the practice of South-South
and triangular cooperation as an important modality
for the achievement of sustainable development
objectives in Palestine and provided participants with
practical tools to understand the inherent challenges
and opportunities.
Last week, on 20 and 21 July, in Baku, the
Committee organized an international conference
on the question of Jerusalem, with the support of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The conference
provided an opportunity to discuss ways in which
the international community could raise economic,
practical and concrete support for the Palestinian
population of East Jerusalem. The issue of current
tensions was also discussed at the conference.
The Committee has repeatedly stressed the
illegality of the blockade on the Gaza Strip, which
is now in its tenth year. That blockade amounts to
collective punishment and has resulted in one of
the worst humanitarian crises, exemplified by the
current electricity outages, the shortage of doctors and
medicine, water and all of the consequences thereof.
Moreover, the Committee has repeatedly spoken
out about the illegality of Israel’s settlement activities
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, which remain
a major obstacle to achieving peace and a serious
violation of international law. Paragraph 2 of resolution
2334 (2016) expressly calls on Israel to
“immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem”.
Regrettably, the recent announcement by the Israeli
Government concerning an additional 4,000 dwellings
reveals a total lack of respect for the Council’s demands
and a total lack of accountability or progress in the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
The momentum generated by the resolution must
not be squandered, and the Council must fully utilize
its accountability mechanisms to ensure the full
implementation of its resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), which in paragraph 12
“[r]equests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council every three months on the implementation
of the provisions of the... resolution”.

17-2304215/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

While the two informative briefings to date have
highlighted what has been common knowledge for many
years — namely, Israel’s ongoing flagrant violations
of international law — by way of oral statements, the
Committee calls on the Secretary-General to issue
written reports in the future and provide practical
recommendations to ensure Israel’s accountability.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): To begin with I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
on China’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month, which has been distinguished, as
is customary, by outstanding wisdom and responsibility.
We are a main stakeholder of the agenda item
under consideration, as Israel has occupied the Syrian
Golan since 1967. I therefore speak as a principal
party in restating the position of the Syrian Arab
Republic. It is a principled position in favour of the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination;
an independent State across the whole of its national
territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and the
guaranteed return of refugees to their country under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Those
non-negotiable rights cannot be subject to concessions
or statutes of limitation, or impeded by force.
The holy esplanade of Jerusalem is under
occupation and exploited by the Israeli occupying
forces. Given the onoing situation around the holy sites,
the Security Council must more than ever do more
than merely express it condemnation and concern. The
Council must fully assume its responsibility to ensure
the immediate implementation of all of its resolutions
relevant to ending the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories, including resolution 2334 (2016), on the
illegitimacy of the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.
With respect to Mr. Mladenov’s briefing to the
Council today, in our view nothing justifies the fact
that he insisted on ignoring the nature of his mission
and mandate as Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process. In an unacceptable, unprofessional
and immoral manner, Mr. Mladenov failed to mention
the illegal Israeli activities in the Syrian Golan. He
did not underscore the United Nations position on the
Israeli occupation since 5 June 1967, despite a dozen
resolutions adopted by our international Organization,
in particular the Security Council, on that very subject.
16/33

25/07/2017

As a result of the racist and terrible Israeli occupation
that has endured for more than half a century, the Syrian
citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan remain subject to
the worst crimes under the oppressive policies of racial
discrimination, detention, torture and other procedures.
They are deprived of their natural resources. They
are deprived of their right to study under the Syrian
national curriculum. They are deprived of their right to
a Syrian identity card. They are deprived of their right
to access national Syrian hospitals in their villages in
the occupied Syrian Golan. That situation, including
the occupation and confiscation of land and property,
has persisted for more than half a century.
The Special Coordinator ignored the fact that Israel
is supporting armed terrorist groups in the occupied
Syrian Golan. He did not address that issue at all. In
addition, in a highly partial and unprofessional manner,
Mr. Mladenov decided, as we heard this morning, to
justify the attacks of the Israeli occupying forces on
the Syrian army. I would remind Mr. Mladenov that
we are talking here about Syrian territory occupied by
Israel. The Israeli army provides logistical support to
the terrorist groups in those territories. Whenever we
gain a victory, we are attacked by the terrorist groups.
The Israeli air force has targeted Syrian bases that are
situated far from the occupied Syrian Golan.
Will Mr. Mladenov continue to justify Israel’s
actions and the fact that Israel is targeting Syrian army
bases, which are themselves combatting terrorism?
Mr. Mladenov should indicate his concern about the
fact that the United Nations is refusing to assume
its responsibilities. He should discuss the statement
made at the conference between the Presidents of the
Russian Federation and the United States of America.
For the record and for history, I call on the Special
Representative to consider the well-documented reports
of Ms. Dilyana Gaytandjieva, a Bulgarian national, and
the articles published in a Bulgarian newspaper on the
activities of terrorist groups in Syria and the transfer of
weapons from Bulgaria to Jeddah, including on ships
registered to certain Member States. All of this is being
financed by certain Gulf States. I will return to that
issue in detail when we discuss counter-terrorism in
another meeting.
It also would seem that the Special Coordinator has
not heard of the illegal decision of the Israeli occupying
forces to hold local council elections in villages in the
occupied Syrian Golan. They called this an Israeli law,
but in fact it is a flagrant violation of our Charter and
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of United Nations resolutions as well as international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 497 (1981), adopted unanimously
on 17 December 1981. That resolution rejects Israel’s
annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan and finds all
Israeli activity in the occupied Syrian Golan null and
void from the perspective of international law.
My country, the Syrian Arab Republic, categorically
rejects this new Israeli resolution. We reiterate that the
Golan will remain an integral part of Syrian territory
and that it will be reintegrated with the motherland. We
also reiterate that we have sovereign authority over the
occupied Syrian Golan within the 4 June 1967 borders.
This is a non-negotiable right on which there can be
no concessions. These are our territories; they are
occupied now, but we will get them back. The Israeli
settlers will leave, sooner or later.
In that respect, my Government calls on the
Security Council to bring pressure to bear on Israel to
ensure the immediate liberation of Syrian prisoners,
in particular Sedqi al-Maqt, the Nelson Mandela of
Syria, who served a 27-year sentence in the occupying
Power’s prisons. He was sentenced a few days ago to
another 14 years because he had dared to expose the
occupying Power’s practice of providing logistical
support to armed terrorist groups in southern Syria and
in the separation zone.
My country, Syria, believes that today the Security
Council must shoulder its historical responsibility to
correct this injustice. We are meeting today and have
met on other occasions with the goal of putting an end
to the loathsome Israeli occupation, not of holding
discussions on issues far removed from the item on
our agenda.
I would recall that Israel has long occupied territory
and carried out massacres. It is the only party in the
Middle East to have an arsenal of nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons. Do not forget the terrorist war
and the unprecedented destruction it has wrought in
the Middle East. Indeed, certain parties in the Security
Council are trying to avoid working to end the appalling
Israeli occupation and are providing cover for it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, and the Mission of
the People’s Republic of China on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July.
Millions of human beings live daily in anguish,
despair and pain as a result of armed conflict. Costa
Rica deeply deplores the increase in conflicts in the
Middle East. The situation has deteriorated in recent
years, and it has not been possible to achieve peace and
security in the region. It is urgent that we put an end to
the humanitarian crisis we are facing and seek a political
solution, as this crisis has become a humanitarian
tragedy of shocking proportions and represents an
affront to all of humankind. We therefore appeal once
again to the Security Council to fully exercise its
mandate to maintain international peace and security,
as clearly set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
With respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
Costa Rica reiterates the urgent need to resume
negotiations between the parties on the central issues
of the conflict, which remain to this day, on the basis
of previous obligations undertaken and agreements
reached. My country condemns the escalation of recent
tensions and the clashes that have resulted in casualties
in and around the holy city of Jerusalem, and urges the
parties to show the utmost restraint and refrain from
any unilateral action that could worsen the already
volatile situation.
It is crucial that a political solution to this conflict
be found it and that we create, as soon as possible, a
new peace architecture that would make it possible to
resolve differences and lead to the achievement of the
objective agreed by the international community, that
is, harmonious coexistence between an independent
Palestinian State and the State of Israel.
June marked the fiftieth anniversary of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. That is 50 years of having
failed, as an international community, to come together
to find a solution to one of the most widely discussed
conflicts since the establishment of the Organization.
It is a failure of our multilateral system, in which
international law must prevail as a central pillar. We
cannot continue to overlook the pain of the millions of
people who are victims of this political and military
struggle. That is why I urge that we do our job and
ensure that multilateralism prevails so as to promote
solidarity and fulfil the commitment to achieve the

17-2304217/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

goals of the entire international community, not simply
those of a group of nations. The United Nations must
play its role as the epicentre of global governance on
the basis of respect for the collective quest for solutions.
Costa Rica deems it urgent to find a political
solution to this conflict. We must work on establishing
a new peace architecture so that we can resolve
differences and implement preventive diplomacy, with
a view to holding negotiations leading to tangible,
lasting and sustainable results. Military options are not
solutions. War cannot be fought with more war. Peace is
not built by fuelling conflicts with arms and bombings.
Peace must be built using the tools provided us by
diplomacy and multilateralism in order to put an end to
this humanitarian tragedy.
We believe that we must without delay work to
investigate and bring to justice those responsible for the
most serious crimes, with a view to putting an end to all
actions leading to the deaths of innocents, delivering
justice and preventing suffering and the deaths of even
more innocent civilians. The only thing worse than this
human tragedy is the fact that it results in impunity
rather than justice.
Costa Rica reiterates its concern over the growing
tensions in the conflict in the Middle East and strongly
urges the international community to achieve peace in
that region, and specifically all permanent members
of the Council to commit, in accordance with the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
code of conduct, to not using the veto in case of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We
urge the Council to act expeditiously and decisively to
ensure the protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening and presiding over today’s
meeting. My delegation is grateful to the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his important
briefing and reflections.
Malaysia associates itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the representative
of Uzbekistan on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Malaysia deplores the violent clashes between the
Israeli security forces and Palestinians on 21 July in
18/33

25/07/2017

the West Bank, which left three Palestinians dead and
injured many others. Those clashes in the West Bank
further complicate the already volatile situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We call on all parties to
refrain from actions that could further escalate tensions
in Jerusalem’s old city.
We condemn in the strongest terms the closure of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque on 14 July by the Israeli authorities.
We join other member States in demanding that Israel
refrain from any action that would alter the status of
the Islamic holy site. We reiterate our call for Israel to
provide unrestricted access for Muslim worshippers
to the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We also urge Israel to cease
any action that can have the effect of changing the
status quo of the Islamic holy sites. The sanctity of the
religious sites must be respected. In that regard, we
also commend and support the efforts of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan and custodian of the holy sites of
Jerusalem to restore calm in the holy city.
We are extremely disheartened to learn of the plans
announced by Israel to increase the development of
housing units in East Jerusalem to a rate of over 30 per
cent more than in 2016, as highlighted by Mr. Mladenov
earlier today. That is a clear violation of resolution 2334
(2016). We recall the pronouncement by the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian people, asking for the quarterly report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) to be produced in writing. The report must
outline where the parties were in compliance. In cases
of non-compliance, concrete measures must be detailed
to ensure the full and effective implementation and
enforcement of the resolution.
We continue to look forward to seeing a written
report on the implementation of the resolution. Let
us make good on the historic Council action that
reflected the urgency and conviction to reverse the
negative trends that threaten the peace and viability
of the two-State solution. We must now focus on the
implementation of existing resolutions, including on
settlements, as well as on all acts of violence against
civilians and further incitements.
Being detached and apathetic to the developments in
the occupied Palestinian territory is no longer an option.
In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the positive initiative
undertaken by the United States in facilitating a watersupply arrangement between the Palestinian Authority
and the Israeli Government for Palestinians in the West
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Bank and Gaza, the respected United Nations and
Egyptian initiative to facilitate the provision of fuel for
the supply of electricity and the concrete commitments
made by Qatar on reconstruction in Gaza.
As we mark 50 years of the illegal Israeli occupation
of Palestine, the international community owes it to
the Palestinian people to mobilize its political will and
explore other peaceful, legal and diplomatic avenues
available to us to end the longest-running occupation in
modern history. Let us not be condemned by history by
virtue of being a by-stander.
Finally, Malaysia remains committed to playing a
constructive role to realize the two-State solution. We
reiterate our long-standing support for the inalienable
rights of self-determination for the Palestinian people
and a just, comprehensive and final solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Chinese presidency for convening
today’s open debate.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements to
be made by the representatives of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and of Uzbekistan on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
We thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for his comprehensive oral report,
pursuant to resolution 2234 (2016), and would like to
join other delegations in underlining the need for a
written report.
We express our deep concern about the escalation
of tension surrounding the illegal closing of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque in East Jerusalem and impeded access
to the mosque by Muslim worshippers. We share the
views of the Special Representative that the situation
surrounding the mosque can have potential catastrophic
costs well beyond the walls of the old city, and stress
the need for respecting and maintaining the historic
status quo at the holy sites, with the freedom to worship
guaranteed for all concerned.
In this fiftieth year of the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian and Arab territories, the Security Council
must demonstrate its resolve to address the Palestinian
question as a matter of urgency. The continued breaches

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

of international humanitarian law and systematic
human rights violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories have given rise to an egregious culture of
impunity. In the absence of any effective international
accountability, the occupying Power continues killing
Palestinian citizens, including youth and children,
imprisoning and abusing scores of Palestinians in its
detention centres and dispossessing and displacing
thousands of Palestinian families through its
construction and expansion of illegal settlements.
We share concerns about the recent Israeli
decision to construct 1,800 illegal settlement units
in occupied East Jerusalem, which would lead to the
further eviction of Palestinian civilians, in flagrant
violation of resolution 2234 (2016). It is obvious that the
settlements, as well as the wall in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, are being deliberately pursued in order
to fundamentally change the character, status and
demography of the occupied Palestinian territories.
The Council has a moral obligation to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlement
regime in the occupied Palestinian territories, lift the
blockade in the Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms
of occupation. Immediate priority must be given to
ensuring international protection for the Palestinian
people suffering for decades from Israel’s policy of
collective punishment. The hunger strike recently
observed by thousands of prisoners in Israeli detention
centres underscores the need for the international
community’s sustained efforts to address their
grievances and plight.
Under the guidance of our honourable Prime
Minister, Sheikh Hasina, the Government and people
of Bangladesh remain steadfast in our support for the
just and legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people
for their inalienable rights, including their right to selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent,
viable, contiguous and sovereign Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in the framework of
a two-State solution.
We continue to urge all key actors to remain seized
of their efforts to pursue a comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question, consistent with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the
principle of land for peace. We also add our voice to the
need to ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable
funding for the United Nations Relief and Works

17-2304219/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order
for it to effectively carry out its humanitarian mandate
in support of the Palestinian refugees.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to begin by congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank you for
having convened today’s open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I would like to commend your friendly country on
its call to ease the suffering of the Palestinian people
and empower them to enjoy their rights and establish
the sovereign State of Palestine based on 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. I also thank you for
the support that you personally represent in that regard.
The past few days have seen the opening of a new
chapter of violence in Jerusalem and the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
firmly condemns all the illegal steps taken by the Israeli
occupying authorities in Jerusalem and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. Jerusalem endured for more than 1,000 years
under Arab Muslim rule, during which the sanctuaries
of Judaism, Christianity and Islam were respected
and protected, as were the worshippers in holy areas.
During the half-century of the Israeli occupation, the
Al-Aqsa Mosque was deliberately set on fire in 1969,
and worshippers in the Abrahamic sanctuary were
massacred by the terrorist settler Baruch Goldstein,
who was glorified by the people and Government of
Israel after his death.
The terrorist settlers have not stopped plotting,
devising provocations and calling publicly for the
demolition of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the exclusion and
expulsion of Muslims from Jerusalem, in coordination
and cooperation with the Israeli occupation authorities.
Today we continue to watch in pain as the Israeli
occupying authorities have besieged Jerusalem and
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, prevented worshippers from
performing their religious rites and reacted with
barbarity to peaceful protests. One such scene has been
documented, in which we saw an Israeli soldier on our
television screens kicking a Muslim worshipper as he
prayed. Has anyone here seen a worse demonstration of
disregard and contempt for a religion and the practice of
its rites? An act of such shamelessness is an expression
of the doctrine of the Israeli occupation, its oppression
20/33

25/07/2017

of the unarmed Palestinian people and its deliberate
policy of insulting, humiliating and terrorizing them.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia firmly condemns
all terrorist acts, regardless of the identities of the
perpetrators or their victims. We condemn all States,
organizations and individuals who practice, ignore or
help to finance or incite terrorism. We believe there can
be no justification or excuse for terrorist acts.
It is disturbing that the Security Council has not
taken measures to express anger at the acts of the
Israeli occupying Power, and we urge it to uphold its
responsibilities and to put a stop to Israel’s continued
anti-Palestinian practices. We reiterate our firm position
of support to the Palestinian people and rejection of
any attempts to impose control and unilateral measures
designed to show contempt for Jerusalem and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. We also want to warn the world about the
danger of the situation’s exacerbation and escalation,
which would have an impact on the entire region and
beyond. My delegation has warned the Council several
times that the most dangerous aspects of the conflict
in Palestine are Israel’s provocations and plans aimed
at changing Jerusalem’s historical status, Judaizing
the city, altering its demographics, distorting its Arab
Muslim identity and disrespecting all its holy Muslim
and Christian sites. Saudi Arabia rejects any attempt
to harm Jerusalem’s status and calls on all States to
commit to the relevant international resolutions in
that regard.
My delegation affirms that the only path to peace is
through a return to the Arab Peace Initiative and to the
development of an effective mechanism guaranteeing
the Palestinian people’s enjoyment of their inalienable
rights. The occupation must be ended in accordance
with a specific timeline, establishing an independent
State with Jerusalem as its capital within the June
1967 borders; ensuring Israel’s withdrawal from all
the occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan and the Lebanese Sheba’a farms; ending the
construction of illegal settlements on Palestinian lands
and removing existing ones; and reversing all the
unilateral measures that have been undertaken by the
occupying Power in Jerusalem.
With regard to Syria, Saudi Arabia welcomes the
agreement reached between the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, the United States of America and the Russian
Federation on a ceasefire in south-western Syria. We
hope that no-fly zones will be established in Syria
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in order to guarantee civilians’ safety and protection
from the barbarities of the Syrian regime and its
allies, particularly in view of the fact that we continue
to witness the Syrian regime violating every truce
agreement and massacring, murdering, terrorizing
and displacing its people with the assistance of Iran’s
Revolutionary Guard and terrorist sectarian militias led
by Hizbullah.
We should emphasize that a lack of accountability is
one of the most important reasons behind the continuing
criminal acts of the Syrian authorities and their allies.
We therefore reiterate that the international community
should continue to take a firm stand against all acts
of killing, siege, deliberate starvation, displacement
and ethnic cleansing, which have provided a golden
opportunity for Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and others
to expand in the absence of an authority. Saudi Arabia
once again affirms its willingness to participate in any
joint international effort to eradicate such terrorist
organizations, wherever they may be found.
We believe that the Syrian people’s struggle and
aspirations for freedom and dignity are destined to
be victorious, even if that may be somewhere down
the road. Peace and justice are two sides of the same
coin, and the security and stability of our region and
indeed the entire world require that they go hand in
hand. We therefore call for the immediate and essential
implementation of the first Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), including the formation of a
transitional authority with the executive power to
establish a future Syria big enough for all its citizens, a
Syria that denounces terrorism and violence and stands
above discrimination and extremism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you for your
leadership of the Security Council during the month of
July. We express our appreciation for the holding of this
open debate.
We support the statement made by the delegation
of Nicaragua on behalf of Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people and
the statement to be made by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

Cuba expresses its deep concern about the situation
in the Middle East, which is plagued by violence,
interference in its internal affairs, foreign aggression
and long-term conflicts, such as the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict — the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is
time to settle the historic debt owed to the State of
Palestine and restore the inalienable rights of its people,
which have been violated by Israel during half a century
of occupation, repression, collective punishment,
destruction and confiscation of Palestinian land and
property, forced displacement and settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We are compelled to
recall what our Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro Ruz,
Leader of the Cuban Revolution, said on 12 October
1979 here at the United Nations:
“Pushed off their land, expelled from their own
country, scattered throughout the world, persecuted
and murdered, the heroic Palestinians are a vivid
example of sacrifice and patriotism, living symbols
of the most terrible crime of our era.” (A/34/PV.31,
para. 24)
The Security Council must take concrete steps
to end that historic injustice by urgently ending
Israel’s occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories dating back to 1967. The approximately
decade-long blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has
led to a profound socioeconomic and humanitarian
crisis affecting 2 million Palestinian civilians, must be
halted immediately, and obligations under international
humanitarian law must be fulfilled.
A two-State solution and a comprehensive, just,
peaceful and lasting settlement of the Palestinian
question will not be possible as long as Israel continues
to violate its obligations under international law and
the Charter of the United Nations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, as well
as the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016).
Cuba also demands the end of the occupation of
the Syrian Golan. We reiterate that any steps or actions
taken, or to be taken, so as to change the legal, physical
and demographic status and institutional structure of
the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israel’s measures
to exercise its jurisdiction and administration in that
territory, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the Charter and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 497

17-2304221/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(1981) and the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as an
act of defiance of the international community.
Cuba takes note of the initiatives to resume direct
peace negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis
and the recently concluded agreement with regard to
supplying water to Palestinian territories. Cuba will
continue to defend the right of the Palestinians to
self-determination; a free, independent and sovereign
State, with its capital in East Jerusalem, within the pre1967 borders; and the return of Palestinian refugees.
We will also continue to support the entry of Palestine
as a full-fledged Member of the United Nations. We
hope that, in the context of the fiftieth anniversary of
the Israeli occupation and the tenth anniversary of the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, the Security Council will
live up to its responsibility and fulfil its debt to the
Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of States members of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my
capacity as Chair of the OIC group.
This meeting is taking place in a climate
overburdened by an increasingly unstable and volatile
situation in the Middle East, with the unresolved and
festering question of Palestine remaining at the heart of
unrest in the region. The OIC is very concerned about
the contempt shown by Israel, the occupying Power,
towards the Security Council’s authoritative decisions
and demands, in contravention of international law and
in total obstruction of a political horizon for a peaceful
solution. In this fiftieth year of the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian and Arab lands since 1967, the urgency
for a peaceful solution remains as pressing as ever and
requires serious and immediate efforts.
The OIC expresses its serious concern with regard
to the ongoing developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and condemns all
of the illegal policies and measures being implemented
by Israel, the occupying Power, aimed at altering the
status, character and demography of the territory,
including the Arab, Islamic and Palestinian character
and identity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. The OIC condemns Israel’s illegal action of
closing the Mosque and further impeding the access
of Muslim worshippers to the Mosque. The OIC urges
the Council to compel Israel, the occupying Power,
22/33

25/07/2017

to ensure the freedom of worship for Palestinians,
including in occupied East Jerusalem; refrain from
interfering in the affairs of the Islamic and Christian
holy sites; respect the historic status quo at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif; and act in compliance with its obligations
under international law as the occupying Power. In
that regard, the OIC reiterates its firm commitment
to the rights of the Palestinian people in occupied
East Jerusalem, which forms an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.
At the same time, the OIC reiterates its condemnation
of the continuation and escalation of Israel’s illegal
measures and policies aimed at expanding its illegal
colonial settlements and further entrenching its
five-decades-long colonization of Palestinian land. The
OIC condemns in particular the recent Israeli decision
to build more than 1,800 illegal settlement units in
occupied East Jerusalem, which will in effect lead to the
confiscation of Palestinian land and the forced eviction
and dispossession of more Palestinian civilians. In that
connection, the OIC reaffirms that the continuation
of the Israeli settlement policy will undermine the
territorial integrity, viability and contiguity of a
future Palestinian State, notwithstanding the fact
that settlement activities are illegal acts constituting
flagrant violations of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, including,in particular
resolution 2334 (2016), which unequivocally demands
an end to all such activities.
The Council must act to uphold its responsibilities
to end Israeli settlement activities, which have been
manifestly and deliberately stepped up in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in and around East
Jerusalem. While the OIC welcomes the second report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), as orally delivered to the
Security Council by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General (see S/PV.7977), we call once
again for the submission of a meaningful written
report so as to ensure the proper documentation of the
implementation of the resolution’s provisions, given
Israel’s continued flagrant disrespect of the Council and
its resolutions. We further appeal to the international
community for its sustained engagement, as also called
for by resolution 2334 (2016), and its full support at this
critical period for sponsorship to a timed, multilateral
political process that would lead to the enforcement of
the relevant United Nations resolutions aimed at finally
ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land since
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

1967, achieving the internationally recognized twoState solution and the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people — the objectives to
which the OIC remains unflinchingly committed.
The OIC further reminds the Council of its
duties with regard to Israel’s condemnable systematic
violations of human rights in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including deliberately killing and injuring
civilians and peaceful protesters; violent military
attacks against the civilian population; the detention
of thousands of Palestinian civilians; the confiscation
of land and property; the demolition of Palestinian
homes; and the forced displacement of Palestinians;
as well as terrorism perpetrated by settlers against
Palestinian civilians. All such actions continue to raise
tensions and sensitivities and are severely aggravating
the fragile situation on the ground, with the potential to
spark grave consequences. The Security Council must
demand that all such illegal acts cease and that Israel,
the occupying Power, abide by its obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, and all the relevant United
Nations resolutions on the question of Palestine.
The OIC group remains firm in its conviction that
the Security Council must not be absolved of its role in
that regard. It should act to ensure that the Palestinian
people realize their right to self-determination,
sovereignty and independence in their State of
Palestine in the territory occupied since 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and that a just solution
emerges for the plight of Palestinian refugees, in line
with United Nations resolutions and international law.
I must also reiterate the concerns of the OIC regarding
the grave humanitarian suffering that the Palestinian
people is enduring throughout occupied Palestine. The
situation in the Gaza Strip remains particularly grave
and alarming, as the Palestinian civilian population
there continues to suffer from decades of occupation
and the impact of military aggression, compounded by
the inhumane, illegal Israeli blockade, now in its tenth
year. We reiterate the call for an end to this massive
form of collective punishment of the Palestinian people
and for urgent efforts to reconstruct, rehabilitate and
revive Gaza, which also remains an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967.
Today we must also reiterate the call for attention to
the plight of Palestinian political prisoners and detainees
in Israeli detention centres. We call for respect of their

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

rights, in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention
and international human rights law, and for an end
to their abuse and captivity by the occupying Power.
The hunger strike recently undertaken by thousands of
prisoners is a cry for attention to their critical plight
and for action to resolve it. In that regard, we appeal for
international compassion and responsibility.
Lastly, the OIC encourages all States Members of
the United Nations to intensify their ongoing efforts
aimed at overcoming the continuing financial shortfalls
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, with a view to
ensuring adequate, sufficient, predictable and sustained
funding for the Agency for the duration of its mandate,
pending a solution. In that way, it can fully meet the
needs of the Palestine refugees at this critical time and
continue to carry out its indispensable humanitarian
mission and its stabilizing role amid the heightened
needs and volatility in the region.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that the conflicts
in the Middle East — including the tragedy of the
Palestine question and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
with the occupation now in its fiftieth year — and
what seems to be chronic divisions within the Security
Council have allowed such menaces as violent
extremism and terrorism to flourish in the region and
reach the proportions we must confront today as we
collectively grapple with the elusive search for viable
solutions. Therefore, the multifaceted dimension and
root causes of the region’s conflicts must be addressed,
without exception, in the context of international law,
including humanitarian law and human rights law, and
with adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the guarantor of peace
and security in the Middle East and globally.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on China’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I also thank you, Sir,
for taking the initiative in organizing this open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We also thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing this morning.

17-2304223/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Events in the region and internationally have an
impact on the Palestinian question. While the peace
process has been paralysed in political terms since
2014, Israel has continued to take unilateral measures in
expanding its settlements in an unprecedented fashion
on the Palestinian territory that has been occupied since
June 1967. Unprecedented violence in the region is
dashing Palestinian hope. They have the feeling that the
international community has abandoned them to turn to
other issues. It is certainly true that other questions are
no less important, but they should not lead us to forget
the Palestinian question. It remains the main crisis in
the Middle East.
In political terms, the years we are living through
are very difficult ones when compared to previous
years. We see that the occupation has continued
for 50 years in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
while settlements, colonialization and Judaization
continue. Those policies cannot lead to peace. That is
why the international community should assume its
responsibilities and encourage the parties to return to
the negotiating table to kick-start the peace process
on the basis of the two-State solution, a solution that
is currently under threat more than ever before. The
current situation will lead only to violence and chaos.
We appreciate and are optimistic about the
determination of the new American Administration to
encourage dialogue between the parties to achieve the
two-State solution. Were the situation to remain bleak,
it would go against the interests of the parties. I repeat
that that will only fan the flames and cause the violence
to increase. In that regard, my country supports all
attempts to restart the peace process on the basis of
a precise time frame decided upon by the parties, as
well as on the basis of the two-State solution within
the borders of 4 June 1067, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of the Palestinian State.
There can be no doubt that Jerusalem has a very
special place not only in the hearts of the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, but also for worshippers of the three
monotheistic Abrahamic religions. That is why
coexistence needs to be maintained in Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is the city that Muslims turn to before Mecca,
and it is the third holy city, after Mecca and Medina, for
more than 1.5 billion Muslims. That is why any attempt
to alter the legal status of Jerusalem will lead only to an
increase in violence and hatred. That would encourage
a number of young people to turn to terrorism. The
King of Morocco Chairs the Al-Quds Committee at
24/33

25/07/2017

the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and, in that
regard, we call for the rights of the Palestinian people
to be respected, in particular their right to create a State
with East Jerusalem as its capital. That is the only way
that we can achieve a fair and sustainable peace in the
Middle East, and that would allow us to strengthen
international peace and security.
His Majesty King Mohamed VI has on a number
of occasions, including at multilateral and bilateral
meetings, called for an end to settlements, as does
resolution 2334 (2016). His Majesty has also warned
against the Judaization of Jerusalem and any attempt
to change the legal status of the city. He said the same
in a statement to the press, and the Security Council
itself also raised the issue in a statement issued on
17 September 2015 (SC/12052). His Majesty the King
of Morocco has called for every step to be taken to
allow the Palestinian people to create a State with East
Jerusalem as its capital within the 1967 borders, living
side by side in peace with Israel. Morocco’s position on
the Arab Peace Initiative therefore remains unchanged,
which we support. We also call for the creation of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the 1967 borders. Morocco stands
ready to participate actively in all initiatives that allow
for progress on the peace process and the achievement
of peace, security and stability in the region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
Mr. President, we are pleased to see you presiding over
the Security Council during the month of July. We
congratulate you, Sir, and your country’s delegation
on the manner in which you have been guiding the
business of the Council this month, and in particular
for convening this open debate on such an important
issue for international peace and stability.
It is an honour for the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries at today’s quarterly open
debate on a subject to which we have historically
attached particular importance, namely, “The situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”.
First of all, we would like to convey our appreciation
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator of the
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Nations for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his valuable briefing this morning.
During the seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in September 2016 in Margarita
Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and Government
reaffirmed their continued solidarity with the
Palestinian people, as well as their unbreakable support
for their just cause, all while calling on the member
States of the Movement to renew their commitment and
to strengthen and further coordinate their efforts to
promote the realization of justice and the rights of the
Palestinian people in the light of the critical situation
that continues to prevail and the ever-diminishing
prospects for a peaceful solution.
That was also the case almost a month ago when, on
27 May, the Ministerial Committee of the Non-Aligned
Movement on Palestine issued a political declaration
of support and solidarity with the Palestinian people
to solemnly commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of
the beginning of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
lands and other Arab countries in 1967. The declaration
also sought to reflect upon other upcoming solemn
anniversaries, including the seventieth anniversary
of the General Assembly’s decision to split Mandated
Palestine by adopting resolution 181 (II) in 1947, as
well as the seventieth anniversary of the Al-Nakba,
which the heroic Palestinian people have resisted.
In that regard, we emphasize that a just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects
remains a priority on the agenda of the Movement. In
addition, we reaffirm that the ongoing Israeli occupation
and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole continue
to pose a serious threat to international peace and
security that requires attention and an urgent solution, in
accordance with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the
United Nations itself. In that regard, the Movement
stands ready to contribute to the achievement of a just,
lasting and peaceful solution. We call for increased
international and regional efforts to support that goal,
all while recalling the responsibilities of the Security
Council and the General Assembly on the matter,
including responsibilities that were recently reaffirmed
in resolution 2334 (2016), which was welcomed and
endorsed by the Movement in its communiqué dated
27 December 2016. We believe that the resolution
offers the most viable path to peace and establishes
the requisites and parameters for a just solution that
would safeguard the two-State solution, based on pre-

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

1967 borders. We believe it would create the necessary
conditions to end the occupation, fairly resolve the
conflict in all its aspects and make Palestinian-Israeli
peace and security a reality.
The member States of the Movement reiterate
their calls for full respect and implementation of the
resolution. We stress that that remains essential in order
to remedy the situation on the ground, remove tensions
and foster an appropriate environment for the search
for peace. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s second report on the implementation of that
resolution, which was orally presented to the Security
Council by Mr. Mladenov (see S/PV.7977). However,
we reiterate the need for a substantive written report
to be submitted in order to support the Council’s
functions and ensure adequate documentation of the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution,
especially in the light of continued disregard on the
part of Israel concerning the Security Council and its
violations of the Council’s resolutions.
The Movement expresses its deep concern about
recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in particular
with respect to the continuation and escalation of
illegal policies and measures by Israel, the occupying
Power, which are aimed at expanding its illegal
settlement campaign, continuing the consolidation of
its occupation and half-century invasion of Palestinian
lands and continuing with its violation of the rights
of the Palestinian people. In that regard, it is worth
mentioning the most recent issuing by the Israeli
occupying authorities of permits for the construction
of more than 1,800 units of illegal settlements in
East Jerusalem, as well as the fact that those policies
continue irrespective of the fact that they will result
in the eviction and expropriation of more Palestinian
property, including the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood.
Instead of ending its violations, reversing their
negative tendencies on the ground and demonstrating its
commitment to the two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, as required by the Security Council
and the international community, Israel continues to
act in contempt of the Council and in violation of its
legal obligations.
In that regard, the Movement’s member States
strongly condemn the recent provocative decisions
by Israel, the occupying Power, to carry out its
settlement activities, which are in grave violation

17-2304225/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). We are
also alarmed and deeply deplore the blatant contempt
of Israel, the occupying Power, for the unequivocal
decision of the Security Council in that respect, which
clearly reaffirmed that Israeli settlement activities are
not legally valid and constitute a flagrant violation
of international law. The Movement calls on Israel
to immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in East Jerusalem, and to fully respect all of
its legal obligations, including those stipulated in the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. The Movement also
recalls the call of the Security Council to end all acts
of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as
well as acts of provocation, incitement and destruction.
With regard to Gaza, the situation remains of
great concern to the Movement, particularly with
respect to the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
which will by untenable by 2020, according to United
Nations officials in the field. In fact, according to
the latest report by the United Nations country team,
most projections for 2020 have deteriorated further
and faster than expected. In that sense, the continued
obstruction of the reconstruction of homes, property
and civil infrastructure destroyed by the Israeli
aggression of 2014, as well as the extremely slow
pace of Gaza’s recovery due to Israel’s current illegal
blockade, have forced thousands of families to remain
displaced and homeless. That has also prevented the
reconstruction of critical infrastructure, including that
related to the electricity supply, which has resulted in
serious repercussions on humanitarian, socioeconomic,
psychological and environmental conditions. In that
regard, we reiterate our call for a complete lifting of
the Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has lasted
for more than 10 years. We simultaneously emphasize
that the Gaza crisis must be tackled in a comprehensive
manner, in accordance with international law,
including the relevant international humanitarian law
and human rights law, as well as the relevant United
Nations resolutions. That all should be taken in the
context of the general situation and the continuation
of the illegitimate and belligerent Israeli occupation of
the occupied Palestinian territory since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, and the unequivocal calls to put an end
to the half-century occupation.
In addition, the Non-Aligned Movement reiterates
its strongest condemnation of Israel’s systematic
26/33

25/07/2017

human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
including, inter alia, the wilful killing and injury of
civilians, including peaceful protesters; violent military
raids, including, in particular, in refugee camps; the
terrorizing of the civilian population; the imprisonment
and detention of thousands of Palestinian civilians,
including children and women; the confiscation of land
and property and the demolition of Palestinian homes;
the forced displacement of Palestinians, particularly
Bedouin communities; and settler terrorism and
violence against Palestinian civilians. We remind the
Council of its duties in this regard.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its calls for
strengthened international efforts to achieve without
delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in
1967 and a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution, and reiterates its readiness to cooperate and
support all relevant efforts, in line with the decisions
taken during the seventeenth Summit on the Island of
Margarita, which declared 2017 as the International
Year to End the Israeli Occupation of Palestine. In this
regard, and on the basis of the Movement’s quest to
establish a peaceful and prosperous world and its role
as an anti-war and pacifist force, we offer the good
offices of the Non-Aligned Movement as a platform for
global peace and in particular for respect for the right
to life and the inalienable right of peoples to their selfdetermination and independence.
The States members of the Movement also condemn
in the strongest possible terms the acts of aggression
committed by Israel against the Syrian Arab Republic
on 17 March and considers such acts to constitute a
grave violation of Syrian sovereignty and a breach of
international law, the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of
1974. In this regard, we request the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibility by clearly condemning
those acts of aggression and taking the necessary
measures to prevent their recurrence, and holding Israel
accountable for threatening regional and international
peace and security.
The States members of the Movement reiterate
their condemnation of all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status and character of the occupied
Syrian Golan. In this regard and in line with our
principled position, we demand once again that Israel
to abide by resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement takes
this opportunity to encourage States Members of
the Organization to redouble their current efforts to
overcome the ongoing shortcomings of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in order to ensure adequate,
predictable and sustained funding of the Agency
throughout its mandate so that it can fully meet the
needs of Palestinian refugees and therefore fulfil its
humanitarian mission.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to express
my delegation’s deep appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate in order for us to share
views on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine.
My delegation wishes to align itself with the statement
delivered by delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, let me take this opportunity to express
our deep concern at the escalating tension and violent
clashes that took place in and around the old city of
Jerusalem this weekend. We join others in strongly
condemning these acts of terror on innocent people and
regret the loss of innocent lives and hope for a speedy
recovery to those who are wounded.As the tension in
occupied East Jerusalem continues to escalate and the
people of Palestine continue living in the face of an
unrelenting human tragedy of multiple conflicts and
rising tension 50 years on, my Government wishes to
reiterate the urgent need for the international community
to swiftly address this rapidly deteriorating situation.
We regret that over the half century since Israel’s
occupation of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East
Jerusalem, there has been little progress achieved to
bring about a viable solution to the Palestinian quest
for control of the occupied territories. It is sad that the
lack of progress in the dialogue between the parties,
continued illegal settlement activities, violence and
increased radicalization still engulf the Middle East to
this day. In this regard, Botswana condemns the ongoing
violence and continued documented settlement-related
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, which

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

regrettably undermine all international efforts towards
the achievement of a lasting solution.
We believe that previous actions of the Council since
1967, including the adoption of resolution 242 (1967),
resolution 338 (1973) and most recently resolution 2334
(2016) are positive steps in the right direction on the
path towards delegitimizing the Israeli settlements and
reiterating the call for the achievement of a two-State
solution. In our view, this is the only viable solution
to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We therefore call for the
immediate and complete halt of any settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, which are in violation of these resolutions
and also a breach of international law.
If achieving a negotiated two-State outcome
is indeed the only way to lay the foundation for an
enduring peace in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, all
stakeholders must take responsibility to ensure that this
cause is achieved. In this respect, we welcome continued
efforts of the United Nations, the United States, Russia,
the European Union and regional partners who continue
to work tirelessly for progress in the quest for solutions
in the peace process in the Middle East so as to achieve
a peaceful, fair, negotiated and lasting solution in line
with international law.
Botswana’s long-standing position on the Middle
East peace process remains unequivocal. We support
a negotiated solution that embraces the coexistence of
Israel and Palestine as sovereign States, living side by
side, that share not only a border, but also a common
desire for peace, security and prosperity. We continue
to call on both parties to resume dialogue as soon as
possible without preconditions as an essential step
towards achieving peace and a two-State solution.
In conclusion, Botswana reiterates that a stable
and peaceful Middle East, free of violence with the
two States living side by side in harmony, is not only
good for peace and security in the region, which has
enormous potential, but will also provide a conducive
environment for a prosperous and peaceful Middle
East. It is therefore pertinent for all of us to create the
conditions for a return to negotiations to solve all final
status issues on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, mutual agreements and international law.
My delegation wishes to reaffirm our Government’s
solidarity with the Palestinian people and reiterates our
resolve to find a lasting solution that will shape the

17-2304227/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Middle East landscape in order to improve the quality
of life of the innocent people in that country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bande (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s debate, which provides an
opportunity to reflect on the fast-developing events
in Jerusalem. We thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for his very lucid briefing and commend
him for his efforts in the search for peace in the
Middle East.
I wish to align myself with the statements made by the
representative of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, and of Uzbekistan, on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The surge in violence and senseless killings in
Jerusalem perpetrated by extremists on both sides,
so well articulated by speakers before me, is deeply
troubling. Indeed, fears have been expressed that if the
situation is not contained, it could escalate further, with
its attendant unsavoury consequences. The international
community must work in a concerted manner to avert
such an occurrence. At this crucial moment, we find
it crucially important for Security Council member
States to use their influence with both sides in order to
encourage them to de-escalate tensions. It is imperative
to maintain the age-long status quo by ensuring the
safety and security of both worshippers and visitors to
the holy sites in Jerusalem. In that regard, we welcome
the assurances of Prime Minister Netanyahu that Israel
has no interest in changing the status quo.
It must be stated that recent developments must
not obscure the underlying problem in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. As widely acknowledged, the
inherent difficulty is the lack of progress in the Middle
East peace process. We would like to see a genuine effort
on the part of Israeli and Palestinian leaders to return
to negotiations. The current situation does not offer a
sustainable solution to the question of Palestine. Indeed,
it is creating despair among the people of Palestine and
causing anxiety among the people of Israel.
It is evident that a departure from the current crisis
and a revival of the peace process is hardly achievable
without ending or reversing the policy of settlement
expansion in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
believe that there are a number of specific actions that
28/33

25/07/2017

are necessary to foster mutual respect and compromise,
build confidence, and pave the way for the realization
of the two-State solution. In that regard, we encourage
Israel to take concrete steps to freeze and reverse all
settlement-related activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. On their part, Palestinian leaders must also
signal their readiness to return to the negotiating table
by making enhanced efforts for unity and dealing with
militancy and other internal security challenges.
Beyond a doubt, neither military might nor
militancy will resolve the protracted conflict. The
current stalemate in the Middle East peace process
is neither ideal nor sustainable. Both sides must take
concrete steps to return to negotiations on the basis of
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the relevant agreements between them. Nigeria
supports the efforts of the international community
towards establishing an environment conducive to a
return to meaningful negotiations to end the occupation
and resolve the long-standing conflict.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Mr. Hannigan (Iceland): I would like to thank the
Chinese presidency for convening this meeting. I thank
you, Ambassador Liu, for your personal presence here
during the whole meeting.
I would also like to express our thanks to Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his frank and informative assessment.
Iceland, like others, has been deeply concerned
by rising tensions related to events around Al-Haram
al-Sharif/Temple Mount, where violence has escalated
in recent days. We are encouraged by the decision of
the Israeli Government to remove metal detectors from
the Al-Aqsa area, hopefully defusing the situation.
Political leaders on both sides carry a heavy
responsibility to continue to reduce tensions, with
the assistance of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
Religious leaders also have a significant role to play.
Confidence must be restored among Palestinians that
Israel is not attempting to alter the status quo, and the
Palestinian leadership must condemn all terrorist acts
and do its utmost to prevent violence.
Looking at the bigger picture, continued violent acts
committed by individual Palestinians against Israeli
citizens must cease, and Israeli settlements must come
to an end if the two-State solution is to remain viable.
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The aim of resolution 2334 (2016), which implemented
several conclusions of the 2016 Quartet report, was
indeed to protect the two-State solution from further
erosion, particularly by Israeli settlements policy. The
regular reporting to the Security Council under the
resolution is an important injection of accountability.
A negotiated two-State solution is the only viable peace
plan that will provide a just and lasting peace and
allow both Israelis and Palestinians to live side by side
in peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Chinese presidency
for convening this important open debate, allowing
us to share our views on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also wish to
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, for his informative briefing.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Last month marked the fiftieth anniversary of the
1967 Six-Day War, which resulted in Israel’s occupation
of the Palestinian and Arab lands. It is painful that we
still have to witness unprecedented, grave crises in the
Middle East, with the unsolved question of Palestine at
the heart. After a half century, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict remains complex with the peace process stalled
and a lack of dialogue between the parties. The situation
has become ever-more complicated and inflamed by
continued illegal settlement activities, acts of terror, the
rise of violent extremism and increased radicalization.
These ongoing activities have caused the vast loss of
lives, disruption of culture and livelihoods of civilians,
constitute an obstacle to the peace process, including a
two-State solution, and pose a serious threat to regional
and international peace and security.
Together with the international community,
Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the serious
developments in the region, especially the recent
escalating tensions and violent clashes in and around
the old city of Jerusalem. We strongly condemn all
acts of terrorism and violence and extend our sincere
condolences to the bereaved families of the victims,

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

and wish a speedy recovery for the wounded. We are
also very much concerned about the closure of the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque.
It is clear that half a century of occupation is a
tragedy for all sides. It is illegal under international
law and makes achieving peace impossible. We call on
Israel to cease any further settlement activities, as well
as its closure of the Gaza Strip, respect and restore the
historic status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem, and
at the same time, step up efforts to improve the living
condition of the Palestinian people. We urge all parties
concerned to fully freeze actions of hostility, incitement
and violence, and allow the rapid and safe access of the
United Nations and other humanitarian aid agencies to
help ease the sufferings of the Palestinian people.
It is essential for all parties to exercise selfrestraint; strictly comply with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law; implement the
relevant United Nations resolutions and take concrete
actions to reduce tensions and resume peace talks
without any further delay.
Viet Nam reaffirms our unconditional support
for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people
for their fundamental rights, especially the sacred
right of self-determination and the establishment of
an independent and sovereign State. We consistently
advocate the settlement of disputes through constructive
dialogue and negotiations, in accordance with relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, including Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map for peace in the
Middle East, with a view to ultimately achieving a
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace, security and mutual recognition.
In that regard, we welcome the continued efforts
of the League of Arab States to relaunch serious peace
negotiations based on a two-State solution, establishing
a Palestinian State on the lines of 4 June 1967. We are
also of the view that more integrated support from
the international community is needed to facilitate
Palestinian economic development and job creation and
to enhance the State of Palestine’s institutional capacity.
Today’s open debate represents an important fresh
appeal for action to push forward the peace process
in the region. We must make use of every window of
opportunity to strive for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East through negotiations,

17-2304229/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/07/2017

under strong United Nations leadership and with
the good will of all Member States and the proactive
contributions of relevant regional organizations and
other stakeholders.

that question on the basis of the two-State solution,
international law and the Arab Peace Initiative, and to
provide the region with a genuine opportunity to live in
peace, security and development.

Let me conclude by reiterating Viet Nam’s readiness
to continue to work with the international community
for such meaningful collective endeavours.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank you, Sir, for having convened this debate, which
is very important in the current circumstances.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms
the Israeli measures that have prevented Muslim
worshippers from accessing Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
which runs counter to freedom of worship and is an
unacceptable provocation to all Muslims around the
world. It is part and parcel of a number of attempts
by Israel to impede the status quo in Jerusalem and in
Al-Aqsa Mosque.
We express our gravest concerns about the violence
we have seen on the holy esplanade. We insist that the
Mosque must to remain open to all worshippers. We call
upon all parties to demonstrate restraint and to abide by
international treaties, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The international community should
assume its responsibilities to end all violations and any
step to alter the historic and legal status of Jerusalem.
The Kingdom of Bahrain therefore calls once again on
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to assume their responsibilities, to end
those dangerous practices and to ensure respect for
the relevant conventions and laws, international law
as a whole and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council concerning the city of Jerusalem by providing
the necessary protection to the Palestinian people and
to the holy sites in order to protect freedom of religion.
A fair and sustainable peace in the region will
depend to a great extent on the ability of the Palestinian
people to recover their legitimate rights, including
their right to an independent State within the borders
of 4 June 1967, and on an end to Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory and to all forms of settlement.
Finally, Bahrain recalls that the Palestinian question
remains among our major concerns. We therefore
encourage any attempt to help the international
community to find a fair and sustainable solution to
30/33

Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, on behalf of the delegation of Algeria I would
like to thank you, Sir, for having organized this open
debate on the Middle East and the very dangerous
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories. I
also thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing on the issue.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) and the Non-Aligned Movement.
Algeria condemns the violations and dangerous
attacks that continue to be carried out by the Israeli
occupying forces against Palestinian worshippers
around the Al-Aqsa Mosque and elsewhere in the West
Bank. We also condemn the unfair blockade of the West
Bank, which continutes despite the many international
calls to end the occupation, including resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly. The
violations and violence are very dangerous. They
includes murder, the arrest of Palestinian worshippers
around the Al-Aqsa Mosque and others. Those measures
deprive Palestinians of the freedom of religion. We also
see attempts to displace citizens and the destruction
of houses. We condemn such horrible crimes in the
strongest terms. Furthermore, the practices of the
occupying forces constitute a flagrant violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law, without accountability and in total impunity. That
is why the international community must act to end
those heinous crimes.
My delegation expresses its full solidarity with the
people and authorities of the Palestinian State, a brother
country. We have always supported the Palestinian
people and their just cause to recover their full rights,
including full and entire recognition of the Palestinian
people under international law, on the territories that
have been occupied since 1967, and we call for the
creation of an independent State with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
In the face of this dangerous spike in violence and
systematic efforts to Judaize the Islamic holy sites,
we call on the international community to accelerate
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

its joint efforts to ensure that the Palestinian people
are not left without defence and can protect the holy
sites. The criminal acts are increasing by the day, and
we therefore call on the Council to fully assume its
responsibilities and to ensure that all of its resolutions
on the subject are fully applied.
In conclusion, we restate that the capacity of the
international community to establish international
peace and security is at stake here. We need to show
solidarity, and Algeria participates generously in that
solidarity, by seeking to establish a sustainable solution
that reflects its commitment to the three pillars of
the United Nations, namely, peace and security,
development and human rights.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Almahmoud (United Arab Emirates): On
behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I congratulate
China on acceding to the presidency of the Council and
appreciate its presiding over the quarterly open debate
on the Middle East. I thank Mr. Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing this morning.
The United Arab Emirates associates itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
Today’s debate could not be more urgent or timely,
as we are witnessing a dangerous deterioration of the
security situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The United Arab Emirates is particularly alarmed by
Israel’s continued aggression towards the holy sites in
Jerusalem and the measures that it has taken to change
the status quo in the city. We strongly condemn the
closure of Al-Aqsa Mosque. The United Arab Emirates
calls for the removal of all obstructions to access for
worshippers at Al-Aqsa Mosque and full respect for the
historical and legal status of Jerusalem.
The international community must engage to
de-escalate the tensions in Al-Aqsa Mosque as well as
urge Israel, the occupying Power, to honour its legal
and international commitments and end its unilateral
actions. To that end, the United Arab Emirates
expresses its support for the tireless efforts of His
Majesty King Abdullah of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, the custodian of the Muslim holy sites in East
Jerusalem, to ease tensions and maintain the status quo
on the ground.

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

Israel’s illegal settlement activities and other
provocative measures continue to pose major obstacles
to achieving a two-State solution that grants the
Palestinian people their inalienable rights. The plight
of the Palestinian people has endured for nearly seven
decades, and it must end. We call on the international
community and the Security Council to take all
measures necessary to reach a two-State solution that
establishes an independent Palestinian State based
on the June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, according to the Arab Peace Initiative, the
relevant resolutions and the Madrid Principles.
The paramount aim for the United Arab Emirates
is the promotion of security and stability in our region.
The continuation of the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories and the lack of a just settlement
to the Palestinian issue have critically destabilized the
Middle East. The situation in the occupied territories
paves the way for extremist groups to spread their
messages of terrorism and violent extremism and
prey upon populations with their destructive agenda
throughout the region.
In conclusion, we call on the Security Council and
the community of nations to hold States accountable
for spreading conflict and regional insecurity by
supporting and financing terrorism and, in turn,
violating international law and this body’s resolutions.
The United Arab Emirates believes that international
law and the institutions that uphold its pillars are the
key to lasting stability, and we appeal to Member
States to comply with the decisions of the Security
Council, in accordance with Article 25 of the United
Nations Charter.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked
for the floor to make a further statement. I now give
him the floor.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I will not take up too much of your time,
Mr. President.
As is his custom, the representative of the SaudiWahhabi-expiatory regime that sponsors terrorism
worldwide has made a statement that is replete with
falsehoods and distorts the truth in a desperate attempt
to serve the interests of Israel by deviating from the
core of this agenda item, namely, ending the Israeli
occupation of Arab lands; to mislead the international
community as to the truth of what is taking place in

17-2304231/33

S/PV.8011 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

my country, Syria, regarding the achievements of the
Syrian army and its allies in facing the war of terrorism
that has been imposed on us for six years; and to cover
up what the Bani Saud regime is doing by becoming
allies with Israel and certain sheikhdoms and kingdoms
of the Gulf region, as well as Governments of that region
and others, in supporting and financing armed groups.
The representative of the Saudi regime pretended
to have forgotten to mention that the terrorism
prevailing throughout the world is nothing but the
result of the adoption by the ruling regime in the Bani
Saud kingdom of an extremist religious doctrine and its
promotion worldwide by supporting religious centres
on which it spends billions of dollars annually to
spread Wahhabism, a doctrine based on the rejection
of others, charging them with infidelity and condoning
their killing.
Since the onset of the terrorism war imposed on my
country, Syria, we have warned against the fact that the
terrorism affecting our country originates in certain
States of the Gulf area, particularly Saudi Arabia
and Qatar. Today, after more than six years of our
analysis, some are now saying that Qatar is a sponsor
of terrorism. I, in turn, say to the representative of the
Saudi regime that the day will inevitably come when
his country will be described as a key State sponsor
of terrorism, and the victims of terrorism in Syria and
the world will confront him and everyone who has
supported terrorism in Syria and the world and will
hold them accountable, wherever they are.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor to make
a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): It was unfortunate to
hear today certain States making statements that are
completely detached from reality. Instead of calming
tensions, some abuse this platform to fuel the flames by
making inflammatory and false accusations.
Let me be clear. Israel is committed to upholding
the status quo concerning the Temple Mount. Israel
safeguards the freedom of religion and the right to
worship of Muslims, Christians and Jews, as well as
members of all other religions, at the historical sites.
Allow me to refer to some of the false accusations
that were made here today by certain Member States.
I was surprised to hear the representative of
Lebanon refer to her country as a beacon of democracy
32/33

25/07/2017

and a champion of human rights. To the representative
of a Government in which a designated terrorist
organization, Hizbullah, holds several positions and
is considered a legitimate political party, I would
suggest a reality check. This is the same Hizbullah
that has been known to commit unspeakable atrocities
in Syria and is notorious for its destabilizing terrorist
activities throughout the Middle East. As for Lebanon
taking the floor to speak about human rights, I
would suggest reading the latest report on torture in
Lebanon by Lebanese authorities of Syrian nationals in
Lebanese custody.
The Iranian representative must have no shame to
be able to sit here today and speak in this Chamber as his
country continues to promote terrorism and destabilize
the Middle East. This is the representative of a regime
that is arming terrorist organizations across the region
and bolstering the murderous Al-Assad regime in Syria.
Iran does all this in violation of numerous Security
Council resolutions.
Iran is continuing to develop an offensive ballisticmissile programme in direct violation of resolution 2231
(2015), and, as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on that resolution (S/2017/515), Iran continues
to export illicit weapons to various terrorist groups and
conflict zones.
Iran even went as far as to launch a ballistic missile
at a very specific and intentional target, the Star of
David. This is a direct and unacceptable threat by one
Member State against another.
When it comes to the credibility of the Syrian
representative who spoke here earlier today, I am
certain that I do not need to remind any representative
now sitting in this Chamber that this is the same
representative who keeps on saying and continues
to claim that his Government is not using chemical
weapons against its own people, this despite all the
concrete evidence to the contrary.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of Saudi Arabia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): When I hear the Syrian representative speak, I
feel like laughing. He described us as the sons of Saud;
we are very proud to be sons of Saud, from the Saud
dynasty. He accused us of promoting Islam, which we
certainly do, but we do not use chemical weapons to
17-23042

25/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

kill our own children and citizens, as does the Syrian
regime. We do not terrorize our own people, as does the
Syrian regime.
Whenever I hear such accusations from the Syrian
representative, I feel like telling them that he is really
talking about himself, not us. What they are doing
is trying to meddle in Gulf country affairs and the

S/PV. 8011 (Resumption 1)

crises in that area. They want to take advantage of that
situation, but they should not interfere in these things.
If it were us, we would be ashamed. We would at least
try to avoid disgracing our own Government and killing
our children.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

17-2304233/33
