UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/3
30 January 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3736th meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 January 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the delay in the
formation of a Government of National Unity and Reconciliation (GNUR) as a
result of the failure of the União Nacional para a Independência Total de
Angola (UNITA) to meet the timetable established by the Joint Commission in
the context of the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex).
"The Security Council also notes with concern the slow pace of
implementation of the remaining military aspects of the peace process, in
particular, the demobilization and integration of UNITA soldiers into the
Angolan Armed Forces.
"The Security Council takes note of the conclusions of the meeting of
the Joint Commission on 23 January 1997, according to which the Government
of Angola and UNITA agreed to postpone the inauguration of the GNUR beyond
25 January 1997, UNITA agreed to ensure that all of its National Assembly
deputies and the members of the future GNUR designated by UNITA be in
Luanda on 12 February 1997, and the Government of Angola agreed to set a
date for the inauguration of the GNUR immediately following the arrival of
the UNITA deputies.
"The Security Council calls upon the parties to implement this
agreement strictly and to form the GNUR without any linkages and without
further delay. Failure to implement this agreement could jeopardize the
peace process and lead the Security Council to consider appropriate
measures, as indicated in relevant Security Council resolutions, against
those responsible for the delays.
"The Security Council emphasizes that the ultimate responsibility for
restoring peace rests with the Angolans themselves. The Council reminds
UNITA and the Government of Angola that the international community can
only provide assistance if progress is achieved in the peace process and

97-02898 (E)

300197

/...

S/PRST/1997/3
English
Page 2

that it will consider a United Nations presence in Angola after the
expiration of the UNAVEM III mandate in this context.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the three observer countries
for their efforts to assist the parties in Angola in advancing the peace
process.
"The Security Council will continue to monitor closely the
implementation of the Joint Commission agreement.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
