S/PRST/2008/41

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 October 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6009th meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 October 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist
suicide attacks that occurred in the towns of Hargeysa and Bosasso in Somalia
on 29 October 2008. These heinous attacks, which caused numerous deaths
and injuries and appear to have been coordinated, targeted the compound of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and an Ethiopian
Government office, as well as local government offices.
“The Security Council expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences
to the victims of these attacks and to their families, and to the people and
authorities of Somalia and Ethiopia. It notes with appreciation that some of the
victims are being treated at the French medical centre in Djibouti.
“The Security Council commends United Nations personnel for their
action on the ground in Somalia, in support of the Somali population.
“The Security Council underlines the need to bring the perpetrators,
organizers, financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism to
justice and urges all States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law and resolution 1373 (2001) and consistent with resolution
1624 (2005), to cooperate actively with the authorities of Somalia in this
regard.
“The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to international
peace and security, and that any acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed.
“The Security Council further reaffirms the need to combat by all means,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all
their obligations under international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

08-57831 (E) 301008

*0857831*

S/PRST/2008/41

“The Security Council reiterates its determination to combat all forms of
terrorism, in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations.”

2

08-57831
