~-ihi

Ij

UNITED NATIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
TWELFTH

770

,i
,I

'I'

RECORDS
YEAR

th MEETING: 18 FEBR UARY 1957
~me SEANCE: 18 FEVRIER 1957

DOUZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITi:
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/770). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January 1957 from the
Minister for Foreign Mfairs of Pakistan addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/376'"', S/3787) (continued).

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/nO). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question Inde-Pakistan: lettre, en date du 2 janvier 1957, adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par le Ministre des
affaires etrangeres du Pakistan (S/3767, S/3787) [suite] . . . .

1.

( 43 p. )
S/PV.770

.

~.....

~:'

~I

SEVEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTIETH MEETING
Held in New York, on Monday, 18 February 195'(, at 10.30 a.m.
SEPT CENT SOIXANTE-DIXIEME SEANCE
Tenue

a New-York, le lundi 18 fevrier 1957, a 10 h. 30.

President: Mr. Gunnar JARRING (Sweden).

Pr~sident: M. Gunnar JARRING (SuMe).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia, China, Colombia, Cuba, France, Iraq,
Philippines, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain ami Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Pr~sents: Les repr~8entants des pays suivants:
Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba, France, Irak,
Philippines, Su~dp., Union des R~publiques sociallstes
sovi~tiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'lrlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Am~rique.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/770)

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/770)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January
1957 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Pakiscan addressed to the P resident of the Security
Council.

2. Question Inde-Pakistan: lettre, en date du 2 janvier 1957, adress~e au Pr~sident du Conseil de
s~curit~ par le Ministre des affaires ~trang~res
du Pakistan.

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopM.

The agenda was adopted.
The India-Pakistan question: letter dated 2 January
1957 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/3767, S/3787) (continued)

Question Inde-Pakistan: lettre, en date du 2 Janvier
1957, adressee au President du Conseil de securite
par le Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Pakistan
(S/3767, 5/3787) [ suite]

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Arthur S. Lall,
representative of India, and Mr. Firoz Khan Noon,
representative of Pakistan, took places at the Council
table.

Sur l'invitation du Pr~sident, M. Arthur S. Lall,
l'lnde, et M. Firoz Khan Noon, repr~sentant du Pakistan, prennent place a. la table du
Conseil.
repr~sentant de

1. Mr. NOON (Pakistan): This morning I have to
answer two speeches of the representative of India, but
please do not be afraid that my statement will be
inordinately long. I shall try to be as brief as possible.

L

1. M. NOON (Pakistan) [traduit de l'anglais]: J'ai

a. r~pondre ce matin a. deux discours du repr~sentant
de 1'lnde, mais rassurez-vous, mon intervention ne
sera pas d'une longueur d~mesur~e. Je m'efforcerai
d'etre aussi bref que possible.

2. I am at a loss to decide where to begin my remarks
and where to end them. I have listened very carefully
to the representative of India. I do not know what the
members of the Security Council feel about it, but I
have had three lectures too many on the words "accession", "aggression" and "sovereignty". All these
matters, as the Council is well aware, have already
been considered and decided, and I fail to see why the
representative of India has dwelt constantly on these
three words. I can find no reason for it except this:
that probably he believes, as Hitler in "Mein Kampf"
that if one goes on repeating a thing a million times;
perhaps people will begin to believe in it. Otherwise,
the time of the Security Council has been completely
wasted by discussing these three words because such
discussion is quite irrelevant. Therefore, I do not wish
to waste any more of the Council's time in dwelling on
them.

2. Je ne sais pas trop par quoi commencer ni par
quoi conclure. J'ai ecoute le representant de l'lnde
avec beaucoup d'attention. Je ne sais pas ce que les
membres du Conseil de securite pensent de ses
declarations, mais, pour ma part, j'ai entendu trois
sermons de trop sur les mots "accession", "agression"
et "souverainete". Tous ces sujets, le Conseil ne
l'ignore pas, ont deja ete examines et tranches, et je
ne vois pas pourquoi le representant de 1'Inde insiste
constamment sur ces trois mots. La seule explication
possible, c'est qU'il pense probablement, comme
l'auteur de Mein Kampf, que si l'on rep~te une chose
un million de fois, les gens finiront peut-etre par y
croire. De toute fac;on, la discussion de ces trois mots
est tout a fait hors de propos, etle Conseil a completement perdu son temps. Je ne retarderai donc pas le
Conseil davantage en prolongeant cette discussion.

3. Mr. Krishna Menon picked out these three words
from the speeches, bu.t he has forgotten-although he

3. M. Krishna Menon a pris ces trois mots pour
tMmes de ses discours, mais s'il a prononc~ le mot
1

may have mentioned the word "plebiscite" once or
twice-that the draft resolution now before the Council
[S/3787] was presented mainly for the purpose of holding a plebiscite, and through all his speeches he has
never diverted either the Council's attention or his own
to the question of a plebiscite. Hehasalways talked of
irrelevant things and tried to establish confusion-with
all due respect to Mr. Krishna Menon-so that in that
confusion the question of a plebiscite might be forgotten.

"pMbiscite" une f(\is ou deux, il a oubli~ que le projet
de r~solution dont le Conseil est saisi [S/3787] a principalement pour objet l'organisation d'un pl~bisciteet,
tout au long de ses interventions, jamais il n'a port~
l'attention du Conseil ou la sienne sur la question du
pl~biscite. Soit dit avec tout le respect que je dois a.
M. Krishna Menon, il a constamment parl~ hors du
sujet et a cherch~ a. cr~er la confusion pour noyer la
question du pl~biscite.

4. I must reiterate at the very beginning that the
question which is beforE' the Security COW1cil is how to
implement the internadonal agreement that subsists
between India and Pakistan for deciding the question of
the accession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir to
India or to Pakistan. The Security Council and the
parties to this dispute agree that demilitarization of
the disputed area is an essential prerequisite to the
holding of the plebiscite. It has not so far been possible
to bring about demilitarization of the State in accordance with the terms of the international agreementfor
a plebiscite. It is, therefore, most essential that the
Security Council should devote its attention to the
problem of demilitarization in order that the agreed
objective of a free and impartial plebiscite may be
reached quickly. This is also the purpose of the present draft resolution.

4. Je dois repeter pour commencer que le present
debat a pour objet de determiner comment mettre en
ceuvre l'l,tccord international qui subsiste entre l'Inde
et le Pakistan concernant l'accession de l'Etat de
Jammu et Cachemire a l'Inde ou au Pakistan. "Le
Conseil de securite et les parties au differend s'accordent pour estimer que la demilitarisation de la
zone en litige est une condition prealable essentielle
a l'organisa;tion du plebiscite. Jusqu'ici, il a ete
impossible de demilitariser l'Etat conformement aux
termes de l'accord international qui prevoit l'organisation d'un plebiscite. Il est donc absolument
essentiel que le Conseil de securite se consacre au
probIeme de la demilitarisation, afin d'atteindre
rapidement l'objectif COnvent': un plebiscite libre
et impartial. C'est egalement le but du present pr-ojet
de resolution.

5. Before I proceed to make my submission about the
draft resolution which is under consideration, I must
say a few words with regard to some points that the
representative of India made in the course of his
address to the Security Council on 8 February 1957
[767th meeting]. My sole object in doing so is to keep
the record straight. I will limit myself to the main
points and will leave aside the rest. That does not
mean that we accept either the validity of the other
arguments used, or in any way subscribe to them. I
am leaVing them aside because in our view those
matters are completely irrelevant to the issue that is
engaging the attention of the Security Council. I think
that such matters as the so-called secularism of India
or the propaganda which is carried on in the vernacular
Press of India and Pakistan against each other, of who
in India or in Pakistan has suffered imprisonment, or
what Sheikh Abdullah does or does not want, or the
claim of India that, because Kashmir has prospered
under its control, Kashmiris should be denied the right
of self-determination, are all irrelevant to the issue
which is under consideration.

5. Avant de formuler mes observations surceprojet,
je commenterai bri~vement certains arguments que le
repr~sentant de l'Inde a avanc~s dans son intervention
du 8 f~vrier 1957 [767~me s~ance]. Mon seulobjet est
de r~tablir les faits. Je me bornerai a. l'essentiel et
laisserai le reste de cot~. Cela ne veut pas dire
que les autres arguments de M. Menon nous paraissent
fond~s ou que nous y souscrivions en aucunefa~on. Je
les laisse de cote parce qu'a notre avis 11s n'ont
absolument rien a. voir avec le probl~me qui occupe le
Conseil de s~curit~. Le pr~tendu lafcisme de 1'Inde, la
lutte de propagande menee dans lapresse vernaculaire
indienne et pakistanaise, les mesures d'emprisonnement prises de part et d'autre, les vceux du cheik
Abdullah, la tMse indienne selon laquelle ondevrait
refuser aux Cachemiriens le droit de disposer d'euxm@mes sous pr~texte que le Cachemire aprosp~r~ sous
le controle de l'Inde, tout cela est hors du sujet.

6. The statement of the representative of India seems
to imply that India accepted the resolution of the United
Nations Commission for India and Pakistan, dated 13
August 1948 [S/1100, para. 75], about a week after it
was presented, and accepted the second proposal of the
Commission, dated 11 December 1948 [S/1196, annex
3], on 23 December 1948. What happened actually was
that the Commission framed a resolution on 13 August
1948 and presented it to the parties. The Government
of India signified its acceptance of the resolution. The
Government of Pakistan also signified its acceptance
of the resolution, subject to certain conditions. The
Commission could not at that stage accept those conditions of the Government of Pakistan, chief amongst
which was that the resolution should specify the
conditions that would govern the final resolution of the

6. Le repr~sentant de 1'Inde voudrait laisser entendre
que son pays a accept~ la r~solutionde la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde etle Pakistan en date du
13 aout 1948 [S/l1 00, par. 75] environ une semaine
apr~s qu'elle eut ~te pr~sent~e, et ladeuxi~mepropo­
sition de la Commission, en date du 11 d~cembre
1948 [S/1196, annexe 3], le 23 d~cembre 1948. En fait,
la Commission a adopt~ une r~solution le 13 aoUt 1948
et l'a pr~sent~e aux int~ress~s. Le Gouvernement
indien a fait savoir qu'll acceptait cette r~solution. Le
Gouvernement pakistanais a egalement donn~ son assentiment, sous r~serve de certaines conditions. A
l'~poque, la Commission n'a pas pu accepter cesconditions, dont la principale ~tait que la r~solutiondevait
pr~ciser les modalit~s du r~glement final du diff~rend
par un plebiscite libre et impartial tenu sous les
2

dispute b
to be co
Nations.
and a t
back to G
to the Sec
7. After
negotiatio
Pakistan
to certain
were, as
Pakistan
Decembe
the resol
the two
accepted
certain a
to them
proposals
resolutio
5 Janua
8. The e
&. plebisc"

India on
Pakistan
stitutes 0
other. Th
be follow
by the pIe
together.
9. It is
Pakistan
for clarif'
the resol
create tr
delay. Th
try, for
resolutio
them, and
all.

10. The
accepted
basis of
Governme
mit that
these reSI
that were
represenu
were give
missiQn. ]
authority
in a cont
from what

11. For i
ment of In
there wou
of the "Az
correct,
and disar
opening a
terms of
the vario
qualificati
India, ind

projet

L prin-

:ite et,

I port~

:ion du
dois ~
ors du
Iyer la

resent
tre en
l'Inde
tat de
m. 'Le
s'acde la
ltielle
a ete
nt aux
ori5aument
:re au
lindre
libre
pJ:'ojet

lrojet,
que le
ention
jet est
tiel et
s dire
issent
on. Je
I n'ont
upe le
Ide, la
ulaire
,onnecheik
evrait
I'eux~ sous

:endre
ission
ate du
maine
Iropo1mbre
11 fait,
l1948
ement
In. Le
m asns. A
sconievait
erend
IS les

dispute by means of a free and impartial plebiscite
to be conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations. Thereupon, the negotiations for a cease-fire
and a truce fell through and the Commission went
back to Geneva and submitted its first report [S/1100]
to the Security Council

auspices des Nations Unies. Sur ce, les n6gociations
en vue d'une suspension d'armes et d'une treve
~chou~rent; la Commission retourna ~ Gen~ve etpr6senta son premier rapport [S/1100] au Consell de s~­
curit6.

7. After some time, th,e Commission again took up
negotiations with the representatives of India and
Pakistan and succeeded in securing their agreement
to certain proposals for a plebiscite. These proposals
were, as pointed out by the then Foreign Minister of
Pakistan in his letter to the Commission dated 25
December 1948 [S/1"196, annex 5], in amplification of
the resolution of 13 August. The proposals were put to
the two Governments on 11 December 1948 and were
accepted by the Governments of India and Pakistan afte r
certain assurances a.nd clarifications had been given
to them on 23 and 25 December respectively. These
proposals, after acceptance, were embodied in a
resolution by the Commission, which was adopted on
5 January 1949 [S/1196, para. 15].

7. Apr~s quelque temps, la Commission reprit les
n6gociations avec les repr6sentants de l'Inde et du
Pakistan et r6ussit cl obtenir leur accord sur certaines
propositions concernant le p16biscite. Comme le
Minist~re des affaires 6trang~res du Pakistan l'a
signaIe ~ 1'6poque dans une lettre du 25 d6cembre
1948 adressee cl la Commission [S/1196, annexe 5], ces
propositions 1taient destin6es cl comp16ter la r6solution du 13 aoUt. Elles ont ~te soumises, le 11 d6cembre 1948, aux Gouvernements de l'Inde et du
Pakistan, qui les ont accept6es les 23 et 25 d6cembre,
respectivement, apr~s avoir regu certaines assurances
et pi"~cisions. Une fois acceptees, ces propositions
ont 6t~ incorpor6es dans une r6solution, que la Commission a adoptee le 5 janvier 1949 [S/1196, par. 15].

8. The entire agreement for a cease-fire, a truce and

was thus accepted by the Government of
India on 23 D,ecember 1948 and by the Government of
Pakistan on 25 December 1948. The agreement constitutes one entity. Each part of it is linked up with the
other. There was to be a cease-fire first, which was to
be followed by a truce, which in turn was to be followed
by the plebiscite. The entire agreement stands or falls
together.

8. Ainsi, l'ensemble de l'accord relatif~unesuspen­
sion a'armes, :\ une treve et cl un pJ.6biscite a 616
accept~ le 23 d6cembre 1948 par le Gouvernement de
l'Inde et le 25 d6cembre 1948 par le Gouvernement du
Pakistan. Cet accord constitue un tout indivisible.
Toutes ses parties sont reliees entre elles. II devait
y avoir d'abord une suspension d'armes, puis une
treve, puis un plebiscite. L'accord tient ou s'ecroule
d'un seul bloc.

9. It is very significant to note here that whereas
Pakistan took a little time, a month or two, in asking
for clarifications and then accepting, along with India,
the resolution in toto, Mr. Krishna Menon tried to
create trouble because of this two or three months'
delay. Then we accepted. On the other hand, his country, for eight or nine years, having accepted those
resolutions, has not carried them out and has evaded
them, and that waste of time does not concern him at
all.

9. Il importe de noter que le Pakistan a eu besoin
de quelque temps - un mois ou deux - pour demander
des eclaircissements avant d'accepter, commel'Inde,
la r6solution dans son ensemble, et que M. Krishna
Menon a essay6 de cr~er des difficult~s :\ cause de ce
delai de deux ou trois mois. Mais nous avons finalement accept6. En revanche, II y a huitou neuf ans que
l'Inde, ayant souscrit ~ ces resolutions, ne les met pas
en reuvre et les elude; mais M. Krishna Menon ne se
soucie gu~re de cette perte de temps.

10. The Indian representative has said that India
acc epted the two resolutions of the Commission on the
basis of certain clarifications that were given to the
Government of India by the Commission. I begto submit that the Government of Pakistan also accepted
these resolutions on the basis of certain assurances
that were given to it by the Commission. The Indian
representative has mentioned only the assurances that
were given to the Government of India by the CommissiQn. I am afraid I have not been able to trace the
authority for all of these assurances. He has put them
in a context whic~ makes them completely different
from what they were intended to mean.

10. Le repr6sentant de l'Inde a declare que son pays
avait accepte les deux resolutions de la Commission
sur la base de certains eclaircissements que laCommission avait fournis auGouvernementindien.Jetiens
a rappeler que le Gouvernement pakistanais a egalement souse rit a ces resolutions sur la base de certaines
assurances que lui avait fournies la Commission. Le
repr6sentant de l'Inde a seulement mentionne les assurances que son gouvernement a re~ues de la Commission. Malheureusement, je n'ai pas pu remonter :\
la source de toutes ces assurances. M. Menon les a
plac6es dans un contexte qui fausse compl~tement les
intentions de leurs auteurs.

11. For instance, it has been claimed by the Government of India that the Commission had assured it that
there Would be large-scale disbanding and disarming
of the" Azad" Kashmir forces. We accept this as being
correct, but the point is, when will such disbanding
and disarming take place? I have clearly shown in my
opening address [761st meeting] that according to the
terms of the resolutions of the Commission as well as
the various assurances that were given to us and the
qualifications that were given to the Government of
India, indeed according to the Government of India's

11. Le Gouvernement indien a pr6tendu par exemple
que la Commission lui avait donn6 l'assurance qu'll
serait proc6de :\ la dissolution et au d6sarmement du
gros des forces du Cachemire "azad". Soit, mais il
s'agit de savoir quand cette dissolution et ce desarmement auront lieu. J'ai clairement montre dans ma
premi~re intervention [761eme s6ance] que, conform6ment aux resolutions de la Commission, aux diverses
assurances qui nous ont ete fournies, aux explications
donnees au Gouvernement indien, et, qui plus est, aux
declarations de ce gouvernementlui-meme, ladissolu-

&. plebiscite

.~--

3

~.
~-~.,

o"'n admission, the disbanding of "Azad" Kashmir
forces is to take place at the plebiscite stage.

tion des forces du Cachemire "azad" dolt avoir lieu au
stade du pl~biscite.

12. In his letter to the Commission dated 18 February
1949, the Sec retary-Gene ral of the Ministry of Exte mal
Affairs and Commonwealth Relations of the Government of India stated:

12. Dans une lettre du 18 f~vrier 1949 adress6e ~ la
Commission, le Secr6taire g6n6ral du. Minist~re des
affaires ext~rieures et des relations avec le Commonwealth de l'lnde ~crivait:

"The disarming of 'Azad' forces is really a matter
of chronology. First. there must be a cease-fire and,
after that, a truce, as envisaged in parts I and IT of
the Commission's resolution of 13 August 1948. After
that, the condition precedent to arrangements for the
holding of a plebiscite is the creation of conditions in
which Kashmir nationals can return to the area now
in the occup~tion of 'Azad' Kashmir forces. So far
as non-Muslims are concerned, such a movement
will not take place until large-scale disarming of
these forces has bee!"" carried out." 1/

"Le d~sarmement des forces "azad" est en fait une
question d'ordre chronologique. Il doit d'abord y
avoir une suspension d'armes, puis une treve, ainsi
qu'll est enVisage dans les premi~re et deuxi~m€
parties de la r~solution de la Commission en date du
13 aout 1948. Apr~s cela, la condition pr~alable a.
toutes mesures d'organisation d'un pl~biscite est
d'instaurer une situation qui permette aux ressortissants du Cachemire de retourner dans la r~gion
actuellement occup~e par les forces du Cachemire
"azad". En ce qui concerne les non-musulmans, ce
mouvement n'aura pas lieutantqu'onn'aurapaspro-c~d~ au d~sarmement des forces en question sur une
large echelle 1/."

13. Today, the Government of India says that such
disbanding is a prerequisite to the withdrawal of the
bulk of their forces from the State, always putting
meaning into sentences, which meaning is not there.

13. AUjourd'hui, le Gouvernement indien soutientque
la dissolution des forces "azad" est une condition
pr~alable au retrait du gros de ses fo:,ces de l'Etat,
continuant ainsi a. donner aux phrases un sens qu'elles
n'ont pas.

14. ! would like to mention only a few of the assurances given to us by the Commission: one, that no
officer, either civil or military, of the Government of
India or of the State Government will be allowed to
cross the cease-fire line or allowed to exercise any
authority in the "Azad" Kashmir area; two, that the
"Azad" Kashmir forces will not be disbanded or disarmed in the truce stage; three, that synchronization
of the withdrawal of the bulk of the Indian Army with
the withdrawal of the Pakistan Army will be arranged
by the Commission in consultation with the two High
Commands; four, that the Commission will be free to
hear the views of the- Government of Pakistan with
regard to the withdrawal of the bulk of the Indian
forces from the Indian side c,f the cease-fire line; five,
that the expression "the Plebiscite Administrator will
be formally appointed to office by the Government of
Jammu and Kashmir" does not mean that he will be an
employee of the Government of Jammu and KashmIr or
subject to its control; six, that by the expression "the
Plebiscite Administrator shall derive from the State
of Jammu and Kashmir the powers he considers necessary" is meant that the Plebiscite Administratcr will
be competent to exercise such powers as he considers
necessary for organizing and conducting the plebiscite
and for ensuring its freedom and impartiality, and he
shall be deemed to have derived those powers from the
authorities concerned. The organizing and conducting
of the plebiscite shall be the responsibility exclusively
of the Plebiscite Administrator. The Plebiscite Administrator could not derive his authority either from
India or from Pakistan since there was no accession
of the State to either one. Nor did the sovereignty of
the State vest in either India or Pakistan. Therefore
the imaginary fountainhead of the Plebiscite Administrator's authority was mentioned as the State of
Jammu and Kashmir, the dissolution of whose powers

14. J'aimerais simplement mentionner quelquesunes seulement des assurances que nous avons rec;ues
de la Commission: premi~rement,aucun fonctionnaire
au officier du Gouvernement de 1'Inde ou du Gouvernement de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire ne serait
autoris~ a. traverser la ligr.e de suspension d'armes
ni a. exercer une autoriM quelconque dans la zone du
Cachemire "azad"; deuxi~mement, les forces du
Cachemire "azaa lt ne seraient ni dissoutes ni d~­
sarm(!es au stade de la treve; troisi~mement, la
synchronisation du retrait du gros de I 'arm~e indienne
et du retrait de l'arm(!e pakistanaise serait arret~e
par la Commission, en consultation avec les deux
hauts-commandements; quatri~mement, la Commission serait libre d'entendre le point de vue du Gouvernement pakistanais en ce qui concerne le retrait
du gros des forces indiennes du c6t~ indien de la
ligne de suspension d'armes; cinqui~mement,les mots
"l'Administrateur du pMbiscite sera officiellement
nomm6 a. ses fonctions par le Gouvernement du Jammu
et Cachemire" ne signifiaientpas que l'Administrateur
serait un fonctionnaire du Gouvernement du Jammu et
C achemire ou qu'll rel~veraitde son autorit~; sixi~me­
ment, les mots "l'Administrateur du pl~biscite recevra
de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire les pouvoirs qu'il
juge n~cessaires" signifiaient que l'Administrateur
du pMbiscite serait habilite a. exercer les pouvoirs qu'il
jugerait necessaires pour organiser et mener a bien
le plebiscite, ainsi que pour entourer celui-ci de toutes
les garanties voulues d,' libert~ et d'impartialit~, et
qu'll serait cens~ avoir rec;u ces pouvoirs des autorit~s
int~ress~es. L'Administrateur du pl~biscite aurait
seul qualit~ pour organiser et mener a. bien le plebiscitEl. Il ne pourrait tenir son autoriM ni de l'lnde,
ni du Pakistan, car l'Etat n'a acced~ ni a. l'un ni a.
l'autre de ces pays. La souverainet~ de l'Etat n'appartiendrait ni a. l'Inde ni au Pakistan. Ainsi donc, la

11 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplement No. 7, document S/1430/Add.l, annex 7,
para. 3.

11 Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, quatrieme annee, Supplement special No 7, document S/1430/
Add.l, annexe 7, par. 3.
4

to the
The C
"Gove
conte

16. T
ment 0
the pr
sion.
terest
we do
as my
see th
and th

"P
final
and
with'

fire
agre
nece
vanc
obse

[S/l1
18.
cause
to allu
"Azad"
bers 0
of the

be allo
momen
forces
consid
observ~

~
.....

.::.:-r>

irlieu au

ss6e a. la

'

to the Plebiscite Administrator was thus presumed.
The Commission did not deliberately use the phrase
"Government of Jammu and Kashmir" stated in this
context.

source fictive de l'autorit~ de l'Administrateurdupl~­
biscite devait etre l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, qui
se dessaisira.it de ses pouvoirs a. cet effet. Ce n'est
pas a. dessein que la ComClission a employ~ l'expression "le Gouvernement du Jammu et Cachemire".

st~re des

~ommon-

15. These and other assurances which are not mentioned, are contained in the three reports of the 'Commission to the Security Council: document S/1100 dated
9 November 1948, document S/1196 dated 10 January
1949 and document S/1430 dated 9 December 1949.

mission au Conseil de s6curit6: documents S/l1 00 du 9
novembre 1948, S/1196 du 10 janvier 1949, et S/1430
du 9 d6'~embre 1949.

16. Thus it will be seen that it is not only the Government of India that was given assurances with regard to
the provisions of the two resolutions of the Commission. The Government of Pakistan was equally interested in the framing of these resolutions. Although
we do not claim to have as much ingenuity of thought
as my Indian colleague has, we also took some care to
see that our viewpoint was heard by the Commission
and the provision for it was made in the resolution.

16. Par cons6quent, le Gouvernement indien n'a pas
6t.; le seul a. recevoir des assurances en ce qUi concerne les dispositions des deux r6s01utions de la
Commission. Le Gouvernement pakistanais s'est6galement int6ress6 a. l'6laboration de ces textes. Nous
ne sommes peut-etre pas aussi ing6nieux que mon
collegue indien, mais nous avons fait en sorte, nous
ausGi, que notre point de vue soitentendupar la Commission et qu 'il en soit tenu compte dans la r6solution.

lltientque
condition
de l'Etat,
squ'elles

17. While dealing with the text of the resolution of 13
August 1948, the distinguished and ingenious representative of India has tried to import into one of its
clauses a meaning which it is utterly incapable of
bearing. I refer to part IT, section B, paragraph 2 of
the resolution. I will read it once agaiD:

17. Lorsqu'il a parle du texte de la resolution du
13 aoilt 1948, le distingu6 et ing6nieux repr~sentant
de 1'Inde a essay6 de donner a. une de ses dispositions
un sens qu'elle ne peut absolument pas avoir. Il s'agit
du paragraphe 2 de la section B de la deuxieme partie,
qui est ai'lsi conc;u:

Juelquesns rec;ues
tionnaire
ouvernene serait
I d'armes
a zone du
orces du
~s ni d~­
iment, la

"Pending the acceptance of the conditions for a
final settlement of the situation in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir, the Indian Governn:ent will maintain
within the lines existing at the moment of the ceasefire the minimum strength of its forces which in
agreement with the Commission are considered
necessary to assist local authorities in the observance of law and order. The Commission will have
observers stationed where it deems necessary."
[8/1100, para. 75.]

"En attendant que les conditions du reglement final
de la situation dans l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire
aient 6t~ accept6es, le Gouvernement l'Inde maintlendra, en dec;a des lignes existant au moment de la
suspension d'armes, les forces de son :u:m6e que,
d I accord avec la Commission, il considerera n6cessaires pour aider les autorit~s locales a. faire respecter l'ordre public. La Commission placera des
observateurs la 01.1 elle le jugera necessaire."
[S/1100, par. 75.]

18. The representative of India has argued that because the phrase "local authorities" is used, it is meant
to allude to the area which is under the control of the
"Azad" Kashmir Government. I would begofthemembers of the Security Council to mark the phraseology
of the clause which says the Indian Government will
be allowed to maintain within the lines existing at the
moment of the cease-fire the minimum strength of its
forces which in agreement with the Commission are
considered necessary to assist local authorities in the
observance of law and order.

18. Le repr~sentant de l'lnde a pr~tendu que, du fait
de l'emploi de l'expression "autorit6s locales", cette
disposition visait la zone qui est sous le contrOle du
Gouvernement du Cachemire "azad". J'appelle l'attention des membres du Conseil sur le passage qui dit
que le Gouvernementde Plnde maintiendra, endec;ades
lignes existant au moment de la suspension d'armes,
les forces de son arm~e que, d'accord avec la Commission, il considere:ra necessaires pour aider les
autorites locales a faire respecter Pordre public.

19. Now, you will want to know why the words "truce
lines" and not "truce line" are used. As a matter of
fact there are two of these lines, one is in the northern
area which runs from south to north-east, and the
other runs on the borders of the Punjab-our Punjabwhich runs from north-west to south-east. Therefore,
when the word "lines" is used it is two truce lines and
not one. Now, with regard to the word "authorities".
Mr. Krishna Menon took a great deal of trouble in
pointing out to you that the word "authorities" means
the authority on. the occupied Kashmir side, and the
authority on the "Azad" Kashmir side-and therefore
!he. word "authorities" is used [767th meeting, para.
... 24]. He tried to give us a talk on the English language
and the implication of this word. Well, Ido not pretend
to know the English language because it is a foreign
language to me; but I tried to look it up in the Oxford
dictionary. I found that since the year 1611 the words

19. .Vous remarquerez que dans cette disposition le
mot "lignes" est au pluriel. En effet, il existe deux
lignes, l'une dans la region septentrionale, allant du
sud au nord-est, etl'autre, alafrontiere du Pendjab notre Pendjab - allant du nord-ouest au sud-est. Par
cons~quent, la resolution parle de deux lignes et non
d'une seule. Je passe maintenant au mot "autorites".
M. Krishna Menon s'est donne beaucoup de mal pour
expliquer qu'il s'agit de deux "autorites": celle de la
partie occupee du Cachemire, et celle du Cachemire
"azad", d'ou l'emploi du pluriel [767eme seance,
par. 124]. Il a essaye de nous donner une lec;on
d'anglais a propos de ce mot. Je ne pretends evidemment pas connaitre l'anglais, qui est pour moi une
langue etrangere; j'ai cependant consulte l'Oxford
Dictionary. J'ai appris que, depuis 1611, le mot
"autorite" s'emploie au singulier au sens abstrait,
comme dans les expressions "autorite de la loi" ou

mfait une
l'abord y
lve, ainsi

jeuxi~me

m date du
~alable

a.

scite est
aux reslar~gion

achemire
.mans, ce
lpas pro..
msurune

~indienne

it arret~e
les deux
Commis~ du Goule retrait
lien de la
,les mots
iellement
juJammu
listrateur
Jammuet
sixi~me­

erecevra
oirs qU'il
listrateur
foirs qU'il
ler a bien
ldetoutes
tialit~, et
autorit~s

te aurait
en le pMde l'Inde,
ll'un ni a.
~tat n'ap:i done, la
urite, gualOt 8/1430/

15. Toutes ces assurances, et d'autresquejen'aipas
~num~r6es, figurent dans les trois rapports de la Com-

5

1

>

.,

~

··1

,. ,•.••..•.
,j"

I

'. ;-'

;'.j
I

1

!
. ;'1

I

. -....•...
. :c~ ....

JIII',""

"authority" and "authorities" are used in the following
sense. When the word is used in the abstract sense,
the "authority" of law or "authority" of government, it
is singular- "authority". When it is used in the concrete sense, that is: the municipal "authorities" then it
is used in the plural, not in the singular. The:.'efore,
when it is used here, "authorities", it is used in the
concrete sense which means "authorities" on the Indian
side of the cease-fire line and "authority" on our side
of the cease-fire line. Therefore the meaning that Mr.
Krishna Menon tried to put into the word "authorities"
is not what the English language means.

"autorit~ du gouvernement", et au pluriel au sens
concret, comme lorsqu'il s'agit d'"autorit~s municipales". Par cons~quent, dans le cas actuel, le met
est employ~ au sens r.oncret et signifie "autorites"
du cote indien de la ligne de suspension d'armes et
"autorit~" de notre cot~ de cette ligne. Ainsi, le sens
que M. Krishna Menon a essay~ de donner au mot
"autorit~s" n'est pas celui que lui donne la langue
anglaise.

20. English is a very difficult language, even the
English themselves probably do not understand it, and
we in the East are particularly in a very difficult situation. So you see, for uS to come and lecture you
people here who know the English language much
better than we do, I will not say it is presumptuous,
but it is very daring.

20. L'anglais est une langue trt:!s difficile, que les
Anglais eux-memes ne connaissent peut-etre pas
parfaitement; II c.Jt ~gard, les Orientaux, plus particuli~rement, se trouvent dans une situa.tion tr~6 d~li­
cate. 11 est par cons6quent, sinon pr~somptueux,
du moins tr~s risqu~ de notre part de venir vous
donner, a vous qui connaissez l'anglais bien mieux que
nous, des le<;ons en cette mati~re.

21. The cease-fire lines were established on 27 July
1949. The Government of India can maintaIn within the
lines existing at the moment of the cease-fire a certain
number of its forces. Could it be claimed that the
Government of India is authorized by this clause to
cross the cease-fire line and post its forces in "Azad"
Kashmir territory? No further proof is required for
rebutting this novel piece of reasoning. If, however,
any further proof of the true im.port of the clause is
required, I would respectfully draw the attention of the
Security Council as well as of my distinguished colleague from India, to the Commission's summary
report, dated 21 August 1948, of a meeting held between
the United Nations Commission and the Government of
India headed by the illustrious Prime Minister oflndia
in person to discuss the Commission's resolution of
13 August 1948 in New Delhi at 3 p.m. on 17 August
1948. This forms part of the firstinterim report of the
Commission to the Security Council [S/1100, annex 12].

21. Les lignes de suspension d'armes ont I1t~ ~tablies
le 27 juillet 1949. Le Gouvernement indien peut
maintenir certaines forces en de<;1I. des lignes existant
au moment de la suspension d'armes. Peut-on dire
que cette clause autorise le Gouvernement indien a.
franchir la ligne et 11. disposer ses forces dans le
territoire du Cachemire "azad"? 11 est inutile de
chercher 11. r~futer cet argument singulier, mals je
pourrais au besoin attirer respectueusement l'attention du Consail et celle de mon coll~gue de 1'Inde sur
le compte rendu analytique en date du 21 aout 1948,
~tabli par la Commission, d'une r~union organis~e
entre des membres de la Commission et des repr~..
sentants du Gouvernement indien, dont J.'illustre Premier Ministre de 1'Inde en personne, afin de discuter h
r~solution de la Commission en date du 13 aofit 1948;
la r~union s'est tenue II New-Delhi le 17 aoilt 194811
15 hem·es. La Commission a fait figurer ce compte
rendu dans son premier rapport provi30ire au Conseil
de s~curit~ [S/1100, annexe 12].

22. I shall now read out to the Council extracts Lrom
this very interesting document which show what the
Commission thought about the proposal of the Government of India to post forces on the "Azad" Kashmir
side of the cease-fire line. (The Commission's view
was apparently accepted by the Government of India, as
no further mention of this demand appears in either the
letter dated 20 August 1948 [S/1100, para. 78], or the
letter dated 23 December 1948 [S/1196, annex4], from
the Government of India to the Commission, or in any
one of the two aides m~moires which formed appendices
to the letter of 23 December.)

22. Je vais donner ledurp de quelques passages de
ce document tr~s intllressant, qui montrent ce que la
Commission pensait de la proposition du Gouvernement
indien tendant 11. disposer des troupes au-dea de la
ligne de suspension d'armes, sur le territoire du
Cachemire "azad". (11 faut croire que le Gouvernement
indien s'est rang~ au point de vue de la Commission,
puisqu'il n'a r~it~r~ sa demande ni dans ses lettres du
20 aout 1948 [S/1100 , par. 78] et du 23 d~cembre
1948 [S/1196, annexe 4], adress~es ilIa Commission,
ni dans les deux aide-m~moire annex~s a la lettre du
23 d~cembre.)
"M. Korbel [TcMcosIovaquie] r~pond que la Commission comprend parfaitement le souci de s~curi~
du Gouvernement de l'Inde mals, en toute franchise,
il doit dire au Premier Ministre de l'lnde que le
Gouvernement du Pakistan redoute, lui aussi, une
invasion de la part des forces de I'lnde. La Commission, dit-il, ne peut donner de garantie ni 11. l'un
ni a l'autre pays en mati~re de securit~; ma.is le
document sur lequel porte la pr~sente discussion
constitue un premier pas dans ce sens. Si la Commission r~ussit 11. obtenir le retrait des troupes du
Pakistan, alle aura, aussi longtemps qu'elle s~-

"Mr. Korbel [Czechoslovakia] replied that the
Commission fully recognized the concern of the
Government of India for security, but that in all
frankness he had to tell the Prime Minister that the
Government of Pakistan was equally fearful of invasion by the Indian forces, The Commission, he
said, could not assure either country on this question
of security. The present document, he said, was a
first step in that direction. If the Commission could
succeed in obtaining the withdrawal of Pakistan
troops, it would have the obligation, while on the subcontinent, of watching over Pakistan. Once the Kash6

m
th

sh
er
ur

si
Go
st
mi
th

se
he
th

be
P
the

Go
tw

"

of
Ira
co
re

[Si
23.
ment
fear
cuat

"

ter

Pal

Co
int
co
to
off'
or
ad

24.
withd
tion 1
in m)
wise.
of thE
wihh

thep
clear
the (
cor re
ment
Arm
the I

istan
the
theb

~/ n

y

~
'<.'--

rie1 au sens
)riMs mu nictuel, le met
"auto rites"
n d'armes et
insi, le sens
Inner au mot
ne la langue

cUe, que les
eut-etre pas
~, plus partion trlls d~li­

r~somptueux,

le venir vous

len roieux que

1t ~t~ etablies
indien peut
gnes existant
Peut-on dire
lent indien a.
,rces dans le
st inutile de
ier, mals je
ment l'attende 1'Inde sur
21 aoiit 1948,
)n organis~e
!t des repr~··
lllustre Prele discuter h
[3 aoilt 1948;
1 aoilt 1948 a
~r ce compte
re au Conseil
passages de
ent ce que la
ouvernement
,u-deJa. de la
:erritolre du
Duvernement
~ommission,

es lettres du
23 decembre
~ommission,

l la lettre du

que laComi de s~curiM
te francWse,
['Inde que le
i aussi, une
:le. La Comtltie ni a. l'un
rite; mais le
e discussion
. Si la Coms troupes du
qu'elle s~·

.'~'

mir problem had been satisfactorily settled, it would
then be the duty and right of the Government of India,
should the State finally be placed under the sovereignty of that country, to take all necessary measures for the security of that area.

journera dans le sous-continent indien, I'obligation
de veiller sur le Pakistan. La questiondeCachemire
une fois resolue de fa<;on satisfaisante, ce sera a la
fois le devoir et le droit du Gouvernementde l'lnde,
au cas oil, en fin de compte, le Cachemire seralt
plac~ sous sa souverainet~, de prend:.e toutes les
mesures n~cessaires pour garantir la s~curite de
cette r~gion.

"The Prime Minister reiterated his fears of possible infiltration with or without the knowledge of the
Government of Pakistan and mentioned that the
strategic points previously enumerated to the Commission which the Government of India considered
that its forces must hold in oraer to ensure the
security of Kashmir. Mentioning Domel in particular,
he rE;marked that, if Government of Indiaforces held
that point, a natural boundary between the two would
be established along the line of the river, and that
Pakistan would, in no sense, be threatened thr<Jugh
the occupation of that point by the forces of the
Government of India inasmuch as Pakistan was from
twenty-two to twenty-six miles distant.

"Le Premier Ministre r~pMe qu'il craint l'infiltration d'~l~ments hostiles, au su ou a. l'insu du
Gouvernement du Pakistan, et il rappelle ~ la Commission les points strat~giquesque le Gouvernement
de l'lnde, dans des communications ant~rieures, a
d~clar~ devoir etre occup~s par ses troupes, afin de
garantir la s~curit~ du Cachemire. Enparticulier, il
cite le nom de Domel, en faisant observer que, si
les troupes de I'lnde occupent ce point, la rivi~re
constituera une s~paration naturellE: entre les deux
arm~es et que l'occupation de ce point par les troupes
de 1'Inde ne saurait rnena~~r le Pakistan dont la
fronti~re se trouve ~t quelque 40 kiloill~tres de la.

"Mr. Korbel commented that such a readjustment
of the front line went beyond the cease-fire and said
frankly that the Commission, after giving careful
consideration to the Indian point af view in that
respect, had not been able to accept the view."
[S/1100, annex 12, pp. 103 and 104.J

"M. Korbel fait observer qu'une telle rectification
du front irait bien au-deIa. de la suspension d'armes
et d~clare franchement que la Commission, apr~s
avoir soigneusement ~tudi~ le point de vue du Gouvernement de l'Inde a. ce sujet, n'a pas pu s'y
rallier." [S/1100, annexe 12, p. 103 et 104.]

23. And here is a perfectly clear and specific statement by the Commission with regard to the state of
fear that will prevail in the area which will be evacuated by the Pakistan Army:

23, Et voici une d~claration clatre et'pr~cise de la
Commissio:; au sujet des craintes que l'on aura dans
la region lorsque l'arm~e paklstanaise l'aura ~vacu~e:

"Part Ill, section G [of the document entitled" Truce
terms transmitted to the Governments of I.'·iia and
Pakistan by the Commission" Y], recognizes that the
Commission cannot prejudge the sovereignty and
integrity of the State as a whole. It should not be
construed as envisaging the introduction into the area
to be evacuated by Pakistan troops of civil or military
officials of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir
or of the Government of India fOl' the purpose of
administration or control. " Y

"Dans la section G de la troisi~mepartie [du document intitule "Conditions de treve communiquees par
la Commission au Gouvernement de l'lnde et au
Gouvernement du Pakistan"Y], la Commission reconnait qu'elle ne peut pr~juger la souverainete
et I'int~griM territoriale de l'Etat dans son ensemble. 11 ne faudrait pas interpr~ter cette clause
comme signifiant que 1'0n envisage d'envoyer, dans
la region que les troupes du Pakistan doivent evacuer,
du personnel civil ou militaire du Gouvernement de
l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire ou du Gouvernement
de 1'Inde aux fins d'administration oUdecontr61e~" .

24. The representative of India has asserted that the
withdrawal of troops as contemplatod in this resolution was unconditional. The facts, however, as I showed
in my opening speech [761st meeting], are quite otherwise. The Commission assured us that the withdrawal
of the Pakistan Army would be synchronized with the
wihhdrawal of the bulk of the Indian Army. Besides,
the phraseology of the 13 August 1948 resolution itself
clearly shoVJ8d that a certain action has to be taken by
the Government of Pakistan on its side, while the
corresponding action has to be taken by the Government of India on its side. It is not that the Pakistan
Army would withdraw and then nothing would happen on
the Indian side of the cease-fire line. When the Pakistan Army is beginning to withdraw from the State,
the Government of India is equally bound to withdraw
the bulk of its forces from that State.

24. Le repr~sentant de l'lnde a affirm~ que le retrait des troupes pr~vu par cette r~solution devait
etre incond.itionnel. Comme je l'ai montr~ dans mon
discours d'ouverture [761~me s~ance], il n'en est pas
ainsL La Commission nous a assur~ que le retrait
de l' armee pakistanaise serait synchronise avec le
retrait du gros de l'arm~e indienne. En outre, les
termes de la r~solution du 13 aoiit 1948 montrent
clairement que le Gouvernement pakistanais doit prendre certaines mesures tandis que, de son caM, le
Gouvernement indien prendra des mesures correspondantes. 11 ne s'agit pas de retirer l'armee pakistanaise alors qu'on ne fait rien du cote indien de la
ligne de suspension d'armes. Lorsque l'arm~e pakistanaise commencera a. ~vacuer 1'Etat, le Gouvernement
de l'Inde sera tenu hit aussi de retirer le gros de
ses fon~es.

~I !Illi!.., annex 21.

5:./ Ibid., annexe 21.

Y Ibid., annexe 23, par. 4, alinea g.

y !Illi!.., Jnnex 23, para. 4, (g).
7

1125. Then it has been alleged that the Government of
Pakistan has incorporated certain areas of the Kashmir
State into Pakistan. I wish to state categorically that
this is entirely incorrect. I would quote to the Security
Council article 203 of the Constitution of Pakistan which
reads as follows:

25. On a pr~tendu ensuite que le Gouvernement
pakistanais avait annex~ certaines zones de l'Etat du
Cachemire. Je tiens ~ d~clarer cat~goriquementque
cette affirmation est absolument inexacte. Je citerai
~ cet ~gard l'article 203 de la Constitution du Pakistan, qui est ainsi congu:

"When the people of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir decide to accede to Pakistan, the relationship between Pakistan and the said State shall be
determined in accordance with the wishes of the
people of that State."

"Lorsque la population de l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire aura d~cid~ d'acc~der au Pakistan, les
relations entre le Pakistan et ledit Etat seront
d~termin~es conform~mentaux vreux de la population
de cet Etat."

26. With the existence of this definite provision in our
Constitution, when Mr. Krishna Menon made the
remark in my presence that Pakistan had incorporated
the Kashmir State already, I was quite a little surprised. What does this show? Does it show that we have
incorporated certain areas of the State into Pakistan,
or that the relationship of Jammu and Kashmir with
Pakistan can be determined only after the question of
the accession has been solved?

26. Etant donne cette disposition formelll; de notre
Constitution, j'ai ete tres surpris d'entendre M.
Krishna Menon affirmer en ma presence que le Pakistan avait deja annexe le Cachemire. Les faits permettent-ils de conclure que nous avons annexe certaines
zones de l'Etat, ou bien que les relations entre l'Etat
de Jammu et Cachemire et le Pakistan ne seront
determinees que lorsque la question de 1'accession
aura ete reglee?

27. In this connexion I would like to mention the case
of Chitral Once again. The Indian representative has
stated that Chitral is part of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir. We deny it. I do not propose to go into the
history of Chitral in order to prove that it was a State
which acceded to us lawfully, because the question of
Chitral is not before the Security Council. But if Mr.
Krishna Menon claims that Chitral is part of Kashmir,
would he be willing to count the votes of the people of
Chitral in a plebiscite for the determination of the
question of accession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir to India or Pakistan? If that were the case I am
sure he would speak for another four hours here as to
why those votes should nut be counted On the Pakistan
side.

27. A cet ~gard, je voudrais rappeler une fois de plus
le cas du Chitral. Le repr~sentant de l'Inde a d~clar~
que le Chitral faisait partie de l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire. Nous ne sommes pas de cet avis. Je ne me
propose pas de faire l'historique de la question du
Chitral pour prouver que cet Etat a acc~d~ Mgitimement au Pakistan, parce que cette question n'est
pas inscrite ~ l'ordre du jour du Conseil de s~curit~.
Si toutefois M. Menon pr~tend que le Chitral fait
partie du Cachemire, est-il pret ~ comprendre les
voix de la population du Chitral dans le pl~biscite qui
doit d~cider de l'accession de l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire ~ l'Inde ou au Pakistan? Si tel ~tait le
cas, je suis persuad~ qu'il parlerait encore pendant
quatre heures pour essayer de d~montrer pourquoi 11
ne fait pas compter ces voix en faveur du Pakistan.

28. Allied to this is another matter which I may deal
with before passing on to other points. I am amazed
that the representative of India should accuse us of not
allowing elections to be held in "Azad" Kashmir.
Although we have had elections in all the provinces of
Pakistan on an adult franchise basis, why have no
elections been held in "Azad" Kashmir? The reason is
not far to seek. We have scrupulously refrained from
interfering with the administration of" Azad" Kashmir;
it is the responsibility of the local authorities. If they
want to hold elections they are at liberty to do so, but
that is a question they have to decide. In adopting this
attitude I claim that we have upheld the directive of the
Security Council contained in the resolution of 17
January 1948 "to refrain from ... doing or causing to
be done or permitting any acts which might aggravate the situation".1I It is unfortunate that the very
fact of compliance with the directions of the Security
Council is being pleaded against us before that very
body.

28. A ce propos, il est une autre question dont je
voudrais traiter avant d'aller plus loin. Je suis stup~­
fait d'entendre le repr~sentant de l'Inde nous accuser
de ne pas autoriser d'~lections dans le Cachemire
"azad". Des ~lections ont eu lieu dans toutes les
provinces du Pakistan sur la base du suffrage universel des adultes; on peut done se demander pourquoi
il n'en a pas ~t~ de meme au Cachemire "azad". La
raison en est simple: nous nous sommes scrupuleusement abstenus d'intervenir dans l'administration du
Cachemire "azad", qUi est assur~e par les autorit~s
locales. Si ces autorit~s veulent organiser des elections, elles sont libres de le faire, mais c'est a elles
de d~cider. En adoptant cette attitude, j'afiirme que
nous avon::: respect~ la r~solution du 17 janvier 1948,
clans Iaquelle le Conseil de s~curit~ faisait appel
aux Gouvernements de l'Inde et du Pakistan pour que
chacun d'eux "s'abstienne... d'accomplir, deprovoquer
ou de permettre aucun acte susceptible d'aggraver la
situation n 1/. 11 est regrettable que l' on invoque contre
nous, au Conseil de securite, le fait meme que nous
ayons suivi ses directives.

29. I think it would be interesting to point out to the
Council that Mr. Krishna Menon of course claims the
credit that whe reas the re have been no elections on the
"Azad" Kashmir side, there iiave been elections on the

29. Bien entendu, M. Menon tire vanite du fait que,
s'il n'y a pas eu d'elections au Cachemire "azad", 11
y en a eu dans le Cachemire occupe. Toutefois, il
interessera les membres du Conseil de savoir que dans

1/ Official Records of the General Assembly, Third Session,
Supplement No. 2, chap. 5, sect. C.

1/ Documents officiels de I'Assemblee generale, troisieme
session, Supplement No 2, chap. 5, sect. C.
8

occupied Kashmi
to notice that i
vote was cast.
under this dicta
were returned u
Menon was pIe
strange election
yet India tries
elections have b
30. Mr. Krishn
to the electoral
bidden to appe
is clear that it
election if eccl
fiats were issue
ular candidate
Krishna Menon
for the fact that
religious interf
lions are free.
to admit that thi
year 1920 and n
and that the law
of the people i
Pakistan also, Vi
freedom of elec
from the Britis
for something
come before a
generous was r
31. It would b
plebiscite to d
l;nguistic, econ
ties, affinities a
choice. So long
lessness or to
conside rations
legitimate.
32. I think that
him for his kno
to differentiate
word "plebiscit
of a Governmen
arguments ar~
wherever it is
differences or c
linguistic or otl
biscite it is quit
electorate fo~ th
to accede to one
election, it is
Mr. Krishna M
views personall
soon recover.
with the questi
election, and we
that he advance
iste r of India hi
telegram of 22
Pakistan when h
Government of
utter violation 0
agreed and eff
Prime Minister

1t

tu
le
at

et
!S

1t

m
:e
1.
;-

.!S

at
I1t

m
IS
.~

et
le

tu
l-

st

t
it
IS

l1i

et
le

I1t

il

11.

je

!-

occupied Kashmir side. But I think you will be pleased
to notice that in that so-called election not a single
vote was cast. All the seventy-five members put up
under this dictatorial order of the Indian Government
were returned unopposed and that is what Mr. Krishna
Menon was pleased to call an election. It is a very
strange election in which not a single vote is cast and
yet India tries to spread it about in the world that
elections have been held in the occupied Kashmir side.

ces pretendues elections aucun vote n'a ete emis. Les
75 candidats imposes sous le regime dictatorial du

Gouvernement indien ont tous ete elus sans opposition;
c'est cela que M. Krishna Menon a bien voulu appeler
des elections. Etranges elections en verite que celles
ou il n'est depose aucun vote; l'lnde essaie cependant
de les presenter au monde comme une consultation
populaire dans le Cachemire occupe.

30. Mr. Krishna Menon has pointed out that according
to the electoral laws of his country people are forbidden to appeal to religion when asking for votes. It
is clear that it might interfere with the freedom of an
election if ecclesiastical condemnation and religious
fiats were issued threatening with damnationaparticular candidate or those who might support him. Mr.
Krishna Menon on this occasion tried to take credit
for the fact that in his country there is a law by which
religious interference is not permitted and the elections are free. But I think it is ungenerous of him not
to admit that this law was framed by the British in the
year 1920 and not by the present Congress Government
and that the law was framed not only for the Indian side
of the people in India but that the same law exists in
Pakistan also, where similar rules exist regarding the
freedom of elections; and we both inherited that law
from the British. Therefore, for him to claim credit
for something which was done by the British and then
come before an international body and try to be so
generous was rather surprising to me.

30. M. Menon a signale que la loi electorale de son
pays interdit d'invoquer des arguments religieuxdans
une campagne electorale. 11 est evident que la liberte
des elections pourrait etre entravee si l'on menagait
de damnation OU d'autres censures ecclesiastiques un
candidat ou ses partisans. A cette occasion, M. Menon
s'est enorg1.leilli du fait qu'il existe dans Son pays une
loi interdisant toute ingerence religieuse et assurant
la liberte des ~lections. Je pense cependant qu'il a
manque de generosite en oubliant de dire que la loi
en question a ete promulguee par l'administration
britannique en 1920 et non par l'actuel gouvernement
indien, qu'elle n'a pas ete faite pour les seuls Indiens
et qu'elle existe egalement au Pakistan, ou des
dispositions analogues regissent la liberte des elections; nos deux pays tiennent cette loi de l'autorite
britannique. C'est pourquoi j'ai ete surpris de voir
M. Menon s'attribuer le merite d'une mesure prise
par les Britanniques et essayer ensuite de se montrer
genereux devant UI1 organe international.

31. It would be perfectly legitimate in the case of a
plebiscite to draw attention ~o religious, cultural,
linguistic, economic, geographic, strategic and other
ties, affinities and considerations that might sway the
choice. So long as nothing has been done to incite lawlessness or to exercise coercion, the exercise of all
considerations that might affect the choice would be
legitimate.

31. Dans le cas d'un plebiscite, il serait tout a fait
legitime d'attirer l'attention sur des liens, affinites et
considerations religieux, culturels, linguistiques, economiques, geographiques, strategiques et autres, qui
peuvent influencer le choix. Tant que l' on ne cherchera
pas a provoquer des desordres ou a exercer une
pression sur les electeurs, il sera Higitime de faire
appel a toutes les considerations qui peuvent influencer
le choix.

32. I think that Mr. Krishna Menon-and I bow before
him for his knowledge of the English language-forgot
to differentiate between the word "election" and the
word "plebiscite". Whereas in an election it is the duty
of a Government to see that it is free and no religious
arguments ar~ brought in, in the matter of a plebiscite,
wherever it is held, it is held because of religious
differences or of ethnic differences or of geographic,
linguistic or other differences. Therefore in a plebiscite it is quite legitimate for people to appeal to the
electorate fo:::' these reasons before they decide whether
to accede to one side or the other. In the matter' of an
election, it is quite different. I am very sorry that
Mr. Krishna Menon is not here today to listen to my
views personally and that he is not well. 1 hope he will
Soon recover. We must realize that we a~'e now dealing
with the question of a plebiscite and not an ordinary
election, and we must not be confused by the arguments
that he advances on this point. In fact, the Prime Minister of India himself emphasized this principle in the
telegram of 22 September 1947 to the Government of
Pakistan when he characterized the acceptance by that
Government of the accession of Junagadh as being "in
utter violation of the principles oh which partition was
agreed and effected". These were the words of the
Prime Minister, Mr. Nehru: that Pakistan's action in

32. Je rends hommage aM. Krishna Menon pour sa
connaissance de l'anglais, mais je crois qu'il aoublie
d'etablir une distinction entre les mots "election" et
"plebiscite". Alors que dans une election le gouvernement a le devoir d'assurer la liberte et d' exclure
tout argument religieux, les plebiscites sont toujours
organises en raison de differences religieuses, ethniques, geographiques, linguistiques ou autres. C'est
pourquoi, dans un plebiscite, il est parfaitement
legitime de faire valoir ces considerations aupres
des electeurs avant qu'ils ne se prononcent sur l'accession. Il ~n va tout autrement lorsqu'il s'agit
d'elections. Je regrette vivement que M. Krishna
Menon soit souffrant et ne puisse m' entendre
aujourd'hui. J' espere qu'il sera bient6t retabli. Nous
de~ons comprendre qu'il s'agit actuellement d'un
plebiscite et non d'une simple election, et nous ne
devons pas nous laisser induire en erreur par les
arguments de M. Menon. En fait, le PremierMinistre
de l'lnde lui-meme a souligne ce principe dans un
UHegramme qu'il a adresse le 22 septembre 1947 au
Gouvernement pakistanais; il y declarait qu'en acceptant l'accession du Junagadh mon gouvernement
"violait tous les principes sur la base desquels le
partage avait ete decide et effectue". C' est donc le
Premier Ministre, M. Nehru, qui a ditqu'enacceptant

!r

re

!S

r-

oi

~-

iu

~s

~-

~s

le

8,
el

1e

er
la

re

1S

e,
il
il

1S

ne

9

-

accepting the accession of Junagadh was against all
the accepted principles on which India and Pakistan
were agreed. But he forgets all those arguments when
he applies the facts to the Kashmir case-thatis to F<l.y,
the principle of separating contiguous Muslim maj ority
areas from non-Muslim majority areas and constituting them respectively into the sovereign States of
India and Pakistan.

l'accession du Junagadh le Pakistan allaitcll'encontre
de tous les principes sur lesquels l'Inde et le Pakistan
s'~taientm\sd'accord.Mais, dansle casduCachemire,
il oublie tous ces principes - tels que la s~paration
des zones a majorit~ musulmane et des zones cl
majorite non musulmane, et leur constitution en deux
Etats souverains: l'Inde et le Pakistan.

33. The word "Junagadh" has reminded me of the fact
that in both of my speeches I emphasized the case of
Junagadh, which is still on the file of the Security
Council and which India has forcibly annexed; and the
State of Hyderabad, which was also annexed by invasion. Not a single word has Mr. KrishnaMenon said
in his speech in defence of the action of his country in
invading and annexing these two States.

33. Le mot "Junagadh" me rappelle que, dans mes
deux interventions, j'ai insiste sur cette affaire, dont
le Conseil est toujours saisi. L'Inde a annexe le
Junagadh par la force; elle a egalement envahi et
annex~ l'Etat d'HaE!erabad. Mais M. Krishna Menon
n'a rien dit pour justifier l'invasion etl'annexionde ces
deux Etats par son pays.

34. The representative of India persists in referring
to the question of the so-called accession of the State
of Jammu and Kashmir to India. I will simply state
that this mattE.r has been disposed of. No party to the
dispute can now claim that Kashmir has acceded to it
so long as the international agreement subsists, and
there is nothing that the party can do to break that
agreement unilaterally. The question of the accession
of the State of Jammu and Kashmir to India or to
Pakistan must be decided by the democratic method of
a free and impartial plebiscite.

34. Le representant de l'Inde s'obstine cl parlerdela
pretendue accession de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire
cl l'Inde. Je me bornerai a declarer que cette question
a ete regl~e. Tant que l'accord international reste en
vigueur, aucune partie au differend ne peut pretendl'e
que le Cachemire a ete rattacM.cl son territoire, et il
est impossible de denoncer l'accord unilateralement.
La question de l'accession de l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire cl l'Inde ou au Pakistandoitetre reglee par
la methode d~mocratique d'un plebiscite libre et
impartial.

35. There are other matters in the speech of the
representative of India which are important. But! will
pass over them to save the time of the Security Council, especially as these points have been made in this
forum ad nauseum, and replies to each one o(them are
already on the record of the Security Council.

35. Dans son discours, le representant de l'Inde a
souleve dlautres questions importantes; mais je les
laisserai de cote, pour ne pas retarder le Conseil,
d'autant plus qu'elles ont ete longuement traitees et
que les reponses sont deja consignees dans les documents du Conseil.

36. There is only one point out of these which I would
submit to the Security Council. In trying to impress on
the Council the importance of the Commission's resolution ef 13 August 19~8, the representative of India
said quite a .lot about the comings and goings and the
palavers and conferences that preceded the framing of
tht:l resolution and its acceptance by the parties. He
said that the resolution was a very carefully drafted
document. Immediately thereafter, he ran into some
difficulties with regard to the meaning of the resolution
of 5 January 1949, especially paragraph 4. which dealt
with the question of the demilitarization ofthe State in
the plebiscite stage. Speaking about the paragraph, the
representative of India said:

36. Je ne m'arr8terai que sur une seuledeces questions. En essayant de faire ressortir l'importance de
la resolution de la Commission en date du 13 aoUt
1948, le representant de l'Inde a longuementparle des
entrevues, pourparlers et conferences qui on:precede
11 ~laboration de ce texte et son approbation par les
parties interessees. il a fait observer que la resolution avait Me r~dig~e avec grand soin. Imm~diatement
apres, il s'est heurt~ cl certaines difficult~s en ce qui
concerne le sens de la r~solution du 5 janvier 1949,
notamment au paragraphe 4, relatif cl la d~militari­
sation de l'Etat au stade du plebiscite, Voici ce qu'll
a dit au sujet de ce paragraphe:

"As members of the Council know, the word 'disposal' has been used with regard to the Government
of India forces in the sense of disposition, not in the
sense of throwing away." [767th meeting, para. 147.]

"Les membres du Conseil savent que le mot
anglais "disposal" a ete employe, pour ce qui est
des forces du Gouvernement de l'Inde, au sens de
fac;on dont on dispose une chose, et non au sens de
fac;on dont on slen debarrasse." [767eme seance, par.
147].

37. Here, again, we have had quite a lecture on the
English language, on the meaning of the word "disposal". He says that the word "disposal" means locating
the troops in various areas and not the dissolution or
demobilization of the forces. That is what he is trying
to do.

37. La aussi, nous avons eu droit a un cours sur la
langue anglaise et sur le sens du mot "disposal" qui,
selon lui, vise le stationnement des troupes dans diverses zones, et non pas la dissolution ou la demobilisation des forces. Voila ce qulil slefforce de faire.

38. If my memory does not fail me, the members
comprising the Commission which drafted the very
carefully-worded document of 13 August 1948 also
drafted the proposals of 11 December 1948, which were

38. Si la m~moire ne me fait pas defaut, les membres de la Commission qui ont redig~ avec grand soin
la resolution du 13 aoiit 1948 ont egalement elabore les
, propositions du 11 decembre 1948, qui ont ensuite

10

i

"

I

I

)

later incorpor
Surely the rep
of some better
lion of the ter
is used in both
armed forces
Mr. Krishna 1\
regarding his
that the word
mobilization,
that word used
their side, wh
paragraph; and
contemplates
side of the ce
farther from
he placed on
quences. I hop
39. Paragraph
"4. (~) Afte
Commission'
the Commiss
have been re
the Plebisei
consultation
disposal of In
posal to be wi
and the freed

"(Q) As re
part IT of the
the "Azad" K
armed forces
the Commissi
consultation
para. 15.]
40. If Mr. Kri
posal" here m
demobilization,
putting before
Kashmir forces
by the interpre
word "disposal"
templates the c
which I am surl
talks in that mar
haste and peopll
then the consequ
not realized mor
41. The repres
about the provis'
sion dated 5 Ja
statement made
lution gives way
of 13 August 19
affirm "their wi
be determined b
Much is made 0
seeks to charact
plebiscite as a
mitment, but a
sentative of Ind'
undertaking of
January 1949, wh

''I'

..

.~

J.

t.

r'{
I

I

"

I

r

fait l'objet de la r~solution du 5 janvier 1949. Le
repr~sentant de l'Inde aurait du trouver de meilleurs
arguments pour etayf I' son interpr~tationde l' expression "final disposal" (retrait definitif). Le mot "disposal" est employe dans les deux alin~as du paragraphe et s'applique aux forces arm~es de l'Inde
comme a celles du Cachemire "azad" , Si, -en ce qui
concerne le cote indien de la ligne de suspension
d'armes, M. Krishna Menon prete a ce mot le sens
de disposition de troupes et non de demobilisation,
la meme interpretation vaudra, al'alin~a sUivant, pour
les troupes "azad". n s'ensuivra que M. Krishna
Menon envisage le maintien des troupes "azad" de
leur cot~ de la ligne de suspension d'armes. Je suis
sur qu'il est loin de souscrire a cette interpr~tation,
qu'il a donnee sans penser aux cons~quences.J' esp~re
que je me suis bien fait comprendre.

later incorporated in the resolution of 5 January 1949.
Surely the representative of India should have thought
of some better argument in support of his interpretation of the term "final disposal". The word "disposal"
is used in both parts of the paragraph and governs the
armed forces both of India and of n Azad" Kashmir. If
Mr. Krishna Menon reads the meaning in this word
regarding his side of the cease-fire line in the sense
that the word means location of troops and not demobilization, then the same meaning shall be read into
that word used in connexion with the "Azad" troops on
their side, which is mentioned in the very next subparagraph; and that will mean that Mr. KrishnaMenon
contemplates the continuance of "Azad" troops on their
side of the cease-fire line. I am sure that nothing is
farther from his mind than this interpretation which
he placed on this word without realizing the consequences. I hope that I have made myself clear.
39. Paragraph 4 says:
"4. (~) After implementation of parts 12.ndIIofthe
Commission's resolution of 13 August 1948, and when
the Commission is satisfied that peaceful conditions
have been restored in the State, the Commission and
the Plebiseite Administrator will determine, in
consultation with the Government of India, the final
disposal of Indian and State armed forces, such disposal to be with due regard to the security of the State
and the freedom of the plebiscite;

39. Le paragraphe 4 est ainsi con<;u:
"4. g,) Lorsque les mesures pr~vues dans lespremi~re et deuxi~me parties de la resolution adopt~e
par la Commission le 13 aout 1948 auront et~
executee's, et lorsque la Commission estimera que
la paix et l'ordre public ont ete retablisdans l'Etat,
ladite Commission et l'Administrateur dupl~biscite
fixeront, en consultation avec le Gouvernement de
1'Inde, les modalites du retrait definitif des forces
armees de l'Inde et de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, apr~s avoir dilment tenu compte des conditions
necessaires a la securite de l'Etat et a la liberte
du plebiscite;
"9) Le retrait definitif des forces armees cantonnees sur le territoire dontir est question au paragraphe A. 2 de la deuxi~me partie de la r~solution
du 13 aout - c'est-a-dire le territoireduCachemire
"azad" - sera d~termin~ parlaCommissionetl'administrateur du pl~biscite agissant de concert avec
les autorites locales." [S/1196, par. 15.]
40. Si M. Krishna Menon soutient que le mot anglais
"disposal" signifie disposition des troupes, et non
demobilisation, cette interpretation contredit son
argument selon lequelles forces du Cachemire "azad"
doivent etre d~mobilis~es, car si le mot "disposal"
signifie disposition, la clause que je viens de citeI'
pr~voit aussi le maintien des troupes "azad", ce qu'il
n'a certainement pas voulu dire. Mais lorsqu'un
orateur avance ses arguments a la hate et qu'll est
emporte par le feu de la rethorique, il ne saisit peutetre pas imm~diatement les consequences de son
raisonnement.

"(!?) As regards the territory referred to inA. 2 of
part IT of the resolution of 13 August"-whichmeans
the "Azad" Kashmir territory- "final disposal of the
armed forces in that territory will be determined by
the Commission and the Plebiscite Administrator in
consultation with the local authorities." [S/1196,
para. 15.]
40. If Mr. Krishna Menon says that the word "disposal" here means location of troops and not their
demobilization, then the argument that he has been
putting before the Security Council that the "Azad"
Kashmir forces must be demobilized is contradicted
by the interpretation which is put here, because if the
word "disposal" means location, then this clause contemplates the continued location of"Azad" troops also,
which I am sure is very far from his mind when he
talks in that manner. But when arguments are made in
haste and people are carried away by their rhetoric,
then the consequences of those arguments are perhaps
not realized momentarily.
41. The representative of India has said a great deal
about the provisions of the resolution of the Commission dated 5 January 1949. But the most misleading
statement made by him is to the effect that this resolution gives way to part ill of the previous resolution
of 13 August 1948, in which India and Pakistan reaffirm "their wish" that the future of the State shall
be determined by the will of the people of the State.
MUch is made of this by Mr. Krishna Menon, and he
seeks to characterize India's undertaking regarding a
plebiscite as a mere wish-not a resolve, not a commitment, but a wish. Nothing is said by the rep re·,
sentative of India about the further and unequivocwl
undertaking of paragraph 1 of the resolution of 5
January 1949, which reads as follows:

41. Le representant de 1'Inde a longuement parl~
de la r~solution de la Commission en date du 5 janvier 1949. Mais sa plus grande erreur a ete de dire
que cette r~solution est subordonnee a la troisi~me
partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948, ou l'Inde et
le Pakistan affiI'ment a nouveau "leur d~sir" que le statut futur de l'Etat soit fixe conformement a la
volonte de la population. M. Menon insiste sur ce point
et cherche a presenter l'engagementdel'Indetouchant
le plebiscite comme un simple desir et non pas
comme une decision, une obligation. n omet de mentionner l'engagement pris ulterieurement, sans equivoque, au paragraphe 1 de la resolution du 5 janvier
1949, qui est ainsi con<;u:

,

'j

:I
~i

11

l
;,

11

,;~

[:·····ll
..•••..................
;
,;'

"

f~'
,. :,
I;i!~i
I

1

.~

I.~

1'1
!'~I
,!

:. ).'.•.•. 1

1

,~
"I

,
I
11
'!,"

1
1

= c -'The question

~

llie accession of llie Siaie

~

Jammu and Kashmir to India or Pakistan will be
decided through the democratic method of afreeand
impartial plebiscite." [Ibid.]

"La question du rattachement de l'Etat de Jammu
et Cachemire a. l'Inde ou au Pakistan sera decidee
d'une fa~on democratique au moyen d'un plebiscite
libre et impartial." [Ibid.]

I am afraid that the copy of the resolution that he has
been reading does not contain this very important
paragraph.

Le texte de la resolution que M. Krishna Menon avait
sous les yeux ne contenait-il pas cet important paragraphe?

42. I do not contest Mr. KrishnaMenon's rightto talk
about the conditions of a plebiscite in the State, but
perhaps it is not entirely relevant to the question that
is engaging our attention at this stage, which is the
problem of demilitarization of the State preparatory to
the plebiscite. Whether a certain type of propaganda
will or will not be allowed, how and when the refugees
will go back to the State, what measures will be taken
to ensure to them the right of legitimate political
activity, what will happen if local authorities on the two
sides of the cease-fire line do not do those things which
they are called upon to do under the terms of the
resolutions-these are all matters for discussion with
the Plebiscite Administrator when he assumes office.
He alone has the authority to discuss these matters
with those concerned and to take decisions on them. It
is not because we have no views on these subjects that
I steer clear of them at this stage. It is only because
the Pakistan Government does not wish to prejudice
these issues beforehand.

42. Je ne conteste pas que M. Krishna Menon ait le
droit de parler des conditions d'un plebiscite dans
l'Etat, mais cette question est peut-etre etrang~re
a. celle qui nous occupe en ce moment, a. savoir la
demilitarisation de l'Etat avant le pgbiscite. Autorisera-t-on ou non une certaine forme de propagande,
comment et quand les refugies retourneront-ils dans
l'Etat, queUes mesures prendra-t-on pour leur assurer le droit de menerune activitt3 politique legitime,
que se passera-t-il si les autorites locales, des deux
cote de la ligne de suspension d'armes, n'observent
pas les resolutions, voila les questions que devra examine rI'Administrateur du plebiscite 10 rsqu' il firendra
ses fonctions. Il est seul habilite a discuter ces questions avec les interesses et a prendre les mesures
necessaires. Si je laisse ces questions de cote pour
le moment, ce n'est pas parce que nous n'avons pas
d'opinion, mais uniquementparce que le Gouvernement
pakistanais ne veut rien prejuger.

43. The representative of India has pleaded forcefully
against any "unsettlement". He said:

43. Le representant de l'lnde s'est eleve avec force
contre toute tentative de "troubler l'ordre". Il a declare:

"Any unsettlement can only be based on the appeal
to non-secularity; it can only be based on this appeal
to religious prejudice." [767th meeting, para. 232.]

"On ne pourra troubler l'ordre etabli qu'en se
departissant de la neutralite en matiere de religion,
qu'en faisant appel aux passions religieuses."
[767~me seance, par. 232.]

44. I have searched a lot whether we have made such
an appeal and to whom, and I admit that I have not been
able to find it. What is it that Pakistan has been demanding about Kashmir? It is not that Kashmiris should
be disposed of like goods and chattels to suit the whims
and fancies of either the Government of India or the
Government of Pakistan. We have always maintained
that Kashmiris and Kashmiris alone can decide their
own future in a free and impartial plebiscite-and when
we say Kashmiris we mean all Kashmiris without
di,stinction of religion.

44. Je me suls longtemps demande si nous avons
j?.mais lance un tel appel, mais en vain. Que demande
le Pakistan au sujet du Cachemire? Il ne demande pas
que les Cachemiriens soient traites comme des marchandises et du betail, au gre du Gouvernement indien ou du Gouvernement pakistanais. Nous avons toujours soutenu que les Cachemiriens et eux seuls peuvent decider de leur propre avenir au moyen d'un
plebiscite libre et impartial - et quand nous disons
Cachemiriens nous entendons tous les habitants de
1'Etat, sans distinction de religion.

45. Tne representative of India has levelled certain
charges of breaches of international agreements
again.::,-t Pakistan. This is indeed a serious matter, and
I would be fa.iling in my duty if I did not refer to them.

45. Le representant de 1'Inde a accuse le Pakistan
d'avoir vioIe des accords internationaux. C'est la en
verite une accusation grave, et je faiUirais a mon
devoir si je la passais sous silence.

The first so-called breach on the part of Pakistan
and I quote from Mr. Krishna Menon's speech,
"'withholding information from the United Nations that
it was a combatant and that it was a party to the in......~ion"' ['i6'th meeting. para. 193].

46. La premi~re pretendue violation commise par le
Pakistan, c'est - et je cite M. Menon - "que ce pays
a cache a l'Qrganisation des Nations Unies son role de
combattant et sa qualite de partie a l'invasion"
[767eme seance, par, 193].

47. I submit that this matter has been considered and
disposed ,)f by the Security Council. The Security
Council adopted a resolution on 17 January 1948 which
called L.rpon the GoYemments of India and Pakistan to
1:a.1{:e all measures ,;,ithin their power calculated to
impl"'O'7e the situation, and to refrain from doing or
c:a:using to be done or permitting any acts which might
agg:rav-ate the situation. Both Governments accepted
t."lis resolution of the Security Council. In utter viola-

47. Je soutiens que cette questionadejaeteexaminee
et reglee par le Conseil de securite. Le 17 janvier
1948, le Conseil de s~curite a adopte une resolution
qui faisait appel au Gouvernement indien et au Gouvernement pakistanais pour que chacun d'eux prenne
toutes les mesures en sonpouvoir a l' effet d'amlHiorer
la situation, et s'abstienne d'accomplir, de provoquer
ou de permettre aucun acte susceptible d'aggraver la
situation. Les deux gouvernements ont accepte c-ette

46.

'ii'aS.

12

lion of this
acceptance
mounted an
mir some t'
this offensiv
that a certa'
into the 8tat
of May 1948
ment of lndi
it or did it
tion? Did the
troop move

48. Again,
Dwen Dixon
was an aggr
mission of
Dixon said 0]

"Upon a
period beg'
of the Kas
had advanc
already re
the furthe
The Prime
meeting,
to it repea
positions, f
such a dec
commissio
investigati
going into
which pres
sub-contin
when the fr
was crosse
elements, .
that when,
regular P
the State,
law.

"I therefc
itarization
Pakistan re
After a sig
day.. then ot
fire line sh,
concurrent
as signific
settle.

"The Pr
strongly hi
tians I took
stated abo
accept, in c
tian that as
drawal of
should begi
number of d

~.'~...

llIf- -,

mu

il~e

:ite

ait

ra-

le

lllS

~re

la
ri-

-~.
'

tion of this resolution of the Security Council and of its
acceptance of the resolution, the Government of India
mounted an offensive in the State of Jammu and Kashmir some time in the spring of 1948. It was to meet
this offensive, that developed into a threat to Pakistan,
that a certain number of Pakistan forces were moved
into the State of Jammu and Kashmir in the first week
of May 1948 in sheer self-defence. When the Government of India mounted their offensive in the State, did
it or did it not amount to an aggravation of the situation? Did they inform the Security Council about their
troop movements?

resolution du Conseil de securite. Or, en violation
flagrante de cette resolution qu'il avait acceptee, le
Gouvernement indien a declenche au printemps de
1948 une offensive contre 1'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire. C' est pour s'opposer a cette offensive, qui etait
devenue une menace a. la securite du Pakistan, qu'un
certain nombre d'unites pakistanaises ont, uniquement
a des fins de legitime defense, penetre dans l'Etat de
Jammu et Cachemire au cours de lapremiere semaine
de mai 1948. Lorsque le Gouvernement indien a
declenche cette offensive contre l' Etat, cet acte avaitil, oui ou non, pour effet d'aggraver la situation? Le
Gouvernement indien a-t-il informe le Conseil de
securite des mouvements de ses troupes?

48. Again, the representative of India has cited Sir
Owen Dixon in support of his contention that Pakistan
was an aggressor in Kashmir. I shall, with the permission of the Security Council, read out what Sir Owen
Dixon said on the subject in his report:

48. Le representant de l'lnde a une fois de plus cite
sir Owen Dixon pour etayer ses allegations selon lesqueUes le Pakistan serait I'agresseur au Cachemire.
Je voudrais, si le Conseilm'yautorise,donnerlecture
de ce que sir Owen Dixon a declare a ce sujet dans son
rapport:
"Au cours de la p~riode commengant a. la date oll
le diff~rend du Cachemire fut pour la premi~re fois
soumis au Conseil de s~curit~, le ler janvier 1948,
non seulement l'lnde fit valoir ;l plusieurs reprises
l'argument que j'ai d~j;l rappel~ - a. savoir que le
Pakistan ~tait l'agresseur - mais eUe demanda en
outre qu'il flit reconnu comme tel. Au d~but de nos
conversations, le Premier Ministre de l'Inde pr~­
senta la meme demande, sur laquelle il revint fr~­
quemment au cours de laConf~rence.Mapositionfut
la suivante: en premier lieu, le Conseil de s~curit~
n'avait pas fait de d~claration dans ce sens; deuxi~­
mement, je n'avais pas regu d'instructions pour
~tudier cette question du point de vue juridique, et
je n'avais pas proc~d~ ;l une teUe ~tude; toutefois,
j'indiquai que, sans chercher a. discerner les causes
ou les raisons des ~v~nementsintervenus, lesquelles
formaient sans doute une partie de l'histoire de la
p~ninsule, j'~tais pret a. estimer que le passage de
la fronti~re de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire par
des ~Mments hostile s, le 20 octobre 1947, si je
pouvais me fier a. ma m~moire, ~tait contraire au
droit international, et que l'invasion du territoire
de l'Etat par les unit~s de l'arm~e r~guli~re du
Pakistan, effectu~e ;l ma connaissance en mai 1948,
~tait, elle aussi, contraire au droit international.

je,

lllS

LS-

le,

~ux

mt
:a-

Ira

!S-

ce

l~-

se

m,

... "
ns
de
as
rnuuun
ns
de
an
en
on
le
yS
je

"Upon a number of occasions in the course of the
period beginning with the reference on 1 January 1948
of the Kashmir dispute to the Security Council, India
had advanced not only the contention to which I have
already referred that Pakistan was an aggressor, but
the further contention that this should be declared.
The Prime Ministe r of India, at an early stage of the
meeting, made the same contention and he referred
to it repeatedly during the conference. I took up the
positions, first that the Security Council had not made
such a declaration; secondly that I had neither been
commissioned to make nor had I made any judicial
investigation of the issue; but thirdly that, without
going into the causes or reasons why it happened,
which presumably formed part of the history of the
SUb-continent, I was prepared to adopt the view that
when the frontier of the State of Jammu and Kashmir
was crossed, on I believe 20 October 1947, by hostile
elements, it was contrary to international law, and
that when, in May 1948, as I believe, units of the
regular Pakistan forces moved into the territory of
the State, that too was inconsistent with international
law.

"1 therefore proposed that the first step in demilitarization should consist in the withdrawal of the
Pakistan regular forces commencing on a named day.
After a significant number of days from the named
daYJ then other operations on each side of the ceasefire line should take place and as far as practicable,
concurrently. What number of days should be fixed
as significant was a matter of detail for them to
settle.

"Je proposai donc, comme premi~re mesure de d~­
militarisation, de retirer les forces r~guli~res du
Pakistan, cette Qp~ration devant commencer a. un
jour fix~. Apr~s une p~riode appropri~e, s'~tendant
sur un nombre de jours d~termin~, a. compter de
cette date, d'autres mesures devraient etre appliqu~es de part et d'autre de la ligne de suspension
d'armes, et, dans la me sure du possible, simultanement. Il appartenait aux deux parties de fixer la
dur~e de lap~riode qu'elles estimeraient appropri~e.

"The Prime Minister of Pakistan expressed
strongly his dissent from the third of the three positions 1 took up, L'1at is to say the third of the positions
stated above. But he expressed his readiness to
accept, in compliance with my request. the proposition that as a first step in demilitarization the withdrawal of the regular forces of the Pakistan Army
should begin on a specified day and that a significant
number of days should elapse before the commence-

"Le Premier Ministre du Pakistan s'opposa vivement ;l la troisi~me des trois considerations que
j'avais formul~es, c'est-a.-dire a. la t:roisi~me des
trois considerations ~noncees ci-dessus. Toutefois,
sur ma demande, il se d~clara pret a. accepter la
proposition tendant a. faire du retrait des forces reguli~res du Pakistan la premi~re mesure de demilitarisation, ce retrait devant commencer ;l un jour
fixe et une certaine periode de temps devant s'ecou-

11"

~e

er

,m
1-

le
~r
~r

la
te

13

I

'I

I'
!'
,'I

,

I

1.1

'1
1···,,1(':
:';
i!
, I

: .~

ment of any operation involving forces on the Indian
side of the cease-fire line." [S/1791, paras. 21 to 23.]

ler avant l'application des mesures concernant les
forces arm~es qui se trouvaient du cot~ indien de la
ligne du cessez-Ie-feu." [S/1791, par. 21 a. 23.]
49. La situation, si on veut la d~peindre en termes
sir Owen Dixon, apr~s
avoir ~tudi~ la question, s'effor~ait d'organiser un
pl~biscite. Chaque fois qu'il pronon~ait le mot "pl~­
biscite", l'Inde, au lieu de s'attaquer s~rieusementau
probl~me et de parler d'un pl~biscite, r~pondait toujours: "Le Pakistan est l'agresseur; je vous prie de
d~clarer que le Pakistan est l'agresseur") ce qUi ~tait
tout ~ fait en dehors de la question. Les Indiens ont
sans doute r~p~t~ si souvent cette accusation d'agression que sir Owen Dixon a du s'en lasser et d~clarer:
"Finissons-en, pour l'amour de Dieu. Admettons qu'il
y a eu agression, mais occupons-nous maintenant du
pMbiscite." Ayant cit~ ces propos hors de leur contexte, le repr6sentant du Gouvernement indien vient
d~clarer au Conseil de s6curit6: "Un tel a d6clar~
dans son rapport qu'il y a eu agression." Je ne peux
pas comprendre la logique de l'argumentselonlequel,
quand des gens essaient de se debarrasser d'unepersonne qui parle sans arret en lui disant: "Bon, admettons pour les besoins de la discussion que ce que vous
dites est vrai, et venons-en :ll'essentiel", cette personne vient dire ensuite: "Vous avez maintenant admis
qu'il y a eu agression".

49. To put this in very plain language, here was this
gentleman looking into this case and trying to hold a
plebiscite. Each time he mentioned the word "plebiscite", India, instead of getting down to brass tacks and
talking about a plebiscite, always said: "Pakistan is an
aggressor; please declare that Pakistan is an aggressor", which was quite irrelevant. The Indian team must
have repeated this question of aggression so many
times that this gentleman must have got sick and tired
of it and said: "For God's sake stop. Let us take for
granted that there was an aggression and letus get on
with the plebiscite now." Having mentioned those words
which were out of context, the Government of India
representative came here and said: "So and so reported
that there was aggression." I do not understand the
sense of this logic, when people try to get rid of a
certain gentleman because he is talking too much by
saying: "All right, take it for granted for the sake of
argument that what he says is true, and now let us get
on to the real point" ,and goes on to say: "Now you have
admitted there was an aggression".

tr~s simples, ~tait la suivante:

50. In the same way, there has beenadiscussion here
about aggression and sovereignty, and so on, for seventeen hours. I do not know what the feeling of the Security Council is. Personally I think you would be prepared to say that we are so sick of hearing this that I
would say: "All right, let us take for granted that all
these things have happened. What about the agreement
for a plebiscite? Why not get on with the plebiscite?"
Then the Indians will come tomorrow and say that the
Security Council decided that there was complete
accession, and there was aggression, and there was
sovereignty. and therefore there can be no plebiscite.
This sort of argument has gone on for so long, for the
last eight years, that I am sure we are tired of it, if
the Security Council is not.

~'
~T:

i

I'

;1

50. De meme, on a par16 ici d'agression, de souverainet~ et d' autres questions pendant 17 heures. J e ne

sais pas ce que le Conseil de s6curit~ en pense, mais
pour ma part, je pense que vous seriez prets ~ dire
que nous sommes si las d'entendre tout cela que vous
pourriez dire: "Bon, admettons que tout cela ait eu
lieu. Venons-en maintenant :ll'accord relatif au pMbiscHe. Pourquoi ne nous occupons-nous pas du pl~­
tiscite?" Mais, si nous faisons cela, les Indiens reviendront nous dire demain que le Conseil de securite
a d~cid~ que le rattachement6taitdMinitif, qu'ily a eu
agression, qu'il y a souverainet~, et par cons~quent
qu'il ne peut y avoir de pl~biscite. Cette sorte de discussion dure depuis si longtemps - depuis huit ans que nous en sommes pour notre part tr~s las, si le
Conseil de s6curiM ne l'est pas.

51. I have quoted what Sir Owen Dixon said in his
report. What does this really mean? According to my
understanding of the English language, which I must
admit is imperfect, it only means one thing. That is
this: for the purpose of getting the agreement of the
Government of India to a plan of demilitarization, Sir
Owen Dixon was prepared to assume, only for the sake
of argument. that when the tribesmen entered Kash'mir
that was a breach of international law and that the entry
of Pakistan troops was also a breach of international
law. It mea..'1t nothing more than this. Infact. Sir Owen
Dixon himself made it more than clear that the Security
Council had not made any declaration on the question
of aggression. nor had he been asked by the Security
CmlncU to go into that question, nor had he himself
made all} stud;; or investigation of that matter, and
therefr;re he was not in a position to pronounce upon it.

51. J'ai cit6 ce que sir Owen Dixon d~clarait dans
son rapport. Qu'est-ce que cela signifie en r~alit~?
Si je m'en tiens ~ ma connaissance de la langue anglaise - qui, je dois l'admettre, est imparfaite - cela
ne peut vouloir dire qu'une chose; cela veut dire que
pour obtenir du Gouvernement indien qu'il donne son
accord ~ un plan de d~militarisation, sir Owen Dixon
~tait pret ~ admettre, pour les besoins de la discussion, que les honimes des tribus comme les forces
pakistanaises avaient commis une violation du droit
international en p~n~trant dans le Cachemire. Cela
ne voulait rien dire de plus. De fait, sir Owen Dixon
a express~ment soulign~ que le Conseil de s~curit~
ne s'~tait pas prononc~ sur la question de l'agression
et ne lui avait pas demand~ de s'occuper de ce~te
question, sur laquelle il n'avait lui-meme proc~d~ :1
aucune ~tude ou ~ aucune enquete, et sur laquelle il
n'~tait done pas en mesure de se prononcer.

52. It is quite clear that Sir Owen Dixon was prepared

52. n est tout ~ fait ~vident que sir Owen Dixon ~tait
pret ~ faire une simple supposition pour ~carter la
question de l'agression, de fa~on que l'organisatio n
du pl~bisdte convenu puisse progresser. Le repr~sen-

ffi2,ke a mere assumption inordertoput on one side
th~ r.fl€stirJ', of aggression, so that progress could be
r:.l2:de ti;TJaraS the agreed plebiscite. The rep res en-

tiJ

14

tative of
in order

mean. In
distingui
estimatio
of this s
admissio
question
examinat
demilitar
that India
he fell
personal!
53. The
non-with
repeat th
the State
the bulk
cease-fir
too anxio
May I ask
to honour
the withd
54. Then
utterly in
"Not
but the
forces
drawal
meeting
55. I re
if the P
when it

equipmen
Pakistan
Army in
Army in "
is not the
say that
back? Wh
strength
Pakistan t
of Jammu
national a
ciding the
cite? HOWl
the fact th:
in West P
itarization
Krishna M
referring.

56. Pakisl
strengthen
that this m
that we
purposes.
ing its arm
as Pakista
eConomic
the procur

in order to twist them to mean what clearly they do not

mean. Incidentally, it is rather amusing to note that the
distinguished jurist from Australia was such in the
estimation of the representative of India only in respect
of this single observation, although according to his own
admission, he was neither asked to examine the
question of aggression nor did he undertake such an
examination; but when he formulated his plans of
demilitarization and ultimately came to the conclusion
that India's agreement would never be obtained to them,
he fell from grace and became quite a different
personality in the eyes of India.

.]

ermes
apr~s

ser un
"pMoentau
it touIrie de
ui ~talt
ms ont
Igres:larer:
Isqu'il
lant du
r convient

diff~rente.

53. J'en arrive maintenant a. la deuxi~me pr~tendue
violation que le Pakistan aurait commise en ne retirant
pas son arm~e de l'Etat de JamplU et Cachemire. Je
r~p~te que ce retrait dolt atre synchronis~avec le retrait du gros des forces indiennes de l' autre cot~ de la
ligne du cessez-le-feu. Le Gouvernement pakistanais
n'a qu'un d~sir, c'est de retirer toutes ses forces de
l'Etat. Puis-je demander au Gouvernement indien s'il
est ~galement pret a. tenir ses engagements internationaux en ce qui concerne le retrait de son arm6e et
de ses forces?
54. Nous trouvons ensuite une d~claration surprenante, et absolument incompr~hensible a. mes yeux:

53. The next so-called violation is with regard to the
non-withdrawal of the Pakistan Army from the State. I
repeat that the withdrawal of the Pakistan Army from
the State is to be synchronized with the withdrawal of
the bulk of the Indian forces on the other side of the
cease-fire line. The Government of Pakistan is only
too anxious to withdraw all its forces from the State.
May I ask if the Government of India is equally willing
to honour its international agreement with regard to
the withdrawal of its Army and forces?

Iklar~

e peux
equel,
eperdmet~ vous
~ peradmis

54. Then comes an astounding statement which is
utterly incomprehensible to me:
"Not only has the Pakistan Army not withdrawn,
but the changed conditions in view of the imbalance of
forces created by rearmament is such that withdrawal has become practically impossible." [767th
meeting, para. 194.]

iouve, Jene
, mais
a. dire
~ vous
aft eu
u pl~­
upMIS recurite
y a eu
!quent
~ dis-

"Non seulement 1'arm~e pakistanaise ne s'est pas
retir~e, mais la nouvelle situation cr~~e par le
d~s~quilibre des forces auquel a abouti le r~arme­
ment est teUe que tout retrait est devenu pratiquement impossible." [767~me s~ance, par, 194.]

55. I really to not understand what this means. Even

55. Je n'arrive vraiment pas :l comprendre ce que
cela signifie. A supposer mame que 1'arm~e pakistanaise ait ~t6 renforc6e, lorsqu'elle se retirera, eUe
6vacuera l'Etat avec tout son ~quipement. Je me demande si le repr~sentant de l'Inde faisait allusion :l
l'arm~e pakistanaise stationn6e dans le Cachemire
"azad" ou a. l'arm6e pakistanaise stationn~e sur notre
terrltoire. S'il voulait dire que l'arm6e pakistanaise
du Cachemire "azad" a 6t6 renforc6e - ce qui est
inexact - queUe raison aurait-il de s'inqui6ter, puisque nous affirmons que tout/es ces forces se retireront
lorsque nous ~vacuerons 1'Etat? Pourquoi le repr6sentant de 1'lnde se lamente-t-il a. ce sujet? En outre,
quel rapport y a-t-il entre les effectifs de 1'arm6e
pakistanaise :ll'int~rieur de nos fronti~resetla question de la d6militarisation de l'Etat de Jammu et
Cac.hemire conform6ment aux dispositions d'un accord
international entre l'lnde et le Pakistan pr6voyantque
la question du rattachement sera tranch6e par unp16biscite? En tout cas, si M. Krishna Menon veut dire
que notre arm6e a 6t6 renforc6e, par exemple dans le
Pakistan occidental, cela n,a rien :l voir avec la d6mi1i.tarisation du Cachemire. Peut-atre M. Menon est-il
le seul :l savoir ce :l quoiilfaisait en r6alit6 allusion.

if the Pakistan Army should have become stronger,

when it withdraws it will leave the State with all its
equipment. I wonder whether he was referring to the
Pakistan Army in" "Azad" Kashmir or to the Pakistan
Army in our own territory. If he meant the Pakistan
Army in "Azad" Kashmir has become stronger, which
is not the case, then why should be wor'ry, because we
say that when we withdraw, this whole army will go
back? Why weep· about it? Besides, what has the
strength of the Pakistan Army within the borders of
Pakistan to do with the question of the demilitarization
of Jammu and Kashmir under the terms of an international agreement between India and Pakistan on deciding the question of accession by means of a plebiscite? However, if Mr. Krishna Menon is referring to
the fact that our Army has become stronge r, let us say
in West Pakistan, that has nothing to do with the demilitarization in the Kashmir State. Perhaps only Mr.
Krishna Menon himself knows to what he was really
referring.

illS -

, si le
: dans
alit~?

.e an. cela
e que
e son
Dixon
scusJrces
droit
Cela
Jixon
:uriM
ssion
ce~te

M~<l

,Ue il

E!tait
.er la
ation
lsen-

tant de l'Inde a d~tacM ces mots de leur contexte pour
les d~naturer et pour leur faire dire ce qu'ils ne
veulent manifestement pas dire. A ce propos, il est
assez ammnnt de constater que 1'~minent juriste
australien n'~tait tel, aux yeux du repr~sentant de
1'Inde, qu'en ce qui concerne cette seule observation,
alors que sir Owen Dixon reconnaft lui-mame qu'on
ne lui a jamais demand~ d'~tudier la question de
1'agression et qu'il n,a jamais entrepris de l'examiner; lorsque sir Owen Dixon a mis au point ses plans
de d~militarisation et est finalement parvenu:Uaconclusion que l'Inde ne leurdonneraitjamais son accord,
il est tomM en disgrace, et!'Inde l' a jug~ de far;on tr~s

tative of India has taken the words out of their context

antles

mde la

,

i

I

L

56. Pakistan has accepted military aid in order to
strengthen its defences. It has been repeatedly asserted
that this military aid, and for that matter any equipment
that we may have, will not be used for aggressive
~Ul·~oses. The Government of India is also strengtbenmg Its armed forces. The only difference is that whereas Pakistan is receiving military aid, India is taking
economic aid and diverting its funds and resources to
the procurement of military supplies. This is a very

56. Le Pakistan a acceptt1 une aide militaire afin de
renforcer sa dMense. Nous avons affirm6 :l maintes
reprises que cette aide militaire, ainsi, du reste, que
tout le rnat6riel militaire dont nous pouvons disposer,
ne seront pas utilis6s :l des fins agressives. Le Gouvernement indien, lui aussi, renforce son arm6e. La
seule dlff6rence est la suivante: tandis que le Pakistan
rer;oit une aide militaire, l'Inde accepte une aide t1conomique et d6tourne les fonds et les ressources ainsi
15

. ~..

"'~. - .~'-~ ,
I

"J
.

~
~.,

interesting point and I should like once and for all to
place it before the Security Council. I am referring to
the allegation of India that Pakistan is becoming
stronger and stronger.

fournis pour se procurer du mat~riel militaire. C'est l~
un point trl!s int~ressant sur lequel je voudrais, une
fois pour toutes, attirer l'attentionduConseHdes~cu­
rit~. Je veux parler des all~gations de l'Inde selon
lesquelles le Pakistan deviendrait tous les jours plus
fort.

57. India itself has recently placed an order for the
purchase of sixty-five Canberras in the United Kingdom. The Canberra, as members of the Council know,
is a long-range bomber which is used only for offensive
purp03es. Why is India purchasing these bombers and
who" are they going to be used against? It is only Pakistan and nobody else. India has also placed an order in
the Pnited Kingdom for 300 of the best and the largest
tanks. Against which country are these 300 tanks going
to be used? It is not against China and Soviet Russia,
I know that. They will not look towards those countries.
Water does not flow up the hill; it always flows down
the hill. He dare not look towards Peking or Moscow
because they are too big for him. He looks only towards
the smaller countries, like the poor Hyderabad State,
Junagadh and Kashmir. If we had been equally weak, he
probably would have started a war against us by now.
All the armaments that India is receiving and preparing are against Pakistan.

57. L'Inde elle-meme a r~cemment commandl! au
Royaume-Uni 65 Canberra. Comme les membres du
Conseil le savent, le Canberra est un bombardier ~
grand rayon d'action qui n'est utilis~ qu'a. des fins
offensives. Pourquoi l'Inde ach~te-t-elle ces bombardiers et contre qui seront-Hs utilis~s? Uniquement
contre le Pakistan. L'Inde a l!galement command6 au
Royaume-Uni 300 chars, choisis parmi les meilleurs
et les plus grands. Contre que 1 pays ces 300 chars
seront-ils employl!s? Pas contre la Chine etlaRussie
sovi~tique, que je sache. L'Inde ne regardera pas du
cot6 de ces pays; leseauxnecoulentpas vers l'amont,
e11es coulent toujours vers l'aval. L'Inde n'ose pas
tourner ses regards vers Pl!kin ou vers Moscou: ca
sont la. de trop gros morceaUx. Elle regarde seulement
du cotl! des petits pays, du cot~ de ces malheureux
Etats que sont I'Hai'derabad, le Junagadh ou le Cachemire. Si nous avions ~t~ ~galement faibles, I'Inde auralt
probablement d~ja. dl!clenchl! une guerre contre nous.
Tous les armements que l'Inde re~oit ettous ses pr!!paratifs militaires sont dirig~s contre le Pakistan.

58. Mr. Krishna Menon complained that the British
Government was not very kind to his country. But
where has India placed these orders? Who has supplied
it with all the equipment? It is the United Kingdom. It
takes these things from the United Kingdom and then
abuses it. From whom is India buying aircraft carriers? It is buying them from the United Kingdom, and
then it comes here and abuses the United Kingdom for
nothing.

58. M. Krishna Menon s'est plaint que le Gouverne-

ment britannique n'ait pas usl! de tr~s bons procl!d!!s
envers son pays. Mais o-Q.l'Inde a-t-elle plac~ ces commandes? Qui lui a fourni tout ce .mat~riel?Le RoyaumeUni. L'Inde accepte ce que lui donne le Royaume-Uni
et, ensuite, elle cherche a. le discr~diter. A qui l'Inde
achete-t-elle des porte-avions? Au Royaume-Uni, et
une fois qU'elle les a obtenus, elle s'efforce ici, sans
motif aucun, de discrl!diter le Royaume-Uni.

59. I want to point out that at the time of partition,
all the gun factories, the tank factories, the armoured
car factories, the airplane repair shop factories, were
all inside the territory which is today India. Most of the
large underground installations of army stocks and
munition dumps were in the territory which is now
India. Members will recall that the British left the
country within two months. They were the quickest
quitters that anybody has ever seen in the whole history
of mankind. They left all those armaments in the hands
of the Indians. Having withdrawn, they said: "Now,
gentlemen, you divide it amongst yourselves." Do you
think that India was going to give us a single thing out
of those armaments, part of which was our share? It
has swallowed all those armaments and they are still
in India. It is proceeding to purchase more from
Canada, from the United Kingdom and from all over the
world. The Americans give the money, bags full of
dollars, and say: "Oh, you poor boys, you take this
money to help yourselves." By obtaining that money,
India makes a reduction in its budget, and with the
money saved, purchases things from the United Kingdom and Canada.

59. Je dl!sire souligner que, au moment du partage,
toutes les fabriques d'armes, de chars et de v6hicules
blindl!s, et tous les ateliers de r~parationd'avions, se
trouvaient dans le territoire qui constitue aujourd'hui
l'Inde. La plupartdes vastes installations souterraines
destin~es aux stocks militaires et la plupart des d~p6ts
de munitions se trouvaient sur leterritoire quiconstitue maintenant l'Inde. Comme les membresduConseil
s'en souviennent, les Britanniques ont l!vacu~ le pays
en deux mois. C'est l' ~vacuation la plus pr6cipi~e que
l'on ait jamais vue dans toute l'histoiredel'humanit!!.
Les Britanniques ont laiss~ tous ces armements entre
les mains des Indiens. Leur retrait op6r~, Hs ont dit:
"Maintenant, MeSSieurs, partagez-vous ces armements." Croyez-vous que l'Inde allait donner au Pakistan la moindre parcelle de ces armements, dont une
part nous revenait? Elle s'est appropril! tout ce materiel, qui est toujours entre ses mains. Elle s'apprete
a. en acheter encore au Canada, auRoyaume-Uni, dans
tous les pays du monde. Les Am~ricains fournissent
l'argent, de pleins sacs de dollars, etdisent: "Pauvres
petits, prenez cet argent pour vous aider a. vous tirer
d'affaire:" Munie de cet argent, l'Inde op~re des r~duc­
tions dans son budget et, avec les sommes ~conomi­
s~es, ach~te au Royaume-Uni et au Canada.

60. The position today with regard to armed fo rces is
the follOwing: Air Force-ours is one-third the size of
India's; Navy-ours is one-third the size of India's;
Army-ours is one third the size ofIndia's. The money

60. Voie! queUe est aujourd'hui la situation de nos
forces arm6es: nos forces a6riennes, nos forces navales, nos forces terrestres repr~sentent le t1-:s de
celles de l'Inde. L'Inde dl!pensepour sesforcesdl!fen-

16

that In
forces
We ar
defenc
larger,
in its
Krishn
publis
going t
up all
never
61. At
forces
officer
roads,
belong
by the

like

Gover
there s
your c
that re
Ministe

62. Th
It is r

world.
nationa
to its n
63. I

musth
country
want t
divisio
divisio
armour
night in
64. Wh

pretend
from P
wolf am
same st
and the
pollutin€
drinking
cannot t
"You da:
upon he
the type
with reg
small c(
compari
we are
better s

65. I a
for sho
body, th
concentr

~.C'estla.

rals, une

ldes~cu.

de selon
ours plus

nand~

au
mbres du
oardier a.
des fins
bombariquement
mand~ au
neilleurs
100 chars
la Russie
ra pas du
l'amont,
l'ose pas
)scou: ce
eulement
,lheureux
.eCachede auralt
tre nous.
ses pr~.
dstan.

ouverne-

proc~d~s

:es comtoyaumeume-Uni
(ut l'Inde
I!-Uni, et
ici, sans
partage,
r~hicules

vions, se
lourd'hui
erraines
I!sd~pots

LiconstilConseil
~ le pays
piMeque
umanit~.

nts entre
; ont dit:
; armer au Padontune
cemate:'apprete
Jni, dans
.rnissent
Pauvres
lUS tirer
sr~duc­

conom!de nos
rces nat1- ~s de
lsdMen-

sives - ou offl!lnsives - quatre fois plus que nous.
Nous consacrons 75 pour 100 de notre revenunatlonal
a. notre d~fense; avecunbudgetquatreoucinq fois plus
important, l'Inde y consacre de 40 a. 50 pour 100 de son
revenu, comme le confirme la publication de son budget.
La derni~re fois que j'ai mentionn~ ce fait, M. Krishna
Menon a essay~ de me contredire. Mais, dans le
dernier budget publi~ par 1'Inde, 40 pour 100 du revenu
total sont consacr~s a. lad~fense. Pourquoil'Inde s'efforce-t-elle d'~difier des forces dMensives aussiputssantes? Contre qui? Elles ne seront jamais utilisees
contre la Chine, je puis vous l'assurer.
61. A l'~poque du partage, les Britanniques avaient
leurs forces au Tibet; Hs y avaient leurs bataillons,
leurs fonctionnaires, leurs ingenieurs des travaux
publics, cha.rg~s de surveiller l'entretien des routes,
leur personnel des postes et t~l~graphes - tout cela
~tait britannique. Les Britanniques s'occupaient du
Tibet, qui faisait alors presque partie de l'Inde britannique, comme n'importe lequel des autres Etats. Mais
lorsque le Gou,vernement chinois ~anifesta quelque
interet pour le Tibet, nos amis indiens s'empress~r.ent
de dire: "Mais certainement, ces gens vous res-'
semblent; ce pays est votre, vous n'avez qu'a. vous en
saisir." Qui esUl'origine de cette invitation? La puissance de la Chine, et non le Premier Ministre d'un
petit pays comme le Pakistan.
62. Ce sont la. des choses que le Conseil de s~curit~
doit comprendre. Le Conseil est responsable de la s~­
curit~ et de la palx du monde. Le Conseil est aujourd'hui l'autorite la plus haute de cette organisation
internationale, et son attention dolt etre appelee sur
tous ces faits.

that India is spending on its defence forces, or offence
forces, is four times the amount that we are spending.
We are spending 75 per cent of our national revenue on
defence forces. India, with a budget four orfive times
larger, is spending 40 to 50 per cent. This is published
in its budget. The last time I made this statement, Mr.
Krishna Menon tried to deny it. In the latest budget
published by India, 40 per cent of the total revenue is
going to its defence forces. Why is India trying to build
up all these defence forces? Against whom? They will
never be used against China, I can assure you.
61. At the time of the partition, the British had their
forces in Tibet; they had their battalions, their political
officers, their public works officers to look after the
roads, and their post and telegraph officers-that all
belonged to the British. That country was looked after
by the British. It was almost a part of British India,
like any of the other States. But when the Chinese
Government paid a little attention to Tibet, my friends
there said: "Oh, yes; these people look like you; this is
your country, by all means come and take it." Behind
that request was the might of China, and not the Prime
Minister of a small country like 'Pakistan.

62. The Security Council must realize these matters.
It is responsible for the security and peace of the
world. It is the highest authority today in the Inter-

national organization and these things must be brought
to its notice.
63. I am told that in order to attack a country one
must have at least three times the strength of the other
country. If today we have one armoured division and we
want to attack India, which has three armoured
divisions, in order to win we would need nine armoured
divisions. How can we increase our strength from one
armoured division to nine armoured divisions overnight in order to fight against India?

63. Pour pouvoir attaquer un pays, il faut disposer,
me dit-on, de forces au moins trois fois plus puissantes que celles de l'adversaire. Si nous disposons
aujourd'hui d'une division blindee et que nous voulions
attaquer l'Inde, qui poss~de trois divisions blindeeG,
neuf divisions nous seraient necessaires pour que nous
ayons des chances de vaincre. Commentpouv0ns-nous
du jour au lendemain porter nos forces de une it neuf
divisions blindees afin de combattre l'Inde?

64. When India comes before the Security Council and
pretends that there is a danger of and it fears an attack
from Pakistan, I am reminded of a little story of the
wolf and the lamb that were drinking water from the
same stream. The lamb was downstream from the wolf,
and the wolf turned round and said: "Why are you
polluting my water?" The lamb replied: "Sir, I am
drinking down here below you and you are above me; I
cannot be polluting your water." The wolf then said:
"You dare to contradict me and call me a liar", whereupon he grabbed the lamb and ran off with him. That is
the type of argument which India is now putting forward
with regard to the defensive strength of Pakistan, a
small country which has practically nothing at all in
comparison .with what India has, when it claims that
we are going to attack it. I think that the world has
better sense than to agree to such a flimsy argument.

64. Lorsque l'Inde se pr~sente devant le Conseil de
s~curi~ et pr~tend qu'il existe un danger d'agression
de la part du Pakistan et qU'ellecraintd'etre attaqu~e
par cet Etat, cela me rappelle la petite histoire du
loup et de l'agneau qui buvaient l'eau du meme rUisseau. Vagneau se trouvait en aval par rapport au
loup, et le loup, se tournant vers lui, lui dit: "Pourquoi
troubles-tu mon breuvage?" L'agneau r~pondit: "Sire,
je me d~salt~re en cet endroit qui se trouve en aval
par rapport a. vous; je ne puis donc pas troubler votre
breuvage." Et le loup de dire: "Tuoses me contredire
et pret~ndre que je mens. ri La.-dessus, H se saisit de
l'agneau et l'emporta. Tel est legenred'argumentque
l'Inde fait valoir actuellement au sujet des forces d~­
fensives du Pakistan - petit pays pratiqu!l!ment d~­
pourvu de tout par rapport a. ce que l'Inde poss~de 10rsqu'elIe pr~tend que nous alIons l'attaquer. Je pense
que le monde a trop de ban sens pour accepter un argument aussi d~nu~ de fondement.

65. I assert that the Indian armed might is not there
for show. Even as I am speaking before this august
body, the Indian war machine is being mobilized and
concentrated along the frontiers of Pakistan. We had a

65. J'affirme que les forces arm~es indiennes ne sont
pas seulement destin~es a. la parade. En ce moment
meme 011 je parle devant le Conseil, on mobilise la
machine de guerre indienne; on la concentre le long,

[1

17

._p-...
~~

I

,

:1

I

I
,I

press release here concerning the mobilization of the
Indian Army on our frontier, and Mr. Krishna Menon
said, "There are observers in Kashmir and we have
mobilized no army in Kashmir". The mobilization of
the Army is outside Kashmir on the borders of West
Pakistan. I shall give the Council the official details on
this matter. If I say that India possesses a knife in its
right hand, Mr. Krishna Menon says, "Come andlook,
my right hand is quite empty, there is no knife in it";
but he has got a big sword on his left hand side. He then
says, "But you never said anything about the left hand
side ll • He is trying to hoodwink the Security Council by
saying that they have done nothing in Kashmir. They
may have done nothing there, that is notour allegation.
Our allegation is that they have mobilized troops on our
borders in West Pakistan.

des fronti~res du Pakistan. Nous avions produit devant
le Conseil un communiqu~ de presse concernant la mobilisation de l'arm~e indienne le long de nos fronti~res,
et M. Krishna Menon a r~pondu: "11 y a des observateurs au Cachemire, et nous n'y avons mobilis~ aucune
arm~e." La mobilisation de l'arm~e s'est effectuae
hors du Cachemire, sur les fronti~res du Pakistan
occidental. Je communiquerai au Conseil les renseignements officiels dont nous disposons a. ce sujet. Si
je dis que l'Inde a un couteau dans la main droite,
M. Menon r~pond: "Mais non, regardez: ma main droite
est vide, elle ne tient aucun couteau" - mais il a une
grande ~p~e suspendue au cota gauche. 11 ajoute alors:
"Mais vous n'avez jamais parl~ du cot6 ga~che." Il
essaie de donner le change au Conseil de sacurit6 en
disant que l'Inde n'a rien fait auCachemire. Il se peut
que l'Inde n'ait rien fait au Cachemire - ce n'est pas
ce que nous pr~tendons. Nous affirmons que l'Inde a
mobilisE! des troupes sur les fronti~res du Pakistan
occidental.

66. Significant troop movements have taken place on
the Indian side of West Pakistan since the recent discussion of the Kashmir question in the Security Council
began. The information that I am going to give the
Council is based on a telegram which I received from
my Government, and the telegram is based on army
intelligence reports and other reports which our Government possesses about the troop movements of India
on our borders. We released this information by way
of a press release here, and it was based on this
official telegram and not on newspaper information
which was conveyed to us. This is official Government
information,

66. Des mouvements de troupes importants ont eu
lieu du c6M indien de la fronti~re du Pakistan occidental depuis la r~cente discussion dont la question
du Cachemire a commenc~ a. faire l'objet au Conseil
de sacurit6. Les renseignements que je vais donner au
Conseil se fondent sur un t6Mgramme que j'ai regu de
mon gouvernement; ce t6Mgramme se fonde lui-meme
sur des rapports de notre service de renseignements
militaires et sur d'autres rapports dont notre gouvernement dispose au sujet des mouvements de troupes
indiennes le long de nos fronti~res. Nous avons !ci
meme, sous forme d'un communiqu6 de presse, divulgu6 ces renseignements, qui se fondaient sur ce
t6Mgramme officiel et non sur des nouvelles parues
dans les journaux. 11 s'agit de renseignements officiels de source gouvernementale.

67. The principal moves were as follows:

67. Les principaux mouvements de troupes ataient
les suivants:

"(1) 166th Brigade (5th Division) has been moved
from Dalhousie (Punjab, India) to Pathankot on the
Indo-Pakistan border;

"1) La 166~me brigade (5ll!me division) a l!Mtransf6r6e de Dalhousie (dans la partie indienne du
Pendjab) a. Pathankot, a. la fronti~re indo-pakistanaise;

"(2) 77th Infantry Brigade (5th Division) from
Dharamsala to Amritsar" -which is within thirteen
miles of our border-"relieving 123rd Brigade (27th
Division) which is now being deployed in the Khemkaran-Rajoke area between Ferozpur and Wagah"That is also on our border.

"2) La 77~me brigade d'infanterie (5~me division)
a l!tl! transf6rl!e de Dharamsala a. Amritsar - cette
ville est situae a. 13 milles de la fronti~re pakistanaise - oil elle a releva la 123~me brigade (27eme
division), qui se daploie actuellement dans laragion
de Khemkaran-Rajoke, entre Ferozpur et Wagahc'est-a.-dire agalement le long de la fronti~re du
Pakistan.

"The net result of these movements is that India
now has two complete divisions, plus one independent
brigade, on the East Punjab-West Pakistan border,
and, in addition, one division, the 4th Division, at
Ambala, and two independent armoured brigades at
Patia.la.

"11 rl!sulte de ces mouvements de troupes que
l'Inde a maintenant deux divisions compl~tes et une
brigade autonome a. la fronti~requi sapare le Pendjab
oriental du Pakistan occidental; elle a, en outre une
division, la 4~me, a. Ambala et deux brigades autonomes blind6es a. Patiala.

!!Thus the over-all position is that India now has
tllree divisiOIlB, plus three detached brigades, on the
Jammu and Kashmir border."

"En consaquence, 1'Inde dispose maintenant au total
de trois divisions et de trois brigades autonomes a.
la fronti~re de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire."

on
It

di
ga
n

is
Ba

69.
broa
and!

"

me
se
bo
tio
bee
Ar
eir
and
pre
ma
all

tha

70.
earn
very
that
Seeu
this
area
here
done
prog
I sho
posit"
your

7l.

battal
train
meet!
to dra
Kashn
not bE
first a
"Azad
batt .
soldie
Kashn
effeeti

72. S

happe
State,
link b
mir f

68. Voici maintenant les chiffres concernant les
forces indiennes stationnaes dans l'Etat:

1J.8. Now these are the figures in Kashmir State:

"Trois divisions et trois brigades autonomes a. la
fronti~re de l'Etat; trois divisions, une brigade au-

"Three divisions, plus three detached brigades, on
fu-; Jammu and Kashmir border; three divisions, plus
18

,

i

;i

L

"Azad
There
mand
Army
are s

-.--.
.._. ...•_._. __._.--'--_'
~._

~

duitdevant
ant la mo-

'ronti~res,

observa-

is~ aucune
effectu~e

Pakistan
es renseie sujet. Si
in droite,
o.ain droite
is il a une
Jute alors:
rauche." n
~eurit~ en
n se peut
n'est pas
le l'Inde a
1 Pakistan

Its ant eu
stan oeeia question
tU Conseil
:donnerau
airegu de
lui-meme
19nements
'egouverle troupes
avons iei
resse, dint sur ee
es parues
lents offi~s ~taient

~t6trans­

llenne du
I-pakistadivision)
r - cette
! pakistale (27eme
lar~gion

Wagah nti~re

du

lupes que
:es et une
ePendjab
outre une
des autont au total
DnOmes :l
ire."

:,
,I

'Mnt les

"

:

lmes a. la
19ade au-

-",-_ ..

_-~_._

..

-

one indepeudent brigade and an armoured brigade on
ae East Punjab border, making a grand total of six
divisions and four brigades, plus an armoured brigade, against West Pakistan.

tonome et une brigade blind~e a. la fronti~re du
Pendjab oriental, c'est-a.-dire que, au total, six divisions, quatre brigades et une brigade blind~e menacent le Pakistan occidental.

"There a=e indications that one armoured division
is also moving from its present location at JhansiBab,ina. "
69. In view of these developments, my Prime Minister
broadcast to the people of Pakistan on 16 February,
and I quote in part from his statement, as follows:

"n semble ~galement qu'une division blind~e s'apprete a. qUitter Jhansi-Babina, oft elle est actuellement cantonn~e."
69. En raison de ces ~v~nements, le Premier Ministre
du Pakistan aprononc~le 16 f~vrierundiscours radiodiffus~, dont je vais citer un passage:

"Whatever may be the reasonS for these movements, the action of India will have dangerous consequences. So many troop movem:ents along the
border, digging trenches, taking up strategic posi':
tions, may provoke border incidents which may
become serious. I have issued instructions to our
Army and our people not to be provoked under any
circumstances. Clashes on the border will suit India,
and may even be engineered by it h an attempt to
prevent the United Nations from considering the
matter coolly and calmly. We have, therefore, to be
all the more careful that we do not get excited and
that we do not fall into a trap laid for us. "

"QueUes que soient les raisons de ces mouvements
de troupes, l'action entreprise par l'Inde aura de
dangereuses cons~quences. De si nombreux mouvements de troupes le long delafronti~re, le creusage
de tranch~es, l'occupation de positions strat~giques,
tout cela peut provoquer des incidents de fronti~re
qui risquent de devenir s~rieux. J' ai donn~ des
instructions i l' arm~e et au peuple pakistanais afin
qu'en cas de provocation lls ne r~pondent sous aucun
pr~texte. Des incidents de fronti~re serviraient les
desseins de l'Inde, etil sepeutmeme que les Indiens
en provoquent eux-memes dans l'intention d'empecher l'Organisation des Nations Unies d'examiner
la question avec calme et impartialit~. Nous devons
donc faire extremement attention :l ne pas perdre
notre sang-froid et a. ne pas tomber dans le pi~ge
que l'on nous tend."

70. I should, at this stage, like to point out very
earnestly to the Security Council that the question is
very serious. You do not,know, gentlemen, the danger
that you are facing, and it is really the duty of the
Security Council to take. some definite steps to resolve
this dangerous situation. Otherwise, the whole of this
area will get into a position which we will all regret
hereafter. So, something has to be done, andhas to be
done quickly, and you, gentlemen, have got to stop this
progressive deterioration between these two countries.
I should not say any more. I think you know what the
position is, and if you do not take any action, well, it is
your responsibility.

70. Je d~sire, a. ce stade du d~bat, dire de fac;on pressante aux membres «;iu Conseil que la question est tr~s
grave. Vous ne voyez pas, Messieurs, le danger qUi
vous menace; le Conseil a sans aucun doute le devoir
de prendre des mesures ~nergiques pour mettre fin
a. ce dangereux ~tat de choses, faute de quoi, la situation dans l'ensemble de cette r~gion ~voluera d'une
mani~re que nous d~plorerons tous par la suite. Il faut
done agir et agir rapidement; c'est a. vous, Messieurs,
qu'll incombe de mettreun terme a.l'aggravation - qui
va en s'accentuant - de la situation entre les deux
pays. Je n'en dirai pas plus, car je pense que le Conseil connaft la situation - et j' estime qu' ~llui incombe
de prendre ses responsabilit~s.
71. M. Menon a dit ~galement: "On compte maintenant
45 bataillons de soldats du Cachemire "azad" (... ),
command~s, form~s et ~quip~s par l'arm~e du Pakistan" [769~me s~ance, par. 58]. On voudrait en d~­
duire que la d~militarisation du Cachemire "azad" est
impossible. Je dois avouer que je ne comprends pas
cet argument. Je tiens avant tout a. affirmer cat~gori­
quement que les forces du Cachemire "azad" ne
comptent pas 45 bat~Uons. J'ai d~ja. di~ et je r~p~te
que. les effectifs des forces du Cachemire "azad" ne
se sont pas r ccrues d'un seul soldat depuis Fentr~e
en vigueur de la suspension d'armes.

71. Mr. Menon again said, "Now there are forty-five
battalions of the 'Azad' Kashmir forces ... , officered,
trained and equipped by the Pakistan Army" [769th
meeting; para. 58]. The conclusion which it is sought
to draw from this is that demilitarization of the "Azad"
Kashmir area is not possible. I am sorry, but I have
not been able to understand that argument. I would,
first and foremost, like to state categorically that the
"Azad" Kashmir forces do not number forty-five
battalions. I have said before, and I repeat, that not one
soldier has been added to the strength of the "Azad"
Kashmir forces since the time the cease-fire became
effective.
72. So, when this area is demilitarized, what will
72. Qu'arrivera-t-lllorsque cette r~gion serad~mihappen? The Pakistan Army will withdraw from the
litaris~e? L'arm~e pakistanaise se retirera de l'Etat
State, taking out all its equipment and personnel. The
avec tout son mat~riel et toutes ses troupes. Ainsi, la
link between the Pakistan Army and the "Azad" Kashliaison entre l'arm~e pakistanaise et les forces du
mir forces will thus be broken. What will be left in
Cachemire "azad" se trouvera rompue. Il ne restera
"Azad" KaShmir will be the people of the area itself.
plus dans le Cachemire "azad" que la population civile.
There will be no officer of the Pakistan Army in comIl n'y aura plus un seul officier pakistanais a. la tete
mand of any" Azad" Kashmir forces when the Pakistan
des fQrces du Cachemire "azad" lorsque l'arm~e paArmy withdraws from Kashmir. The reason that the re
kistanaise aura quitt~ I'Etat. Si un certain nombre d'ofare Some Pakistan officers in top positions in the
ficiers pakistanais occupent des postes de commandeKashmir forces is thai, in agreemeoi with the 19 ment d""s les forces du eachemire "azad" , e'est paree

:L'ad"

"Azad" Kashmir Government, the PakistanHighCommand is in over-all command of all the forces that are
now in that area.

que, en accord avec le Gouvernement du Cachemire
"azad", le Haut-Commandement pakistanais alahaute
main sur toutes les forces qui sont actuellement dans la

75. The Com
graphs 284 and

r~gion.

I;
11
i
11

;j

73. Then a reference was made to the alleged violation
by Pakistan of the cease-fire agreement. The ceasefire agreement was concluded on 27 July 1949. According to the terms of that agreement, all violations of the
cease-fire are reported to the two States and to the
United Nations Military Observers Group. There is a
procedure laid down for that purpose. The Security
Council receives periodical reports from the United
Nations Military Observers Group. Let it declare,
after reference to those reports, whether the allegations made in this respect by the representative of India
are correct. I assert that those allegations are completely baseless.

73. Il a ~t~ question ensuite de la pr~tendueviolation
de l'accord de suspension d'armes que le Pakistan aurait commise. Cet accord a ~t~ conclu le 27 juHlet
1949. Aux termes de cet accord, toute violation du
cessez- ·.tl··fl'lu doit etre signal~e aux deux Etats et au
groupe d'observateurs militaires des Nations Unies.
Une procMure sp~ciale a ~t~ ~tablie ~ cet effet. Le
Conseil de s~curiM rec;oit r~guli~rementdes rapports
du groupe d'observateurs militaires. Il peut v~rifier,
d'apr~s ces rapports, si les al16gations faites it ce
sujet par le repr6sentant de l'Inde sont exactes. J'affirme, pour ma part, que ces all~gations sontd6nu6es
de tout fondement.

74. The representative of India has more than once
quoted from the third interim report of the Commission
words to the effect that, while the situation in the State
has changed, the resolutions rem ain unchanged. That
report was submitted by the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan on 9 Dtecember 1949. All
that the Commission said, I submit, was-and I quote
from paragraph 283:

74. Le repr~sentant de l'Inde a plus d'une fois cit6
des passages du troisi~me rapport provisoire de la
Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan pour prouver que, si la situation de l'Etat a
chang6, les r6solutions demeurE'nt les m€lmes. La
Commission a pr~sent6 ca rapport le 9 d~cembre
1949. Les seules d~clarations que la Commission a
faites ~ ce sujet sont les suivantes - je cite le paragraphe 281:

"The period of investigation has been completed.
Within the framework of its terms of reference,
following in its endeavours the provisions contained
in its resolutions of 13 August 1948 and 5 January
1949, the Commission feels that the possibilities of
mediation open to it have been exhausted. Over a prolonged period, in a changing and dynamic situation
and restricted by long-standing related clarifications
which p~oved to be a real impediment to reaching
agreement, the framework of the resolution of 13
August has become inadequate in the light of the
factual conditions in the State. The Commission has
been unable, therefore, to mediate much beyond what
is today a rather outmoded pattern. The State of
Jammu and Kashmir has not been demilitarized, as
was envisaged in part IT of the resolution of 13
Au~st, and until this is achieved the conditions
necessary to the holding of a plebiscite cannot begin
to be established. As has been seen from those parts
of the report entitled 'The" Azad" Kashmir forces'
and 'Withdrawal of forces' the Commission believes
that the problem of demilitarization must be treated
as a whole, and that the distinctions relative to
demilitarization which exist in the division of the
problem into truce and plebiscite periods as visualized in the original plan of demilitarization has
proven one of the most difficult obstacles in achieving
agreement on the problem. It is evident that the presence of large numbers of troops in the State is not
conducive to the creation of a peaceful atmosphere.
The demilitarization of the State is essential to permit the holding of afree and unfettered plebiscite. "y

"A pr6sent, la p~riode d'enqu€lte a pris fin. D~­
ployant tous ses efforts dans les limites de son mandat, et s'inspirant it cet ~gard des dispositions de ses
r6solutions des 13 aout 1948 et 5 janvier 1949, la
Commission a la conviction d'avoir ~puis~ les possibilit6s de m~diation dont elle disposait. Apr~s une
p6riode prolong6e, dans une situation mouvante et
novatrice au milieu de laquelle la Comnussion se
trouvait limit6e par des pr6cisions 6tablies de
longue date, pr6cisions qui se sont av6r6es €ltre un
r6el obstacle it la r~alisation d'un accord, le :dre
de la r6solution du 13 aout a perdu de son actualit~
au regard de la situation de fait qui existe dans
l'Etat. La Commission a donc ~t6 incapable de conduire ses m~diations au-deIa de ce qui, a l'heure
actuelle, constitue une formule plutot d6su~te.
L'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire n'a pas 6t6 d6militaris6, comme l'envisageait la deuxi~me partie de
la r~solution du 13 aout; or, tantqu'onn'en sera pas
arriv~ la, 11 ne sera pas possible de passeI' it la
r~alisation des conditions n6cessaires ~l'organisa­
tion d'un pl6biscite. Comme il ressortdes parties du
rapport intif:ul~es "Les forces du Cachemire "azad"
et "Retrait des forces arm~es", la Commission
estime que le probl~me de la d~militarisationdoit
etre consid~r6 comme un tout et que les distinctions,
touchant la d~militarisation, qui r~sultentdeladivision du probl~me en une p~riode de tr€lve et une p6riode de pl6biscite, comme l'envisageaitleplanprimitif de d~militarisation, se sont av~r6es €ltre un
des plus redoutables obstacles it la r~alisation d'un
accord. Il va de soi que lapr~sencede troupes nombreuses dans l'Etat n'est pas favorable ala r~alisa­
tion d'une atmospMre pacifique. Lad~militarisation
de I'Etat est essentielle si I'on veut pouvoir organiser
un pl~biscite libre de toute entrave Y ."

:. ,
j'

fl/ Official Records of the Securit Council, Fourth Year
Special Supplement No. 7, document S 1430, para. 283.

~/ Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, uatrieme annee, Supplement special No 7, document S 1430,
par. 283.

20

"It is impe
issue be reac
it can be rea
established a
the holding of
people of the
may be freely
"The Com
body is the m
continue in
single person
negotiations
out in active
parties. The d
authority and
practical me
promise nece
dispute. "§/

76. The conte
by the Commiss
circumstances,
first, that de
brought about no
resolution, but .
mission should
taken by a singl
changed circums
cumstances we
There was nothi
the phraseology
quoted more tha

77. Let us see
by the Commissi
submit that they
itarization in a
against the inter
Pakistan, in a
reasonable basis
the Government
that was offered,
refused to agree
Lation in a single

78. I need not re
sions on which t
accept clear-cut ~
itarization of the
by me in my openi
the representativ
that even one of
to the Governme
some limit to intr

79. In his addre
Mr. Krishna Men
purported to be
correspondent wh
from Mr. Krishna
newspaper corres

L
,'j

--

Ibid••

P~M. 284

Cl

75. The Comm ission' s. report continu es, in its paragraphs 284 and 285:

75. La Comm ission dit ensuite , aux paragr aphes 284
et 285 de son rappor t:

"It is impera tive that a settlem ent of the Kashm ir
issue be reache d, and the Comm ission believe s that
it can be reache d. To this end, conditi ons should be
establi shed at an early date which will make possib le
the holding of a plebisc ite whereb y the wishes of the
people of the State regard ing the future of the State
may be freely ascerta ined.

"il est indispe nsable d'abou tir a un rElglem entdan s
le problO me du Cachem ire, et la Commiss~onest persuad~e qu'il est possib le d'y aboutir . Pour
cela, 11
faudra it r~aliser dans le plus bref d~lai des conditions qui perme ttent l'organ isation d'un pl~biscite
par lequd la popula tion de l'Etat ferait librem ent
connaf tre ses aspirat ions en ce qui concer ne l'aveni r
de l'Etat.

"The Comm ission doubts whethe r a five-m embel'
body is the most flexibl e and desirab le instrum ent to
continue in the task. In the Comm ission' s view, a
single person can now more effectiv ely conduc t the
negotia tions which, to be succes sful, mustbe carried
out in active and constan t consul tation with the two
parties . The design ation of a single person with broad
authori ty and undivid ed respon sibility offers a more
practic al means of finding the balanc e and compromis e necess ary to advanc e the settlem ent of the
dispute . "§./

"La Comm ission doute qu'un organe cpmpos~ de
cinq membr es soit l'instru ment le plus souple et le
plus opportu n pour continu er la tache entam~e. De
l'avis de la Comm ission, uneper sonne seulep ourrait
actuell ement mener plus efficac ement des n~gocia­
:ions qui, pour atre couronn~es de SUCCElS, doiven t
prendr e la forme de consul tations actives et
consta ntes avec les deux parties . La d~signation
d'une telle personl!alit~,investi e d'une large autorit~
et d'une responsabilit~ entiElre, offre un moyen plus
pratiqu e de r~aliser l'~quilibre et l'espri t de conciliatio n n~~essairespour faire avance r le rElglement
du diff~rend.Q/. "
76. Les circon stance s qui ont amen~ la Comm ission
a faire ces d~clarationsappara issent nettem ent. Tenant
compte des change ments interve nus, la Comm ission
a fait deux sugges tions: elle a indiquE Houtd'a bord que
la d~militarisationdevrai t s'effec tuer non pas en deux
~tapes comme on l'avait envisa g~ dans la r~solut
ion,
mais en une seule fois; elle a indiqu~ ensuite que l'on
devrai t dissou dre la Comm ission et coniier sa tache a
une seule person ne. Telles ~taient les deux seuls changemen ts interve nus, mais la r~solution demeu rait la
meme. C'est la tout ce que laCom missio n voulait dire
dans son rappor t, que le repr~sentant de l'Inde a si
souven t cit~.

76. The contex t in which this phrase ology was used
by the Comm ission is clear. In the light of the change d
circum stances , the Comm ission sugges ted two things:
first, that demili tarizat ion should hencef orth be
brought about not in the two stages, as enVisa ged in the
resolution, but in one stage; second , that the Commission should be dissolv ed and that its place should be
taken by a single individ ual. Those were the only two
changed circum stance s; the resolut ion stOOd; the circumsta nces were change d in those two directi ons.
There was nothing more that the Comm ission meant by
the phraseo logy which the represe ntative of India has
quoted more than once.
77. Let us see whethe r ornott hese recom' mendat ions
by the Comm ission were accepte d by Pakista n. I beg to
submit that they were. Despit e the fact that demilitarizat ion in a single, continu ous proces s worked
against the interes ts of Pakista n, the Govern ment of
Pakistan, in a sincer e effort to go forwar d on any
reasonable basis, accepte d this propos ition. What did
the Govern ment of India do? It secure d the conces sion
that was offered , and therea fter dug its toes in and
refused to agree to any reason able plan of demili tarLation in a single, continu ous proces s.
78. I need not repeat the story. The numbe r of occasions on which the Govern ment of India refused to
accept clear-c ut and specifi c propos als for the demilitarizat ion of the State have already been enume rated
by me in my openin g statem ent; and, despite his efforts ,
the represe ntative of India has not been able to say
that even one of these propos als was found accepta ble
to the Govern ment of India. Surely , there should be
some limit to intrans igence .
79. In his addres s to the Counci l on 15 Februa ry,
Mr. Krishn a Menon read out certain portion s of what
purported to be the views of. a certain Austra lian
Correspondent who was recentl y in Kashm ir. It appear s
from Mr. Krishn a Menon 's version that this Austra lian
newspaper corresp ondent was giving his impres sions

-

QJ !!lli!., paras. 284 and 285.

l-

77. Voyons si ces recomm andatio ns de la Comm ission
ont ~M accept~es par le Pakista n. J'affirm e qu'elle s
l'ont ~t~. La d~militarisation en une seule ~tape continue ~tait contra ire aux int~rets du Pakista n, mais le
Gouve rnemen t pakista nais, sinc~rementd~sireuxd 'aller de l'avant a partir de toute base raisonn able, n'en
a pas moins accept~ cette propos ition. Qu'a fait le
Gouve rnemen t indien? Il a profit~ de la conces sion qui
lui ~tait offerte , puis 11 a adopt~ une attitud e intransigean te, refusan t d'acce pter tout plan raisonn able de
d~mili tarisa tion en une seule ~tape continu e.
78. Il est inutile que je retrace tout l'histor ique de
l'affair e. J'ai d~ja indiqu~ au cours de ma premiE lre
d~claration comme nt le Gouve rnemen t indien,
a ma1ntes reprise s, a refus~ d'acce pter des propos itions
concrE ltes et pr~cises en vue de la d~militarisationde
l'Etat. Malgr~ ses efforts , le repr~sentant de l'Inde
n'a pas pu dire qu'une seule de ces propos itions a ~t~
jug~e accepta ble par le Gouve rnemen t indien. Il
devrai t
vraime nt y avoir une limite a l'intran sigean ce.
79. Lorsqu 'il s'est adress~ au Consei l, le 15 f~vrier
dernie r, M. Krishn a Menon a donn~ lecture de quelqu es
passag es d'un article qui auraitexprim~l'opini ond'un
certain corresp ondant austral ien qui s' ~tait r~cemment
rendu au Cachem ire. n ressor t de la version donn~e
par M. Krishn a Menon que ce corresp ondant de presse

§/ Ibid., par. 284 et 285.
21

"in an informal meeting with thelocalnew~;;>apermen"
in Srinagar on 7 February 1957 [769th meeting, para.
156].

australien a fait connaftre ses impressions "au cours
d'une r~union non officielle avec les journalistes 10caux", qui a eu lieu a. Srinagar le 7 f~vrier 1957
[769~me s~ance, par. 156].
80. Je n'ai pas le temps de rappeler tout ce que
l'Inde a fait, dans la partie de l'Etat qu'elle occupe,
pour emp/kher les journalistes d'accomplir leur
travail. Elle a institu~ en fait la censure des d~peches
de presse exp~dMes de Srinagar. Les correspondants
et r~dacteurs pakistanais n 'ont jamais ~t~ autoris~s a.
pan~trer daI18 l'Etat. Quant aux correspondants ~tran­
gers, on les en a exclus dans la mesure du possible.
Seuls quelques privil~gi~s ont ~t~ admis a. prendre part
a. des visites officielles organis~es a. travel's l'Etat.
Non seulement les journaux de l'Etat qui r~clamaient
un pl~biscite ont ~t~ interdits, mais les journaux de
Deiili et d'autres villes importantes qui demandaient
que la population du Cachemire fUt trait~e de fa<;on
~quitable ont ~t~ supprim~s ou ont fait l'objet de mesures vexatoires.

80. There is not time enough to recall all that India
has been doing by way of the suppression of newspapermen in the part of the State occupied by India.
There has been a virtual censorship of press messages
going out from Srinagar. Pakistan correspondents and
editors have never been allowed to go into the State.
Foreign ~orrespondents have been excluded so far as
possible. Only a few chosen ones have been taken on
conducted tours of the State. Not only have newspapers
in the State been suppressed for demanding a plebiscite,
but newspapers in Delhi and other important towns
which have pleaded for a fair deal for the Kashmiris
have either been suppressed or harassed in other
ways.

of charcoal
over me and

"Today I
result of at
to the home
Bakhshi.
"The idea
of Srinagar f
has decreed.
"Secondly,
try tc frighte
of the Bakhsh

"I now have
out of premi
darling of Ka
Political Co
mosques.

81. Je voudrais signaler ici ce qui est arriv~ r~­
cemment - au cours de la premi~re semaine de" ce
mois - a deux correspondants ~trangers qui se trouvaient a. Srinagar. L'un d'eux ~tait M. Richard
Greenough, correspondant du "Daily Mail". Voici ce
qu'il d~clare dans une d~peche expMi~e de Srinagar
le 4 f~vrier:
"R~cemment, certains milieux gouvernementaux
du Cachemire ont orgaI1is~ avec soin ..... j 'ai de bonnes
raisons de le croire - deux manifestations violentes
dirig~es contre moi et contre un autre correspondant britannique. Ces maIlifestations avaient pour
objet de me convaincre des sentiments pro-indiens
de la population ainsi que de la haine ~t de l'amertume ressenties contre les Britanniques, l' Organisation des Nations Unies etl'Occidenteng~n~ralparce
qu'ils sont favorables a. la requete pakistanaisetendant a. l'organisation d'un pMbiscite. Elles avaient
~galement pour but de me faire peur et de m'empecher de parler a ceux qui s'opposent au rattachement a. l'Inde. Ces op: sants existent sans aucun
doute, malgr~ toutes les mesures de r~pression."

81. I would mention here what happened as recently as
the first week of the current month to two foreign
correspondents Visiting Srinagar. One was the
correspondent of the "Daily Mail", Mr. Richard
Greenough. This is what he said in a dispatch from
Srinagar dated 4 February:
"Two recent demonstrations of mob violence
against myself and another British correspondent
here were carefully 'fixed' by a high quarter of the
Kashmir Government, I have good grounds for
believing. Demonstrations were intended to impress
on me the pro-Indian feeling of the people here and
also the degree of hatred and bitterness felt against
the British, the United Nations and the West generally
for favouring the Pakistan request for a plebiscite.
They were also intended to try to scare me off talking
to those who oppose integration with India. They
undoubtedly exist, stifled though they are."

82. Another correspondent who visited the area was
Mr. Stephen Harper of the "Daily Express". This is
what he said about his experiences in Srinagar in a
dispatch published in the "Daily Express" on 5
February 1957:

82. Le deuxi~me correspondant qui se trouvait dans
la r~gion ~tait M. Stephen Harper, du "Daily Express".
Voici ce qU'il dit de son s~jour a. Srinagar dans une
d~peche publi~e par son journal le 5 f~vrier 1957:

"In this capital city of the 'Valley of Fear', I
learned today how a plot was laid to set the mob
against me. The 'Valley of Fear' is in Kashmirwhere India's PremierNehrukeepsapuppetGovernment in power with the support of 80,000 Indian
troops.

"Dans ceUe capitale de la "Vall~e de lapeur", j'a!
appris aujourd'hui comment on avait complot~ pour
dresser la foule contre moi. La Vall~e de la peuT
est situee au Cachemire, oft, grace a. M. Nehru,
premier ministre de l'Inde, un gouvernement fantoche se maintient au pouvoir avec l'appui de 80.000
soldats indiens.

"The puppet Premier is Bakhshi Ghulam Mohammed. He had declared 'the irrevocable accession'
of Kashmir to India without Kashmir's 4 million
people having a say in the matter.

"Le chef de ce gouvernement fantoche est Bakhshi
Ghulam Mohammed. Il a proclam~ "le rattachement
irr~vocable" du Cachemire a. l'Inde, sans que les
4 millions d'habitants du Cachemire aient eu voix
au chapitre.

"1 had scarcely arrived in the Srinagar capital last
week when a mob swarmed round my car. They
shouted 'Murder him-we don't want British reporters here!' Car doors and canopy were ripped off.
Hands grabbed and tore at my clothes. Little baskets

"La semaine derni~re, j'~tais a. peine arriv~ dans
la capitale, Srinagar, que la foule a entour~ ma
voiture. Elle criait: "A mort! Nous ne voulons pas
de journalistes britanniques ici:" Les portes et la

"Besides m
of two other a
warned that I
paper is cri
'Daily Expre
Kashmir has

83. I am ment
Mr. Krishna Me
Council of what
parted to have
on 7 February.
has consistent!
foreign corresp
world opinion,
dents to go to S
ditions which wo
84. A correspo
the following rep
August 1955:

"As j:hings ar
to be assaultel
Kashmir Gover
to be arrested
locked up with
but it seldom
well-run Indi
hammed, the p
looks like a m
like one."
85. The London
the following rep
;.:

~!

"The Gover
sorship by refu

capole de rea volture ont.", arracMes. Des mains ~ visit Kash
22

of charco al-carr ied around for heat-w ere poured
over me and burned my face.

"Today I discov ered that the mob gathere d as a
result of a telepho ne call from a Govern ment officia l
to the home of the brothe r of the puppet Premi er
Bakhshi.
"The idea was to try to convin ce me that the people
of Srinag ar favour integra tion with India, as Bakhsh i
has decree d.
"Secon dly, assemb ling of the mob was an attemp t to
try tc frighte n me out of trying to contac t oppone nts
of the Bakhsh i r~gime. In both ways theplo t failed.
"I now have eviden ce that Sheikh Abdull ah-hus tled
out of premie rship and jailed in 1953- is still the
darling of Kashm ir, and a party called the Kashm ir
Politic al Confer ence carrie s on secret meetin gs in
mosque s.
"Besid es my source s for this news, I have heard
of two other attemp ts to contac t me. Last night I was
warned that I am a target for the mob becaus e my
paper is critica l of Premi er Nehru. News of the
'Daily Expres s' campai gn urging a fair deal for
Kashm ir has spread to this remote valley. "

83. I am mentio ning these recent inciden ts becaus e
Mr. Krishn a Menon has chosen to inform the Securit y
Council of what an Austra lian corresp ondent was reported to have told Indian newspa permen in Srinag ar
on 7 Februa ry. Thefac t,howe ver,ist hatInd ia's policy
has consist ently been to screen off the area from
foreig:l corresp ondent s. Whene ver, under pressu re of
world opinion, India has allowe d foreign corresp ondents to go to Srinag ar, we have had reports on conditions which would interes t this Counci l.
84. A corresp ondent of the London "Econo mist" made
the following report in a dispatc h which appear ed on 20
August 1955:
"As j:hings are, the averag e Kashm iri has no desire
to be assault ed by the paid bullies of the presen t
Kashm ir Govern ment's so-call ed 'Peace Brigad e' or
to be arreste d on some specio us charge and to be
locked up withou t trial. His resentm ent smould ers,
but it seldom bursts into flame. Kashm ir is quite a
well-ru n Indian colony ... Bakhsh i Ghulam Mohammed, the presen t Prime Minist er of Kashm ir,
looks like a mousta ched Musso lini and often talks
like one."

L

"Outre ces renseig nemen ts que j'ai r6ussi :lobtenir, j'ai appris que deux autres tentati ves avaien t
ete faites pour entrer en rappor ts avec mol. Hier
soir, j'ai ~te averti que la foule m'en veut parce que
mon journa l critiqu e le Premi er Minist re, M. Nehru.
La nouvel le de la campag ne menee par le "Daily
Expres s" en faveur d'une solutio n equitab le pour le
Cachem ire est parven ue jusque dans cette val16e
eloign~e. "
83. Si je rappell e ces inciden ts recent s, c'est parce
que M. Krislm a Menon a juge bon d'infor mer le Conseil de securit e de ce qu'un corresp ondant austral ien
aurait declar e :l des journa listes indiens le 7 fevrier
:l Srinag ar. En realite , l'Inde a toujou rs eu pour politique d'tkart er de la region les corresp ondant s de
presse etrang ers. Chaque fois que, sous la pressio n
de l'opinio n mondia le, l'Inde a autoris e des corres pondan ts de presse etrang ers ~ se rendre :l Srinag ar,
nous avons obtenu sur la situatio n des renseig nemen ts
qui int6res seraien t certain ement le Consei !.
84. Un corresp ondant de l' "Econo mist", de Londre s,
a 6crit ce qui suit dans une d6p~che parue le" 20 aout
1955:
"Dans l'etat actuel des choses , le citoyen moyen
ne d~sire nullem ent etre attaqu~ par les brutes :l
gages qui font partie de la pretend ue "brigad e de la
paix" de l'actue l gouver nemen t du Cache' mire, ni
~tre arrete sous quelqu e pr~texte fallacie ux
et emprisonn e sans jugeme nt. Ses ressen timent s couven t,
mais Hs ~clatent rareme nt. Le Cachem ire est une
colonie indienn e parfait ement admin istree (... ).
Bakhsh i Ghulam Moham med, l'actue l Premi er Ministre du Cache mire, a l' air d'un Musso lini mousta chu, et il parle souven t comme lui."
85. Le "Times " de Londre s a, le 14 oc;tobre 1955,
publie la d~peche suivan te de son corresp ondant dans
l'Inde:

85. The London "Time s" of14 Octobe r 1955 publish ed
the following report from its corresp ondent in India:

:'.1

se sont agripp~es ~ mes v~tements et ont essay~ de
les mettre en pi~ces. De petits braser os - dont on
se sert pour se r~chauffer - ont tiM renver stis sur
moi et j'ai ~tti brU16 au visage .
",T'ai d6couv ert aujourd 'hui que la foule s'~tait
rassem b16e :l la suite d'un messag e t6Mphonique
adress e par un fonctio nnaire au domici le du fr~re
de Bakhsh i, le Premi er Minist re fantoch e.
"Il s'agiss ait d'essa yer de me convai ncre que la
popula tion de Srinag ar est favora ble au rattach ement
:ll'Ind e, d6cret~ par Bakhsh i.
"En second lieu, on voulait , en ameuta nt la foule,
me faire peur et m'emp echer d'entre r en rappor ts
avec les advers aires du r~gime de Bakhsh i. Le ccmplot a toh:lem ent 6choue , car nil'un nil'aut re de ces
objecti fs n'ont 6t~ atteint s.
"J'ai mainte nant la preuve que le cheik Abdull ah,
chass6 de son poste de Premi er Minist re et emprisonne en 1953, est toujou rs l'enfan t cMri duCac hemire, et qu'un parti appe16 Confer ence politiq ue du
Cachem i-re tient des reunio ns secr~tes dans des
mosqu 6es.

"The Govern ment of India is still practis ing censorship by refusin g to allow British corresp ondent s
to visit Kashm ir. Repres entativ es of the 'Daily

"Le Gouve rnemen t indien continu e d'appli querun e
censur e en interdi sant aux corresp ondant s de presse
britann iques de se rendre auCac hemire . Les repr~-

23

I
t

,I

j,

, j

,

'I
,1
.1

'I

'·1

'1

~i

I

;1

·1

:1

J"

.j
'1

i

.J

1
'l

Telegraph' and 'Daily Express' have failed to obtain
the necessary permits and have left the country."

sentants du "Daily Telegraph" et du "Daily Express"
n'ont pas r~ussi ~ obtenir leslaissez-passern~ces­
saires et lIs ont quitt~ le pays."

86. The London "Daily Telegraph" of 14 October
published a dispatch from its correspondent, Mr.
George Evans, which said, in part:

86. Le "Daily Telegraph", de Londres, a publM le
14 octobre une d~peche de son correspondant,
M. George Evans, qui disait notamment:

"This morning when I withdrew my application
after a vain eighteen-day wait for an entry permit
to Kashmir, a New Delhi Government spokesman
insisted that my application had not been refused.
It was merely 'delayed'.

"Ce matin, lorsque j'ai retir~ ma demande apr~s
avoir attendu vainement pendant 18 jours l'autorisation d'entrer au Cachemire, unporte-paroleduGouvernement de New-Delhi a soulign~ que mademande
n'avait pas ~t~ rejet~e, et que l'octroidel'autorisation avait ~t~ simplement "retard~".

"This statement was made despite the fact tha.t
since my application was first submitted the India
Ministry of Defence, which controls the issue of
permits, had given one to a Japanese correspondent
within two days of his application."

"Voll~ ce qui m'a ~t~ dit, alors que, depuis que
j'ai pr~sent~ ma demande, le Minist~re indien de la
d~fense, de qui d~pend la d~livrance des laissezpasser, en a accord~ un a. un correspondant de
presse japonais dans les deux jours qui ont suivi la
pr~sentation de sa demande."

87. In its issue of 21 October 1955, the London "Daily
Telegraph" published another dispatch from the same
correspondent, Mr. George Evans, writing from
Muzaffarabad, "Azad" Kashmir-that is, from the
free side of Kashmir. In this dispatch, Mr. Evans said:

87. Dans son num~ro du 21 octobre 1955, le "Daily
Telegraph", de Londres, a publi~ une autre d~peche
que le meme correspondant, M. George Evans, avait
expMi~e de Muzaffarabad, localit~ situ~e dans le
Cachemire "azad", c'est-~-dire dans la partie du
Cachemire qui est libre. Dans cette d~peche, M. Evans
disait:

"Recent reports of disaffection in 'Azad' Kashmir
emanating from India are not in accordance with the
actual conditions which I have observed in the course
of a two-day visit here.

"Les r~cents rapports indiens concernant un m~­
contentement dans le Cachemire "a:zad" ne sont pas
conformes a la situation r~elle tellequej'aipu l'observer pendant un s~jour de 48 heures que j'ai fait
ici.

liThe most striking contrast is that, while Mr.
Nehru's Government excludes observers from
Indian-occupied Kashmir whom it suspects might
voice criticism of conditions there, no such discriminatory censorship is applied this side of the
cease-fire line ...

"Le contraste le plus frappant est le suivant: alors
que le Gouvernement de M. Nehru interdit l'acc~s
de la partie du Cachemire occup~e par l'Inde aux
observateurs ~trangers qU'll soupgonne de vouloir
critiquer l'~tat de choses existant dans cette r~gion,
aucune censure d'un tel caract~re discriminatoire
n'est appliqu~e de ce cot~-ci de la ligne du cessezle-feu ...

"Permission to enter' Azad' Kashmir is necessary,
but it seldom takes more than a few hours to get it.
The day after applying, I drove unconducted across
the frontier."

"Il faut une autorisation pour se rendre au Cachemire "azad", mais II est rare qU'll faille plus de
quelques heures pour l'obtenir. Le lendemaindujour
oft j'ai pr~sent~ ma de mande , j'ai pu traverser la
fronti~re en voiture, sans escorte."

88. A correspondent of the London "Times" who
secured permission to go to Srinagar sent a long dispatch to his newspaper, dealing with the activities of the
"Peace Brigade" in Anantnag. This correspondent of
the London "Times" said:

88. Un correspondant du "Times", de Londres, qui
avait obtenu l'autorisation de se rendre a Srinagar
a adress~ a. son journal une longue d~peched~peignant
l'activit~ de la "brigade de la paix" a. Anantnag. Ce
co.rrespondant disait:'

"One man had torn nostrils and another claimed
that his teeth had been knocked Qut by members of the
'Peace Brigade'. Two shopkeepers complained that
they had been robbed during unofficial searches and
others said their shops had been looted. A woman in
a highly hysterical state said that she was afraid to
go home because of constant harassment. She was the
widow of a Muslim killed during the tribal invasion
while escorting Hindu refugees, and she alleged that
compensation awarded to her had not been paid because she was a supporter of Sheikh Abdullah.

"Un homme a eu les narines d~chir~es etun autre
a affirm~ que des membres de la "brigade de la
paix" lui avaient bris~ les dents. Deux commergants
se sont plaints d'avoir ~t~ vol~s au cours de perquisitions non officielles, d'autres ont d~clar~ que
leurs magasins avaient ~t~ pllMs. Une femme
en pleine crise nerveuse a dit qu'elle avait peur de
rentrer chez elle a cause des vexations constantes
qui lui ~taient impos~es. Il s'agissait d'une veuve:
son mari, un musulman, avait ~t~ tu~ durant l'invasion des tribus alors qu'llaccompagnaitdes r~fugMs
hindous; elle affirmait que l'indemnit~ qui lui avait
~t~ allou~e ne lui avait pas §t~ pay~e parce qu'elle
~tait en faveur du cheik Abdullah.
24

"Mr. Be
on two oc
publicly w
when shop
of their nu
robbed by

"One of
this corre
To top all
proached b
demanded
nationality
"The Ind
moral duty
therefore s
the political
it is ultimat
"Generou
intelligent
Government
ernment tha
ally border

89. May I a
beating admin
member of th
Kashmir Stat
deal to the pe
reported prac
paper.

1:1

90. Then the
such a distin
MriduIa Sarab
lent in IndianGandhi Ashra
Secretary-Gen
After she had
culated to the
Indian Prime ~
Delhi Constitut
she had stayed
reported in th
Minister had
Congress, at "\1
Nehru was ad
letters be rele
well as the le
veracity of whi
Mohammed th
This is wh~t ha
She is a daught
manufacturers
life in social se
has been in the
Mr. Nehru's p
favour of the pe
out of the hoste

~~.1

_ _

::
,j

fi

ilij
h
11

~

t

]J See documen

"Mr. Beg said that physic al injurie s were inflicte d
on two occasi ons when his brothe r, G. M. Beg, was
publicl y welcom ed after his release frompr isonan d
when shopke epers declare d hartal last week after one
of their numbe r alleged that he had been beaten and
robbed by membe rs of the 'Peace Brigad e'.

ss"
esle

tnt,

r~s

sa-

"One of the town's leading trader s appear ed before
this corresp ondent with bruise d and bandag ed face.
To top all this, the corresp ondent himsel f was approach ed by a membe r of the 'Peace Brigad e', who
demand ed inform ation such as his name, addres s,
nationa lity and purpos e of his visit.

DU-

Ilde
sa-

~ue

! la

~z-

"The Indian Govern ment often behave s as if its
moral duty is to defend depend ent people s, and it is
therefo re surpris ing that so little attentio n is given to
the politic al welfar e of 4 million Kashm iris for whom
it is ultimat ely respon sible.

de
lla

lily

~he

"Gener ous Indian econom ic aid and indeed the
intellig ent develo pment progra mme of the Kashm ir
Govern ment tend to concea l the method softhat Governmen t that are totalita rian in concep t and occasio nally border on outrigh t terrori sm in practic e. "

'ait

le
du
ms

16-

Jas
lb.

'ait

lrs

:~s

LUX

Jir

In,
'ire

lZ-

le-

de
lur

la
lui
;ar
mt
Ce
:re
la

Its
11ue
ne
de
es

re:
a~s

ut
lIe

89. May I also recall to the Securi ty Counci l the
beating admini stered to Mr. Ashoka Mehta, a promin ent
membe r of the Indian Parliam ent who, on a visit to the
Kashm ir State, had the audaci ty of sugges ting a fair
deal to the people of Kashm ir. This inciden t was fully
reporte d practic ally in every import ant Indian newspaper.

90. Then the Counci l has before it the testimo ny of
such a disting uished Indian social worke r as Miss
Mridula Sarabh ai with regard to the conditi ons prevalent in Indhm- held Kashm ir. She was an inmate of the
Gandhi Ashram for years and later becam e Assist ant
Secreta ry-Gen eral of the Indian Nation al Congre ss.
After she had written the letters which have been circulated to the membe rs of the Securi ty Counci l, the
Indian Prime Minist er had her thrown out from the New
Delhi Constit ution House, a Govern ment hostel, where
she had stayed for a numbe r of years. It was recentl y
reporte d in the Indian Press that the Indian Prime
Ministe r had her ejected from a meetin g of the
Congre ss, at which she was presen t and which Mr.
Nehru was addres sing. I have reques ted that her
letters be release d as a United Nation s docum ent as
well as the letter of Sheikh Moham med Abdull ah, the
veracity of which has been admitte d by Bakhsh i Ghulam
Mohammed, the presen t Prime Minist er of Kashm ir.JJ
This is what has happen ed to a lady of very high rank.
She is a daught er or sister of one of the bigges t textile
manufa cturers of India, and she has spent her whole
life in SOCial service for the benefit ofthe people . She
has been in the forefro nt of the Congr ess Party- that is
Mr. Nehru' s party. The momen t she utters a word in
favour of the people of Kashm ir, Mr. Nehru throws her
out of the hostel in New Delhi, which is a Govern ment

90. Le Consei l dispos e aussi du t~moignage de l'un
des travail leurs sociau x les plus eminen ts de l'Inde,
Mile Mridul a Sarabh ai, en ce qui concer ne la situatio n
dtr. Cachem ire occup~ par l'lnde. Longte mps pensio nnaire de I' "ashra m" de Gandhi , Mile Sarabh ai ~tait
devenu e secr~taire g~n~ral adjoint du Congre s nationa l
indien. Une fois qu'elle eut ~crit les lettres qui ont
~t~ commun iqu~es aux membr es du Consei
l de s~cu­
ritl~, le Premi er Minist re de l'lnde l'a fait
mettre :l
la porte d'une r~sidence de l'Etat, la Constit ution
House de New-D elhi, ou elle habitai t depuis de longue s
ann~es . On a signal~ r~cemment dans la presse
indienne que le Premi er Minist re de l'Inde l'avait fait
expuls er d'une r~union du Congr~s :l laquell e elle
assista it et pendan t laquell e M. Nehru pronon gait un
discou rs. J'ai demand~ que ses lettres soient publi~es en tant que docum ent de l'Organ isation
, ainsi
que la lettre du chelk Moham med Abdull ah, dont la
v~raci t~ a ~M admise par Bakhsh i Ghulam Moham
med,
l'actue l Premi er Minist re du Cachem ire1/. Voil:l ce
qui est arriv~ :l une dame de la haute socMt~. Fille ou
sesur d'un des plus grands filateu rs de l'Inde, elle a
consacr~ toute son existen ce aux esuvre s
sociale s et
au bien-e tre de la popula tion. Elle a ~t~ l'un des
membr es les plus en vue dupart iduCo ngras - c'esta-dire du parti de M. Nehru. Des l'instan t ou elle eleve
la voix en faveur de la popula tion du Cache mire,

t! Y;;; document S/PV.761/Add.I.

L

I

"M. Beg a dit que des coups entrafn ant blessu res
ont ~t~ inflig~s :l deux reprise s: lors des manife stations organis~es enl'hon neurde sonfra re, G. M. Beg,
:l l'occas ion de sa remise en libert~, et au momen t
Oil, la semain e dernia re, des comme rgants ont ferm~
boutiqu e en signe de protest ation parce que l'un
d'eux avait affirm~ que des membr es de la "brigad e
de la paix" l'avaie nt battu et voM.
"Le corresp ondant qui rappor te ces faits a vu l'un
des princip aux comme rgants de la ville, qui s'est
pr~se nM ~ lui le visage tum~fi ~ et band~.
Et pour
comble , ce corresp ondant lui-ma me a ~t~ interpe lM
par un membr e de la "brigad e de la paix", qui lui a
notamm ent demand~ son nom, son adress e, sa nationali t~ et le motif de son s~jour.
"Le Gouve rnemen t indien se compo rte souven t
comme si le devoir de dMend re les peuple s non autonome s lui incomb ait sp~cialement; il est donc
surpre nant 1U'il prete si peud'a ttentio n au bien-a tre
politiq ue de ces 4 million s d'habit ants du Cachem ire,
dont il a, en fin de compte , la charge .
"La g~n~rosit~ de l'aide ~conomique indienn e, et,
il faut le reconn aftre, la valeur du progra mme de
d~veloppement mis au point par le Gouve rnemen t du
Cachem ire, tenden t a. faire oublier les m~thodes de
ce gouver nemen t, qui sont d'inspi ration totalita ire
et qui parfois , en fait, touche nt au terrori sme pur
et simple ."
89. Je me perme ttrai ~galement de rappel er au
Consei l de s~curit~ les s~vices inflig~s :l l'un des
membr es les plus en vue du Parlem ent indien,
M. Ashoka Mehta, qui, lors d'un s~jour dans l'Etat,
avait eu l'audac e de propos er que l'on traite de fagon
~quitable les habitan ts du Cachem ire. L'incid
ent a ~t~
rapport~ en d~taiI dans presqu e tous les journa
ux importan ts de I'Inde.

JJ Voir docume nt S/PV. 761/Add. I.
25

~r--

J~ :

building, and he ejects her from the meeting in which
she is sitting. To give that treatment to a woman of
status, position, a woman who is a friend, a friend's
daughter: it can only happen in India.

M. Nehru la fait mettre :lla porte de la r~sidence de
New-Delhi, qui appartient a.1'Etat, et il la fait expulser
de la r~union a. laquelle elle assiste. Traiter de la
sorte une femme qui occupe une telle place dans la
soci~t~, une femme qUi est une amie et la fille d'un
ami: cela ne peut arriver que dans l'Inde:

91. Mr. Krishna Menon had been trying to create an
impression, here and outside, that it is entirely immaterial what world opinion thinks of Pandit Nehru's
attitude in Kashmir, of his intransigence and defiance of
this international body created by the Charter, to which
India has subscribed.

91. M. Krishna Menon s'est efforc~ de faire croire,
ici et hors de l'Organisation, qu'il n'y apas lieu d'attacher la moindre importance a. ce que l'opinion mondiale pense de l'attitude prise par le pandit Nehru au
Cachemire, de son intransigeance et du faitqu'ild~fie
cet organe international cr~~ par la Charte, :llaquelle
l'Inde a adh~r~.
92. A ce stade, je voudrais rappeler un discours que
M. Nehru a prononc~ le 3Mvrierdernier, :ll'occasion
de la campagne ~lectorale.Ayant constat~ que la presse
du monde entler blamait son gouvernement de s'opposer a. ce qu'un pl~biscite ait lieu au Cachemire, et sachant bien qu'aux yeux du monde civilis~ cette affaire
avait fait baisser son prestige, il a prononc~ au cours
d'une r~union publique ces paroles m~morables:
"Messieurs, on me dit - je suppose qu'il faisait
allusion a. la presse et :ll'opinion mondiales - que
mon prestige a souffert. Mais qu'importe ce que
pense le monde entier. C'est de vous, mon peuple,
que d~pend mon prestige."

,i,
~

1

92. At this stage r should like to refer to a speech that
Mr. Nehru made on 3 February 1957 in connexion with
the election campaign. Having seen that his Government
was being condemned by the Press of the whole world
for not allowing the plebiscite in Kashmir, and being
convinced of his position, that he had fallen in the eyes
of the whole civilized world in this matter, he made a
remarkable speech at this public meeting. He said:
"Gentlemen, I am told" -I suppose he referred to
the world Press and world political opinion-"that I
have fallen in stature. But what does it matter what
the whole world thinks? My stature depends on you,
my people."
That is the value that Mr. Nehru attaches to world
opinion, to the Security Council, to the United Nations
and to the world Press. He says, "Let them say what
they like. So long as my people, you people, are with
me, I do not care for world opinion". When you are
dealing with a man like that, I do not know what method
you can employ in order to incline him to honour his
pledges given to the United Nations and to the Security
Council, when the man does not care for public opinion,
the public opinion of the whole world. I think that Mr.
Krishna Menon wasted your time when he came here
and argued his case for seventeen hours when his
Prime Minister has no intention of carrying out his
international obligations.

Voila. donc l'importance que M. Nehru attache a.l'opinion mondiale, au ConseU de s~curit~, :l1'Organisation des Nations Unies, :l la presse mondiale! Il
affirme: "Qu'ils disent ce que bon leur semble: Tant
que vous, mon peuple, etes avec moi, l'opinion mondiale m'importe peu." Quand on a affaire a. un homme
comme lui, a. un homme qui se moque de l' opinion,
de l'opinion du monde entier, je ne sais pas queUe
m~thode on peut employer pour l'amener ahonorer les
engagements qu'll a pris devant l'Organisation des
Nations Unies et le Conseil de s~curit~. Je crois que
M. Krishna Menon vous a fait perdre votre temps en
venant ici soutenir sa cause pendant 17 heures alors
que son Premier Ministre n'a nullement l'intention
de s'acquitter de ses obligations internationales.

93. I am sure that members of the Security Council
have seen some of the comments that have appeared in
the Press the world over which have severely taken
Pandit Nehru to task for his Kashmir policy. Among
these are such distinguished papers as the "Manchester Guardian" and the "New Statesman and Nation"
of London, both of which are great admirers of Pandit
Nehru. Mr. Kingsley Martin, who is the world-renowned editor of the "New Statesman and Nation" of
England, is a fast friend of Pandit Nehru and has been
such for the last twenty or thirty years. Mr. Kingsley
Martin has brought out a leading article against Mr.
Nehru, his friend, condemning him for not allowing a
plebiscite in Kashmir and for dishonouring his international agreement. What further proof do you need of
world opinion in this direction? In the face of Mr.
Nehru's wholly unreasonable attitude in Kashmir, the
world Press has been forced tt> revise its estimate of
Mr. Nehru. Such distinguished papers or magazines as
"The New York Times", the "Christian Science Monitor", the "Washington Post", the "New York Herald
Tribune", "Life" and "Time" in the United States, the
"Times", the "Observer", the "Daily Telegraph", the
"Daily Mail", the "EconOmist", to mention only a few

93. Je suis sur que les membres duConseilde s~cu­
rit6 ont lu quelques-uns des commentaires parus dans
la presse mondiale, qui a s~v~rement blam~ le pandit
Nehru de la politique qu'il poursuit au Cachemire.
Parmi ces critiques figurent des journaux ou des revues aussi r~put6s que le "Manchester Guardian" et
le "New Statesman and Nation", de Londres, qui sont
tous deux de grands admirateurs du pandit Nehru.
M. Kingsley Martin, qui est le r~dacteur en chef universellement connu de la revue anglaise "New Statesman and Nation", est un grand ami du pandit Nehtu,
et cela depuis 20 ou 30 ans. M. Kingsley Martin a
publi~, contre son ami M. Nehru, un ~ditorial oil illui
reproche de ne pas permettre qu'un pl~biscite ait lieu
au Cachemire et de ne pas respecter l'accord international auquel il a souscrit. Mais, Messieurs, avez-vous
besoin d'autres preuves puur savoir quelle est l'opinion
du monde en la mati~re? Devantl'attitude parfaitement
d~raisonnable qu'a adopt~e M. Nehru au Cachemire,
la presse mondiale a dti reviser l'id~e qu'elle se faisait
de M. Nehru. Des journaux ou revues aussi r~put~s que
le "New York Times", le "Christian Science Monitor",
le "Washington Post", le "New York Herald Tribune",
"Life" et"Time",auxEtats-Unisd'Am~rique,etque26

I

of the B
Canada,
tralia, B
countries
are whol
Minister.

94. I haY
that if M
having re
whom he
edition of
I will pas
has one
head, in 0
little twig
there is
sword sid

95. I wou
world opi
vigorously
would agr
this opini
Kashmir.
disregard
over. We
editorials,
what the
the compi
document.
96. I, of
India that
mission fo
and 5 Janu
ment that e
ments, and
no relevan
present eff
of India to
and for th
between th
a fair and
method of a
as the Secu
demonstrati
intention to
before the c:;
internation
Pakistan to

;j
11

n

i

97. No ch
Government
to a plebisc
is due to un
India in cle
national agr
be easily u
side.

~r

ce de
mIser
de la
ns la
d'un

1

oire,
d'atmonru au

ld~fie

quelle

s que
asion
resse
oppoet saffaire
cours

aisait
- que

e que

euple,

l'opimisale; Il
Tant
mon)mme
inion,
luelle
erles
n des
.s que
.ps en
alors
mtion
s~cu­

ldans
landit
mire.
s rem" et
l sont
ehru.
: uniatesehru,
rUn a

of the British papers, and leading newspapers in
Canada, France, Switzerland, Norway, Sweden, Australia, Burma, Indonesia, South America and other
countries have expressed views on this matter which
are wholly uncomplimentary to the Indian Prime
Minister.

pour citer seulement quelques journaux anglais - le
"Times", l' "Observer", le "Daily Telegraph", le
"Daily Mail", l' "Econoniist", ainsi que les principaux
journaux du Canada, de France, de Suisse, de Norv~ge,
de Su~de, d'Australie, de Birmanie, d'Indon~sie, de
pays d'Am~rique du Sud, et d'autres pays, ont cl ce
sujet exprim~ des opinions qui sont des moins flatteuses
pour le Premier Ministre de l'Inde.

94. I have with me a very interesting cartoon. I think
that if Mr. Krishna Menon were here he would regret
having referred to one newspaper correspondent on
whom he tried to pin his faith. I have here the latest
edition of "Punch", the periodicaL Here on this pageI will pass it on-we see a cartoon where Mr. Nehru
has one body; he has two heads. On one side of his
head, in one hand, he is holding a dove of peace and a
little twig. On the other side of his body near his face
there is a big sword and underneath is written on the
sword side "Kashmir"; on the dove side "Suez Canal".

Jlai sous la main un dessin humoristiquetr~sin­
Krishna Menon ~tait ici
il regretterait d'avoir mentionn~un certain correspondant de presse, en qUi il a mis tous ses espoirs. J'ai
ici le dernier num~ro de "Punch". Sur la page que
voici - je vais vous la faire passer - se trouve un
dessin 0\1 M. Nehru est repr~sent~ avec un seul corps
et deux tetes. Du c6t~ de l'une de ces tetes, il tient a.
la main une colombe et un petit rameau. De l'autre
c6t~ de son corps, pr~s de l'autre Visage, il brandit un
grand sabre; du c6t~ du sabre se trouve inscrit le mot
"Cachemire", et du c6t~ de la colombe, les mots
"canal de Suez".

95. I would venture to say that on no single issue has
world opinion expressed itself so clearly and so
vigorously as in the case of Kashmir, and the Council
would agree with me that almost the entire volume of
this opinion is critical of Pandit Nehru's policy in
Kashmir. ;Mr. Menon advises the Security Council to
disregard this expression of public opinion the world
over. We have compiled some of these comments and
editorials, and although these are only a fraction of
what the world Press has said, I would request that
the compilation be circulated as a United Nations
document.

95. J'irais jusqu'cl dire qu'il n'yapasdequestion sur
laquelle l'opinion mondiale se soitprononc~eavec tant
de nettet~ et de fermet~ que sur celle du Cachemire,
et le Conseil sera d'accord avec moipour reconnaJ.1:re
que dans sa presque totalit~ cette opinion condamne la
politique suivie par le pandit Nehru au Cachemire.
M. Menon recommande au Conseil de ne pas tenir
compte de cette manifestation de l'opinion mondiale.
Nous avons r~uni quelques-uns de ces commentaires
et de ces ~ditoriaux et, bien qu'ils ne repr~sentent
qu'une fraction de ce qu'a dit la presse mondiale, je
voudrais demander qU'ils soient publi~s sous forme
-d'un document de l'Organisation.

96. I, of course, agree with the representative of
India that the resolutions of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan dated 13 August 1948
and 5 January 1949 are "the only international engagement that exists". Since these are international agreements, and binding international agreements, there is
no relevance to Mr. Menon I s laboured discussion of the
present effect of unaccepted offers by the Government
of India to hold a plebiscite in Kashmir. These offers,
and for that matter the 20 August 1953 agreement
between the Prime Ministers ofIndiaandPakistan that
a fair and impartial plebiscite was the most feasible
method of ascertaining the wishes ofthe people, as far
as the Security Council is now concerned, are simply
demonstrative of India's long-standing announced
intention to hold a plebiscite in the State. What is now
before the Security Council is the implementation of the
international agreement between the Council, India and
Pakistan to hold that plebiscite.

96. n va sans dire que je reconnais, comme le repr~­
sentant de l'Inde, que les r~solutionsde la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan en date
du 13 aout 1948 et du 5 janvier 1949 sont "le seul engagement international existant". Etant donn~ qu'il
s'agit d'accords internationaux et d'accords internationaux ayant force obligatoire, on volt mal pourquoi
M. Menon a longuement d~battu la port~e actuelle
d'offres du Gouvernement indien, relatives cl l'organisation d'un pMbiscite au Cachemire, qui n'auraient
pas ~t~ accept~es. Ces offres, et cl cet ~gard l'accord
du 20 aoiit 1953 entre les Premiers Ministres de l'Inde
et du Pakistan reconnaissant que le moyen le plus
pratique de d~terminer les vceux de la population ~tait
d'organiser un pl~biscite ~quitable et impartial, t~­
moignent simplement, en ce qUi concerne maintenant
le Conseil de s~curit~, de 1'intention de l'Inde, annonc~e
il y a longtemps, d'organiser unpl~biscitedans l'Etat.
La question dont le Conseil est maintenant saisi est
celle de l'ex~cution de l'accord international conclu
entre le Conseil de s~curit~, l'Inde et le Pakistan, au
sujet de l'organisation de ce plebiscite.

94.

t~ressant. Je crais que si M.

Hlui
it lieu
~rna­

-vous
tinion
iment
:nire,
llsait
s que
tor" ,
une",
[ue -

97. No change has taken place as may absolve the
Government of India of its international commitment
to a plebiscite. Any change that may have taken place
" is due to unilateral action taken by the Government of
India in clear violation of the provisions of the Inter:1 national agreement. Even these changes are such as can
H be easily undone without causing any harm to either

1

97.

national qu'll a pris de procMer cl unpMbisclte. Tous
les changements qui ont pu intervenir r~sultent de
mesures unllatt:lrales prises par le Gouvernement
indien en violation flagrante des dispositions de
1'accord internationaL D'ailleurs, ces changements
sont tels que l'on pourrait aist:lment revenir cl l'~tat

:l

,Id,.

n ne s'est produit aucun changement qui puisse

d~lier le Gouvernement indien de l'engagement inter-

27

,'I

·r····
.

::)i;':'"

,

1

de choses ant~rieur sans pr~judicepour 1'une ou l' autre
des parties.
98. The representative of India has reminded the
COt'ncil that it is not a legal tribunal. Surely he does
not ,an by this that the Security Council is unable to
appreciate the nature of the obligation embodied in the
international agreement-an obligation which he says
his Government and his people "have no intention
and ... shall at no time violate" [767th meeting, para.
85]. What is the nature of that obligation? Mr. Menon
points out that the holding of the plebiscite must await
the demilitarization ofthe State of Jammu and Kashmir.
This is undoubtedly ·correct. With respect, I should like
to point out that Mr. Menon' s further argument, that
because demilitarization has not been accomplished the
obligation to hold a plebiscite falls, is utterly untenable.
In fact, it is an attempt by India to take advantage of
its own default. The settlementoftheKashmirdispute,
according to the international agreement, must proceed
step by step. The step that must now be taken is to
secure the demilitarization of the State. It was with
regard to this next step that my original remarks on
16 January were addressed [761st·meeting]. We have
tried every method recommended by the Charter, by the
Security Council and by the Commission and by the
United Nations representatives-and Kashmir is still
not demilitarized. There is now before the Council a
draft resolution [S/3787] which addresses itself to the
next step.

98. Le repr~sentant de l'Inde a rappel~ au Conseil
de s~curit~ qu'll n'est pas un organe judiciaire.
M. Menon ne veut certainement pas dire que le Conseil
n'est pas a. meme d'appr~cier la naturedel'obligation
~nonc~e dans I' accord international - obligation que le
Gouvernement et le peuple indiens, si 1'on en croit
M. Menon, n'ont "pas l'intention de renier et (... ) ne
renieron(t) jamais" [767~me s~ance, par. 85]. Quelle
est la nature de cette obligation? M. Menon souligne
que le pl~biscite est subordonn~ a. la d~militarisation
de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire. C'est on ne peut
plus vrai. Je tiens cependant a. faire observer que
l'argument suivant de M. Menon, a. savoir que, la d~­
militarisation n'ayant pas eu lieu, l'obligation deprocMer a. un pMbiscite disparail, est absolument insoutenable. De fait, l'Inde s'efforce de tirer parti de son
manquement a. ses obligations. Aux termes de l' accord
international, le r~glement de la question du Cachemire doit se faire par ~tapes, et les premi~res mesures qu'il convient maintenant de prendre doivent
avoir pour objet d' assurer la d~militarisation de
l'Etat. C'est a. ces mesures que j'avais consacr~ mes
premi~res observations le 16 janvier [761~me s~ance].
Nous avons essay~ toutes les m~thodes recommand~es
par la Charte, par le Conseil de s~curit~, par la Commission et par les repr~sentants des Nations Unies,
et le Cachemire n'est toujours pas d~militaris~. Le
Conseil est maintenant saisi d'un projet de r~solution
[S/3787] qui enVisage pr~cis~ment les mesures a.
prendre.

99. I do not understand Mr. KrishnaMenon'sdissatisfaction with the supporters of this draft resolution and
the manner in which he has expressed that dissatisfaction. It is interesting to note what Mr. Krishna
Menon has said. He has accused Sir Pierson Dixon-or
is it the Government of the United Kingdom?-of a
"lapse from fortitude and wisdom" [769th meeting,
para. 53]. Mr. Krishna Menon has taunted the representative of the United States with having proposed
something that is against international law, unethical
and inequitable, although he does notimpugn Mr. Lodge
personally, whom he regards as a man "of great
simplicity of mind"-I do not know whether Mr. Lodge
will consider that as a compliment - "frankness, and
candour of expression" [ibid., para.99]. Mr. Krishna
Menon charges the representative of Cuba with not
haVing understood history, political philosophy or the
record of the Security Council in respect of Kashmir.
The representative of Iraq was chided for having committed the offence of referring to the brotherhood of
Islam. Mr. Krisha Menon contrasted it with human
brotherhood. If he had read the Koran, from which he
is often fond of quoting, he would have known that the
concept of the brotherhood of man and of tolerance for
a~l peoples, irrespective of race, creed, colour or
caste, is fundamental in Islam. It is one thing to put
these things down in a Constitution and quite another
thing fully to comprehend them. A little later in his
speech Mr. Krishna Menon plainly accused the representative of Iraq of having departed from the truth.

99. Je ne comprends pas le m~contentement dont
M. Menon a. 1'~gard des partisans de ce
projet de r~solution, non plus que la fagon dont ill'a
exprim~. Il est int~ressant de noter ce que M. Menon
a dit. n a accus~ sir Pierson Dixon - ou serait-ce le
Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni? - de "s'~carter du
courage et de la sagesse" [769~me s~ance, par. 53].
Il a reproch~ au repr~sentant des Etats-Unis d'Am~­
rique d'avoir pr~sent~ une proposition contraire au
droit international, a. la morale et a l'~quit~, tout en
~vitant de s'en prendre personnellement a. M. Lodge,
qu'il consid~re comme un homme "qui s'exprimeavec
une grande simplicit~" - je ne sals si M. Lodge
prendra ceci comme un compliment - "une grande
franchise et une grande sinc~rit~" [ibid., par. 99].
M. Krishna Menon a accus~ ensuite le repr~sentant
de Cuba de n'avoir pas compris l'histoire, la philosophie politique nl les documents du Conseil de s~cu­
riM, en ce qUi concerne le Cachemire. Il a reprocM
au repr~sentant de l'Irak d'avoir os~ mentionner la
'fraternit~ de l'Islam. M. Krishna Menon lui a oppos~
la fraternit~ humaine. S'il avait lu le Coran, qu'll
aime a. citer, il se serait rendu compte que la notion
de fraternit~ humaine et de tol~rance pour tous les
peuples, sans distinction de race, de croyance, de
couleur ou de caste occupe une place fondamentale
dans le monde islamique. Inscrire ces principes dans
une constitution est une chose, les saisir enti~rement
en est une autre. Dans la suite de son discours,
M. Menon a carr~mentaccus~lerepr~sentantdel'Irak
de s'etre ~cart~ de la v~rit~.

J-.

1
j

.I

1-

'I

r

t~moigne

100. Je voudrais faire quelques observations a. ce
sujet. Commentant I"~ tervention du repr~sentant de
1'Irak, M. Krishna ; mon a termin~ par la phrase

100. Here, I should like to make a few comments.
When Mr. Krishna Menon was commenting on the
speech of the representative of Iraq, his last sentence
28

was: "0
to be po
to say th
the tru
Security

101. If
Supreme
accuses
the truth
judicial
lawyer's
accusati
Member
Member
ber of P
I feel t
honour 0
come bef
language
consonan
and I ha
to defend
an exam
before it
the repre
102. Wh
Security
technique
istan, but
, He began
,: and when
Pierson
when we
i, were frig
country,
.1 "Well, m
look after
11 immediat
if Sir Piers
ij him: "Wh
London, t
and so 0
!
Commonw
brothers. "
kissing hi:
party usin!
the Securit
of languagl
angry, a If
I have vel)

l!

103. I cou
Mr. Krish
;1 tive-about
fji tive of the
" a represen
il he resorts
~ believe tha
I1

104. Inste
amine wha
'., said about
q explained
ment takes
'!

~
',j

,"!

I

Dul'autre

Conseil
diciaire.
Conseil
bligation
on que le
en croit
3t (••. ) ne
]. QueUe
souligne
arisation
n ne peut
rver que
e, la d~­
n de prontinsouti de son
l'accord
I Cache~res medoivent
ation de
lcre mes
seance].
mandees
la ComlS Unies,
,rise. Le

~solution

~sures

~

lent dont
1S de ce
ont ill'a
L Menon
ait-ce le
arter du
par. 53].
: d'Ameraire au
, tout en
. Lodge,
lmeavec
. Lodge
l grande
lar. 99].
esentant
la philo:le secu'eprocM
onner la

was: "One must stick to the truth even when one wants
to be polite." [769th meeting, para. 119.] That means
to say that the representative of Iraq had strayed from
the truth. And that is a point which I feel that the
Security Council cannot pass over lightly.
101. If an advocate before a High Court Judge, a
Supreme Court JUdge, or even an ordinary Magistrate,
accuses the Judge or the Magistrate of departing from
the truth, that is an insult which, when offered to a
judicial authority, would bring the confiscation of a
lawyer's licence to practise. If a sentence like that
accusation-and a false accusation-were uttered by a
Member of Parliament, the Speaker would call upon that
Member to withdraw that word. Otherwise, that Member of Parliament would be expelled from the House.
I feel that it is commensurate with the dignity and
honour of the Security Council that the parties who
come before it to argue their cases must control their
language and speak in a respectful manner which is in
consonance with the high office which the Council holds;
and I hope that it is for the Council now to take steps
to defend its own honour and prestige so as not to set
an example by which, in future, parties who come
before it can insult it to its face in the manner in which
the representative of Iraq has been insulted.
102. When dealing with other representatives on the
Security Council, Mr. Krishna Menon has employed a
technique which is well known to us in India &.~d Pakistan, but which may not be well known to the Council.
He began to criticize Sir Pierson Dixon very strongly,
and when he saw a smile-as I did-on the face of Sir
Pierson Dixon, he must have realized that the days
when we could accuse the British in India, and they
were frightened of us, had gone and we are now a free
country, and that Sir Pierson was probably thinking:
" "Well, my friend, you are afree country; you must now
U look after yourself." Mr. Krishna Menon must have felt
11 immediately that he had made a mistake in attacking
n Sir Pierson, and so he softened. He tried to cajole
him: "When I was High Commissioner for India in
London, the British gave us a lot of supplies and arms,
and so on, and we have been friends; we are in the
Commonwealth, and we are a sister country, and we are
brothers." Then he proceeded almost as if he was
kissing him on both cheeks. This sort of conduct of a
party using strong language against a representative on
the Security Council and then changing to another sort
of language, thinking that the representative might get
angry, a language to cajole him, is an advocacy which
I have very seldom come across.

10PPOSe

m, qu'il
la notion
tous les
mce, de
.mentale
les dans
~rement

103. I could have "said a good deal about the remarks
Mr. Krishna Menon has made about each representative-about the representative of Cuba, the representa:1 tive of the United States; and so on-simply because if
I1 a representative on the Council does not agree with him
il he resorts to these personal attacks. However, I
believe that representatives can defend themselves.

suivante: "Il faut respecter la verite, si desireux
que l'on soit d'observer les r~gles de la politesse"
[76geme seance, par. 119]. Ce qui veut dire que le
representant de l'Irak se serait ecarte de la verite.
C'est hi une affirmation que le Conseil de securite, cl
mon avis, ne saurait prendre a la lege re.
101. L'avocat qui, devant une haute cour, un tribunal
supreme ou un simple tribunal, accuse le juge ou le
magistrat de s'ecarter de la verit~ se rend coupable
d'outrage a. magistrat, et, sil'affaireestporteedevant
une instance judiciaire, il est radie du barreau. Si un
membre du parlement proferait des paroles analogues
a. cette accusation - qui est fausse, de surcroit - le
president inviterait l'orateur a. retirer ses paroles,
faute de quoi il serait expuls~ du parlement. Je crois
que la dignite et l'honneur du Conseil de securite demandent que les parties qUi viennent exposer leur
th~se devant lui surveillent leur langage et s'expriment avec tout le respect du aux hautes fonctions
du Conseil. J'esp~re que le Conseil ne manquera pas
de prendre d~s maintenant des dispositions pour defendre son honneur et son prestige de fa~on a. ne pas
laisser s'etablir un precedent qui pourrait ulterieurement inciter une partie se presentant devant lui a.
l'insulter comme le representant de l'Irak l'a ete.
102. Avec d'autres representants, M. KrislmaMenon
a use d'une tactique qui, si elle est bien connue dans
l'Inde et au Pakistan, est peut-etre moins famili~re
aux membres du Conseil. Il a commence par critiquer
tr~s violemment sir Pierson Dixon, mais lorsqu'il a
vu, comme je l'ai vu moi-meme, un sourire sur le
visage de sir Pierson Dixon, il a du se rendre compte
que le temps etait passe o~ nous pouvions, dans l'Inde,
accuser les Britanniques, qui nous craignaient - que
nous ~tions maintenant un pays libre et que sir Pierson
se disait probablement: "Tr~s bien, mon ami, votre
pays est un pays libre; vous devez desormais vous
debrouiller tout seuls. n M. Krislma Menon dolt avoir
aussi senti l'erreur qu'il avait commise en attaquant
sir Pierson, et il s' est adouci. Il a essaye de le cajoler: "Lorsque j'etais Haut-Commissaire de l'Inde
a. Londres, les Britanniques nous ontfourni de grandes
quantites de materiel et d'armes, etc.; nous etions
amis. Nous faisons partie du Commc!llwealth, nous
sommes une nation sceur, et nous appartenons tous les
deux a. la meme famille." On avait l'impression que
M. Menon allait l'embrasser sur les deux joues. J'ai
rarement ete le temoin d'un telprocMe: quelqu'un use
de propos extremement vifs contre un membre du
Conseil de securite, puiS, craignant que celui-ci ne se
mette en col~re, change brusquement de ton et essaie
de le cajoler.
103. Je pourrais m'etendre plus longuement sur les
remarques que M. Krislma Menon a adressees a. chacun des repr~sentants, au repr~sentant de Cuba, a.
celui des Etats-Unis, etc.; d~s qu'un membre du
Conseil ne partage pas ses vues, M. Menon l'attaque
personnellement. Je suis convaincu cependant que les
representants peuvent se defendre.

iscours,
de l'Irak

il

,ns :l ce
,ntant de
. phrase

104. Instead of examining personalities, let us ex104. Au lieu de discuter de questions de personne,
amine what the representatives on the Council have
examinons ce que les membres du Conseil ont dit du
11 said about the draft resolution. This document has been
projet de resolution. Ses auteurs en ont expos~ tous
~1 explained exhaustively by the sponsors. My Governles aspects. Mon gouvernement prend note des pr~ci­
menl takes nole of the follOWing clarlflcalloos of the 29 sions suivantes, apportees par les auteurs du projet

ij

I1

I

i

i.I,•.
":'1

,-_ ...

'~'"
..... ' _..

"

,

1

i

draft resolution that were offered by the sponsors in

de r~solution au cours du d~bat, le 15 f~vrier 1957

the course of the debate on 15 February 1957 [768th
meeting].

[768~me s~ance].

105. The representative of the United Kingdom said:

105. Le repr~sentant du Royaume-Uni a ddclar~:
"En ce qui concerne les autres conditions favorabIes a. un r~glement, peut-iUre conViendrait-il
d'indiquer ce que nous avions a. l'esprit en faisant
figurer ces mots dans le projet de r~solution.

"As regards other conditions for progress towards
the settlement, perhaps I should indicate what we
have in mind in including this in the draft.
" •.. This, then, is one condition for progress which
indeed should be examined-the need for a decrease
in tension-and there are doubtless other matters. I
think, for instance, of clarification of the position of
the Plebiscite Administrator, which the President
may think would repay examination with the two
Governments. But all this examination is governeq
by the phrase 'haVing regard to the previous resolutions of the Security Council and of the United Nations
Commission for India and Pakistan'. That point is
fundamental.

"(00.) Cette d~tente nj§cessaire est donc unecondition favorable au r~glement qui devrait sans aucun
doute etre examin~e, et il en existe certainement
d'autres. Je songe, par exemple, a. la n~cessit~ de
pr~ciser la situation de l'Administrateur du pMbiscite, question que vous pensez peut-etre, Monsieur
le Pr~sident, devoir examiner avec les deux gouvernements. Mais tout cet examen est subordonn~
a. cette phrase: "compte tenu des r~solutions ant~­
rieures du Conseil de s~curit~ et de la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan". C'est
la. un point essentiel.

" ..• The draft resolution, therefore, provides for a
procedure which, we trust, will enable progress to be
made, but not through the medium of p"blic debate,
during the next few weeks. Yet, the need to make
progress is pressing, and for that reason the draft
resolution proposes a definite time-limit within
which the President should report to the Security
Council; for the Council cannotfail to take up its task
again at the earliest possible moment." [768thmeeting, paras. 16 to 19.]

"(00.) Le projet de r~solution pr~voit donc une pro-

cedure qui, nous l'esperons, permettra de faire des
mais sans recourlr a. un d~bat public au
cours des quelques semaines "a. venir. Cependant,
des progr~s doivent etre faits de toute urgence, et
c'est pour cette raison que le projet de resolution
sugg~re un delai precis a l'expiration duquel, Monsieur le President, vous devriez presenter un rapport au Conseil de securite; en effet, le Conseil ne
peut faire autrement que de se saisir a. nouveau de
cette question le plus t6t possible." [768~me seance,
par. 16 a 19.]
progr~s,

106. Le representant des Etats-Unis d' Amerique

106. The representative of the United States'said:

reso
the S
miss
mind
the
Pres
in mi
ell. "

107.
"T

draft
bisci

"

"Fr
and
clear
pro
condi
plied
would
eondit
held.
fore
mitte
the C
tions
[Ibid.,

a dit:
"The draft resolution which has been introduced

"Le projet de resolution presente par l'Australie,
Cuba, le Royaume- Uni et les Etats- Unis [S/3787]
est fonde sur les points d'accord entre les deux
parties. C'est pourquoi il insiste particuli~rement
sur l'importance de la demilitarisation, qui fait
l'objet du quatri~me considerant.

by the Governments of Australia, Cuba, the Umted

Kingdom and the United States [S/3787] builds upon
these points of agreement. It thus lays considerable
stress on the importance of achieving demilitarization. Four of the preambular paragraphs refer to
this problem.
"The task which we are suggesting that the Security
Council assign to its President also emphasizes the
~fforts to achieve demilitarization. In this connexion,
a proposal has already been put forward as a suggestion by which the present deadlock might be
broken. This was the proposal of the representative
of Pakistan at the 761st meeting, reiterated at the
766th meeting, to the following effect:

"La mission que nous proposons au Conseil de
confier a son president vise egalement a la demilitarisation. A ce propos, la proposition suivante,
qu'a faite le representant du Pakistan a la 761~me
seance et qu'il a renouvelee a la 766~me seance,
pourrait permettre de sortir de l'impasse actuelle:

" 'The functions of protecting the State and ensuring
internal security should be entrusted by the Council
to a United Nations force which should be introduced
into the area m: once.' [761st meeting, para. 112.]

"La protection de l'Etat et sa securite interieure
devraient etre confiees par le Conseil a une force
des Nations Unies, qui devrait etre envoyee immediatement dans la region." [761~me seance,
par. 112.]

"We have thought it desirable to note this proposal
temporary United Nations force in connexion with
demilitarization ...

"Nous avons juge utile de noter la proposition du
representant du Pakistan tendant a recourir, en vue
de la demilitarisation, a une force temporaire des
Nations Unies (00.).

"As I indicated earlier, the United States believes
that we must build upon the gains which have been
made before. The President, in undertaking this
mission, is accordingly to do so having regard to the

"Comme je l'ai indique precedemment, les EtatsUnis estiment qu'il faut faire reuvre constructive
en partant des resultats deja obtenus. Dans l'accomplissement de sa mission, le President du Con-

by the representative of Pakistan for the use of a

30

108. T
followin

"Th
anee
demili
as:- '1
impar
on det
demili
This h
View, 1
efforts

"The
repres
United
effecti1
idea is
and i
United
the Uni
out dra
to the

Force
measu
limina
plebisc
body to
-it migh
in the

clar~:

ions favoendrait-il
en faisant
ion.

unecondians aucun
tainement
icessit~ de
r du pM,Monsieur
deux gou-

107. Le representant de Cuba a dit:

107. The representative of Cuba said the following:

"Le projet de resolution que nous discutons actuellement tend, selon nous, a faire en sorte que le
plebiscite puisse avoir lieu (... )

"The Cuban delegation therefore believes that this
draft resolution would lead to the holding of a plebiscite ...
" ... Therefore, for us ... , the problem of the
plebiscite is something that has been definitely
settled and agreed upon by the parties. All that has to
be done is to bring about conditions in which the
plebiscite can be held.
"From the Indian representative's statementhere,
and also from the statements I have quoted, it seems
clear that India has at no time tried to retract its
promise to hold the plebiscite, since it laid down
conditions under which parts I and IT must be complied with before part ill can be carried out; and there
would be no reason to speak of the fulfilment of
conditions for a plebiscite if no plebiscite were to be
held. This, in our opinion, is crystal clear. Wc therefore believe that the draft resolution we have submitted is an attempt, by entrusting the President of
the Council with this task, to bring about the conditions which will allow the holding of a plebiscite."
[Ibid., paras. 95 to 99.]

:ubordonn~
ions ant~­

lmmission
:an". C'est

lcuneprofaire des
. public au

~ependant,

rgence, et
resolution
[uel, Moner un rap::onseil ne
louveau de
ne s~ance,
Amerique

" (... ) Aussi,pournous i( ... ),leproblemedu plebiscite est definitivement resolu et regIe par accord
entre les parties. La seule chose qU'il reste a faire
est de creer des conditions telles qU'il soit possible de l'organiser.
"De l' intervention du representant de l'Inde au Conseil, de meme que des declarations que j'ai citees,
il r~sulte, selon toute ~vidence, qu'a. aucun moment
l'Inde n'a voulu revenir sur sa promesse au sujet
du plebiscite, pUisqu' elle a insiste sur certaines conditions, a savoir que les premiere et deuxieme
parties de l' accord aient ete executees avant que
l'on entreprenne la troisieme partie; on comprendrait d'ailleurs mal que M. Menon parle des conditions du plebiscite si son pays ne voulait pas de ce
plebiscite. Cela nous paraft coul~r de source. C'est
pourquoi le projet de resolution que nous avons
presente s'efforce, par le mandatqu'ilconfieanotre
President, de parvenir a etablir des conditions qui
permettraient un plebiscite." [Ibid., par. 95 a 99.J
108. Le representant de l'Australie a dit:

108. The representative of Australia stated the
following:

Australie,
; [S/3787]
i les deux
ili~rement
l,

seil devra done tenir compte des resolutions adoptees
par le Conseil de securite et par la Commission des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan sur la
question du Cachemire. Le President devra tenir
compte egalement des declarations des deux parties ,
et notamment de la proposition relative a une force
des Nations Unies. Il ne manquera pas, d'autrepart,
en tant que President du Conseil de securite, de tenir
compte des vues exprimees par les membres du
Conseil." [768eme seance, par. 32 a 36.]

resolutions which have been adopted on Kashmir by
the Security Council and the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan. He is also to bear in
mind the statements of the parties and specifically
the proposal for a United Nations force. As the
president of the Council, he will also no doubt bear
in mind the statements of the members of the Council." [768th meeting, paras. 32 to 36.]

vrier 1957

qui fait

~onseil de

la demili, suivante,
la 761~me
le seance,
e actuelle:

interieure
une force
royee im-

e s~ance,
osition du
'ir, en vue

lraire des
les EtatsIlstructive
tans I'acIt du Con-

I

"The Council has ,all along attached great importance to the adoption of appropriate measures of
demilitarization in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
as ;- 'lecessary step towards the holding of a free and
impartial plebiscite. It is well known that negotiations
on detailed practical measures to bring about such
demilitarization have not in the past been successful.
This is the most immediate problem to which, in our
view, the Security Council should bend its present
efforts.

"Le Conseil a toujours attache une grande importance a l'adoption de mesures appropriees de
demilitarisation dans I' Etat de J ammu et Cachemire
en tant que premier pas vers l'organisation d'un
plebiscite libre et impartial. On sait que le£- negociations entreprises dans le passe pour la recherche
de mesures pratiques de demilitarisation n'ont pas
abouti. C'est le probleme le plus immediat que, a
notre avis, le Conseil de securite devrait essayer
de resoudre pour le moment.

"The draft resolution refers to the proposal ofthe
representative of Pakistan for the use of a temporary
United Nations force to facilitate agreement on
effective arrangements for demilitarization. The
idea is perhaps not a new one, but it gains in interest
and importance from the recent experience of the
United Nations in the establishment and operations of
the United Nations Emergency Force in Egypt. Without draWing any parallel between the situation that led
to the General Assembly's decision to establish that
Force and the problem 6f securing appropriate
measures of demilitarization of Kashmir as a preliminary step towards holding a free and impartial
plebiscite, it would seem to us very difficult for anybody to deny t.hat the use of such a force, in so far as
tt might contribute towards demilitarization, would,
in the words of the draft resolution 'deserve con-

"Le projet de resolution fait allusion a la proposition du representant du Pakistan tendant a faire
usage d'une force temporaire des Nations Unies
pour faciliter un accord sur les mesures propres a
amener cette demilitarisation. L'idee n' estpeut-etre
pas nouvelle, mais son interet et son importance se
sont accrus a la suite de l'experience recente
faite par les Nations Unies dans la constitution et
l' emploi de la Force d'urgence des Nations Unies en
Egypte. Sans vouloir, bien entendu, etablirunparallele entre la situation qui a amene l' Assemblee
generale a decider la creation de cette force et le
probl~me que pose la recherche des mesures propres a assurer la demilitarisation du Cachemire
prealablement a 1'0rganisation d'un plebisicte libre
et impartial, il semble difficile que l'on puisse nier
que l'emploi d'une telle force, dans la mesure ou
31

sideration'. It is the hope of the Australian delegation
that this proposal will receive full and sympathetic
consideration by the Council and the parties. " [Ibid.,
paras. 52 and 53.]

elle peut contribue r ll. la demilitarisation envisagee,
"merite examen", pour reprendre les termes memes
du projet de resolution. La delegation australienne
espere que cette proposition sera examinee avec une
pleine comprehension a la fois par le Conseil de
securite et par les parties." [Ibid., par. 52 et 53.]

109. Apart from these clarifications and explanations
as to its objective offered by the sponsors, my Government also notes the following from the speeches of
the representatives of the Philippines, China and Iraq
with regard to their understanding of the contents of
the resolution and its objectives.

109. Outre les precisions et explications donneespar
les auteurs en ce qui concerne 1'objet du projet da
resolution, mon gouvernement prend note egalement
des passages suivants des declarations du representant
des Philipl-ines, de celui de la Chine et de celui de
l'lrak, qui indiquent comment ils cOlll;oivent l'objet
et le contanu de la resolution.

110. The representative of the Philippines said:

110.

"Although the representative of India has dealt with
the question of aggression anew, I do not think that
the Council is called upon to make any finding as to
whether there has been aggressiQn and by whom it
was committed. It should be recalled that the charge
and counter-charge of aggression ceased to be
relevant the moment both sides agreed to the resolutions of the United Nations Commission for India and
Pakistan of 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949. "[Ibid.,
para. 104.]

~'-,

.

.'~

Le representant des Philippines a dit:

"Bien que le re}!l'esentant de l'lnde soit revenu sur
la question de 1''''0- ..lssion, je ne crois pas que le
Conseil soit appeIe ni a se prononcer sur le point
de savoir si une agression a ete commise, ni a
designer le coupable. N'oublions pas que les accusations et les contre-accusations que nous aVQns
entendues a ce sujet ont perdu toute importance des
1'instant ou les parties ont accepte les resolutions
adoptees par la Commission des .Nations Uniespour
l'lnde et le Pakistan le 13 aoiit 1948 et le 5 janvier
1949." [Ibid., par. 104.]

111. The representative of the Philippines then
went on to say:

111.

"D' apres les resolutions de la Commission des Nations Unies pour 1'lnde et le Pakistan en date du 13
aoiit 1948 et du 5 janvier 1949, resolutions que 1'lnde
et le Pakistan ont tous deux acceptees, on cherchera
a determiner les vreux de la population. de l'Etat de
Jammu et Cachemire par le moyen democratique
d'un plebiscite libre et impartialtenu sous l'egide de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Les autres dispositions des resolutions precitees sont clairement
suboraonnees a cet objectif. Les dispositions relatives au cessez-le-feu et a la treve visent simplement a creer des conditions qui permettent de parvenir a ce but essentiel dans laliberte et l'harmonie.
Quels que soient les changements survenus dans la
situation depuis que le Conseil a adopte ces resolutions, j'estime que le principe sur lequel elles se
fondent ne peut pas etre change parce qu'il est
immuable." [Ibid.• par. 110.]

112. The repre::'entative of the Philippines, further on
in his statem.ent, went on to say the following:

112. Le representant des Philippines, dans la suite
de son intervention, a ajout~:

"The draft r·::solution before us meets all the
requirements of the situation and, without departing
from the sOWld ann practical (' curse heretofore
followed by this organ of the United Nations, opens
the way realistically to a settlement which, if the
parties are minded to co-exist in peace, should be
final and conclusive.

"Le projet de r'esolution dont nous sommes saisis
repond a toutes les exigences de la situation et, sans
s'ecarter du chemin pratique et raisonnable que le
Conseil de securite a toujours suivi jusqu'ici, il
ouvre la voie, de maniere realiste, a un reglement
qui devrait etre durable et definitif si les parties
interessees sont animees du desir de vivre en paix
cote a cote.
"La proposition ne nous ecarte pas de la voie que
nous avons suivie; elle reconnait qu'll est absolument necessaire de demilitariser la region en litige
et que cette demilitarisation est la condition prealable d'un veritable plebiscite. Aucun membre du
Conseil ne. contestera que, la. ou il existe des conditions rappelant l'etat de guerre, un plebiscite est
impossible. La premiere et la plus importante des

"The proposal does ro;'l deviate from the course
we have followed. It rec '6nizes the absolute necessity
of demilitarizing the disputed region as a condition
precedent to any genUine plebiscite. None of us here
will dispute the proposition that no plebiscite is
possible in a setting of warlike appearances. The
first and most important condition to a free election
is that the people should be able to go to the polls
32

"We can a
of our Pres
is that the
melled exer
a plebiscite,
is actually c
"Finally,
the proposal
that a Unite
and Kashmi
achievement
Government'
sideration. "

113. I must
going to draw
draft resoluti
them.

Le representant des Philippines aditegalement:

"The will of the people of Jammu and Kashmir,
according to the resolutions of the United Nations
Commission for India and Pakistan ofl3 August 1948
and 5 January 1949, which have been accepted by both
India and Pakistan, is to be ascertained by the
democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite
conducted under the auspices of the United Nations.
The other ::;>rovisions of the resolutions mentioned are
clearly subordinated to that end. The provisions
relating to the cease-fire and the truce arrangements
are aimed simply at the creation of conditions to
enable the free and orderly attainment of the prime
objective. Whatever changes may have occurred in
the situation since the resolutions of the Security
Coun~il were passed, it is submitted that the principle underlying those resolutions cannot be changed
because it is Wlchangeable." [!Q!Q., para. 11 0.]

without fea
would make
impossible.
democratic
plebiscite w
conditions 0
valid and co

114. The rep
"Therefor
to further th
the Council 0
The co-spon
the draft res
stand.
;

_.~

.,

".."

•

.~

" ... So we
these two re
of the State
the force th
not coerce 0
intimidating
ments that
this problem

"I do not kn
reqUirements
use of a Unii
contribute to
in that State d
the stationing
Kashmir can
idating or co
either of the
idea of a te
deserves con

115. The repr
and this is the 1

"The whole
tion, namely,

t'

,.

_.~

<'

.~

without fear in their hearts. Any sign of coercion
would make the true expression of the people's will
impossible. Those of us who have been used to the
democratic way of life will readily admit that any
plebiscite worth its name must be conducted under
conditions of absolute peace if it is to be regarded as
valid and conclusive.

conditions ::l remplir en cas d'elections libres est
que le peuple puisse aller voter sans eprouver de
crainte. Toute menace de coercition empecherait
une veritable expression de la volonte populaire.
Tous ceux qui, parmi nous, ont l'habitude d'unmode
de vie democratique sont prets :l admettre qu'un
plebiscite digne de ce nom doit etre organise dans
des conditions de paix absolue si l' on veut pouvoir
considerer son resultat comme valable et concluant.

"We can assume that one of the principal concerns
of our President when he goes to the sub-continent
is that the ground is properly laid for the untrammelled exercise 01 popular suffrage when the plan of
a plebiscite, which is the Security Council's decision,
is actually carried out.

"Nous pouvons etre certains que lorsque notre
President se rendra dans la peninsule indienne I'une
de ses principales preoccupations serad&s'assurer
qu'on aura etabli dans cette region des conditions
telles que le suffrage populaire pourra s'exprimer
librement au moment du plebiscite decide par le
Conseil de securite.

"Finally, the reference in the draft resolution to
the proposal made by the representative of Pakistan
that a United Nations Force be assigned to Jammu
and Kashmir as a temporary means toward the
achievement of demilitarization is in line with my
Government's views that the idea merits full consideration." [Ibid., paras. 118 to 121.]

"Enfin, en mentionnant une proposition du representant du Pakistan concernant l'envoidansl'Etatde
Jammti et Cachemire d'une force des Nations Unies
comme moyen temporaire pour-aider a realiser la
demilitarisation, le proj et de resolution exprime une
idee conforme aux vues de mon gouvernement, qui
pense qu'elle me rite d'etre pleinementprise enconsideration." [Ibid., par. 118 a 121.]

113. I must apologize for these quotations, but I am
going to draw a conclusion from them as regards the
draft resolution. That is my only reason for quoting
them.

113. Je m'excuse de ces ci12.tions, mais je vais en
tirer une conclusion qui interesse le projetde resolution. C'est la seule raisonpourlaquellejeme permets
de citer ces d~clarations.

114. The representative of China said:
"Therefore, what this Jraft resolution tries to do is
to further the implementation of the resolutions which
the Council or the Commission has already adopted.
The co-sponsors have told us and the language of
the draft resolution states that all those resolutions
stand.

114.

Le representant de la Chine a dit:
"Ainsi, ce proj et de resolution cherche ::l assurer
encore davantage la mise en ceuvre de resolutions
deja. adoptees par le ConseU ou la Commission. Les
auteurs du projet nous ont declare, et lestermes du
projet le montrent, que toutes ces resolutions
restent valables.

" ... So we have to devise a scheme to take care of
these two requirements: first, the peace and security
of the State during the plebiscite; and, second, that
the force that maintains peace and security should
not coerce or intimidate or give the appearance of
intimidating the voters. These are the two requirements that we must always keep in mind in solving
this problem of demilitarization.

" '" Nous devons donc elaborer un programmequi
permettrait de concilier les deux exigences suivantes: maintien de la paix et de la securite dans
l'Etat pendant le plebiscite; certitude que lesforces
qui maintiennent la paix et la securite n'exercent
aucune pre!3sion sur les votants, ne les intimident
pas, et ne donnent pas l'impression de les intimider. Nous ne devons jamais perdre de vue ces
deux exigences lorsque nous nous attaquons au
probleme de la demilitarisation.
"Je ne vois pas de meilleur moyen de concilier
simultanement ces deux necessites. En utilisant temporairement une force des Nations Unies l\.U Cachemire, nous pouvons aider a maintenir la paix et la
securite dans cet Etat pendant le plebiscite. En outre,
le stationnement d'une force temporaire des Nations
Unies au Cachemire ne peut eveiller nulle suspicion
d'intimidation ou de coercition exercee sur les
electeurs pour les obliger a voter enfaveurde l'une
ou l'autre des deux parties. C'est pourquoi j'estime
que l'idee d'une force temporaire des Nations Unies
me rite certainement d'etre examinee." [Ibid.,
par. 124 a 130.]

"I do not know of a better way of meeting those two
reqUirements simultaneously. With the temporary
use of a United Nations force in Kashmir, we can
contribute to the maintenance of peace and security
in that State during the pIebiscite. In the second place,
the stationing of a temporary United Nations force in
Kashmir cannot be suspected by anybody of intimidating or coercing the voters to vote in favour of
either of the two parties. Therefore, I find that this
idea of a temporary United Nations force really
deserves consideration." [Ibid., paras. 124 to 130.]

115. The representative of Iraq said the followingand this is the last quotation:

115. Le representant de l'Irak a dit a son tour - et
c'est le dernier membre du Conseil que je me permets de citer:

"The whole issue centres around one major question, namely, that of the establishment of conditions

"Tout revient i resoudre un probleme essentiel:
arriver a creer des conditions qUi permettent de
33

f
(

I

~;,

procMer a un pl~biscite libre et impartiaL On aura
certainement reconnu que toutes les r~solutions,
negociations et rapports n' etaient au fond que des
tentatives pour arriver a cr~er ces conditions. On
pourrait donc dire que ce probleme, qui au d~but
~tait tres clair, s'est parfois trouv~ obscurci par
l'introduction dans la discussion d'un certain nombre
d'elements qui lui ~taient etrangers et n'avaient parfois aucun rappv~ t avec lui." [76geme seance,
par. 17.]

under which a free and impartial plebiscite could be
conducted. It will have been realized that all the resolutions t negotiations and reports were endeavours to
promote such conditions. It could therefore be said
that this problem, which wn s from its very beginning
a clear one t at times had been obscured by the introduction of a number of elements foreign to it and
sometimes quite irrelevant." [769th meeting, para.
17.]

"The Gov
permit fore
para. 153.]
I submit, Mr.
soiL The que
soil does not
122. Mr. Kr"
left sufficient
returns, after
meaning of m
Indian territo
not our terri
mayed by the
he has left a I

116. Le representant de l'lrak a dit ensuite:

116. The representative of Iraq then said:
"':T'he passage of time hasneitherchangedtheprinciples upon which the future of Kashmir was to be
decided nor has made the method of a plebiscite less
applicable now than it was eight years ago." [Ibid.,
para. 21.]

"Le temps ecoule n'a ni change les principes dont
devra s'inspirer toute decision sur l'avenir du
Cachemire, ni rendu la m~thode du pl~biscite moins
applicable a pr~sent qu'elle ne l'~tait il y a huit ans."
[Ibid., par. 21.]

117. The representative of Iraq concluded his statement as follows:

117. Le repr~sentant de I'Irak a declare pour conclure:

"We believe that the draft resolution submitted by
Australia, Cuba, the United Kingdom and the United
States [S/3787] contains all the elements necessary
at the moment for taking certain positive steps in the
solution of the Kashlilir dispute." [Ibid.? para.27.]

"Nous sommes convaincus que le projet de r~so­
lution presente par l' Australie, Cuba, les Etats- Unis
d'Am~rique et le Royaume-Uni [S/3787J contienttous
les ~lements qui sont actuellement n~cessairespour
prendre certaines mesures positives en vue de parvenir au reglement du differend relatif au Cachemire." [Ibid., par. 27.]

118. The Government of Pakistan is grateful to the
members of the Security Council for the clarifications
of the draft resolution which they have been kind enough
to give publicly. In view of these clarifications t I take
great pleasure in informing the Security Council that
my Government would accept the draft resolution that
is now before the Security Council and has authorized
me to assure the Security Council that the distinguished
President of the Council will receive all possible cooperation from the Government of Pakistan in his
difficult and responsible task.

118. Le Gouvernement pakistanais remercie les
membres du Conseil de securite des precisions qu'lls
ont bien voulu officiellement donner au sujet duprojet
de resolution. Maintenant que ces precisions ont ete
apportees, je puis faire savoir au Conseil de securite
que mon gouvernement acceptera le projet de resolution dont le Conseil est saisi, et qu'il m'a autorise
a donner au Conseill'assurance qU'il fera tout ce qui
est en son pouvoir pour aider le President dans l'accomplissement de sa mission delicate et lourde de
responsabilites.

119. My Government has complete confidence in the
ability and impartiality of the President of the Security
Council t Mr. Gunnar V. Jarring, Ambassador of
Sweden. Let us hope that his mission, which is to bring
about demilitarization of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, preparatory to the holding of a plel;Jiscite
under the auspices of the United Nations to determine
the question of the acceSsion pf the State to India or
Pakistan, shall succeed.

119. Mon gouvernement a entiere confiance dans la
competence et l'impartialite du President du Conseil
de securite, M. Gunnar V. Jarring, ambassadeur de
Suede. Souhaitons que sa mission, qui est d'amener
la demilitarisation de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire
afin qu'un plebiscite ait lieu sous les auspices de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour trancher la
question du rattachementdel'Etatal'lndeouau Pakistan, soit couronnee de succes.

120. My Government is happy that the Security Council
has noted the proposal that a United Nations force be
sent to the State of Jammu and Kashmir in orqer to
facilitate its demilitarization in accordance with the
terms of the international agreement. I would humbly
submit, once again, that in our view this is a good way
of making progress towards the agreed objective t
namely, the plebiscite. Over the course of the last
eight years the Government of India has rejected, one
after another, eleven proposals to bring about the
demilitarization of the State. The various procedures
laid down in Chapter VI of the Charter have been tried
without success. If the situation is not to erupt into a
catastrophe, something positive must be done to demilitarize the State thus making it possible for the plebiscite to be held without further delay.

120. Mon gouvernement est heureux de constater que
le Conseil de securite a pris note de la propositicn
tendant a envoyer une force des Nations Unies daus
l'Etat de Jammu et Cacbemire afin de faciliter sa
d~militarisation conformement aux dispositions de
l'accord internationaL Je voudrais dire une fois de
plus que, a notre aVis, c'est la un bon moyen de progresser vers l'objectif convenu, c'est-a-dire vers le
plebiscite. Au cours des huit dernieres annees, le Gouvernement indien a rejett~ rune apres l'autre 11 propositions qui avaient pour objet d'assurer la demilitarisation de l' Etat. Les diverses procedures enoncees
au Chapitre VI de la Charte ont ete essayees sans
succes. Si l'on veut eviter que la situation ne degenere
en catastrophe, il faut prendre des mesures positives
pour demilitariser l'Etat, de maniere que le plebiscite
puisse avoir lieu sans plus de retard.

121. Mr. Menon has said, and I quote him:

121. M. Menon a dit - et je me permets de le citer:
34

..

.'
f

123. The dis
also raised ob
force on the
itarizing the
force will go
force the troo
ing and disban
international
representative
case may be.
draw the atte
Soviet Unioncreate confide
should enable
charge of the
agreement. As
Kashmir, both
terms of the
draWing their f
by disbandme
further reduct
cease-fire lin

124. Now, thi
this United Na
consent of bot
have agreed
agreed to wit
that agreeme
Pakistan befor
force is goin!
imagine that t
the people of
would be wron~

125. If India s
then it would
before the Co
force is now b
occupy the fro
and to remov
other will inva
United Nations
then India, hav'
according to th
it-must withd
want to addre
troops are goi
We are agree!
demilitarizatio

._-

~_

1

I

__ ..

__..

--~_.~---,---

. __._._. __·.. _'-_·ce

122. M. Menon est un juriste habile. n s' est exprime
de maniere assez vague pour pouvoir dire, lorsqu'U reviendra sur cette question apres avoir donne son accord sur tous les points: "En disant "notre territoire" ,
je voulais parler du territoire de l'Inde et non de"celui
du Cachemire, qui n'est pas territoire indien." Il ne
faut done pas se laisser deconcerter par cette declaration de M. Menon, car il s'est exprime de maniere
a se menage l' une issue.
123. L'eminent representant de l'Inde a egalement
formule des objections contre l'envoi d'une force des
Nations Unies en faisant valoir qU'il se peut que cette
force ne parvienne pas a demUitariser la region. Nous
n'avons jamais dit que cette force iraitinspectertoates
les casernes du Cachemire pour obligeI' les troupes a
deposer les armes. Aux termes de l'accord intersational, c'est au representant des Nations Unies ou a
l'Administrateur du plebiscite, selon le cas, qu'il incombe d'assurer la dissolution et ledesarmementdes
forces. L'intervention d'une force des Nations Unieset je me permets d'attirer particulierement sur ce
point l'attention du representant de l'Unionsovietiquea uniquement pour objet de creel' un climat de confiance qui permette aux deux parties de s'acquitter
sans crainte des obligations que leur fait l'accord international. Des que la force des Nations Unies penetrera au Cachemire, les deux parties devront, ainsi
que le prevoit expressement l'accord international,
commencer a retirel' leurs forces, operation qui sera
suivie par la dissolution des forces du Cachemire
"azad" et par une nouvelle reduction des forces se
trouvant du cote indien de la ligne de demarcation.

123. The distinguished representative of India has
also raised objections with regard to the United Nations
force on the score that it may not succeed in demilitarizing the area. We have never suggested that the
force will go round the army barracks in Kashmir and
force the troops to surrender their arms. The disarming and disbanding of forces is under the terms of the
international agreement the responsibility of the
representative or the Plebiscite Administrator, as the
case may be. The object of the entry-and I specially
draw the attention of the honourable member of the
Soviet Union-of a United Nations force is simply to
create confidence in the minds of the two sides which
should enable them to proceed without fear to the discharge· of their obligations under the international
agreement. As soon as the United Nations force enters
Kashmir, both sides must, strictly according to the
terms of the international agreement, start withdraWing their forces, which operation would be followed
by disbandment of the "Azad" Kashmir forces and
further reduction in the forces on the Indian side of the
cease-fire line.

.

..

J'affirme, Monsieur le President, que le Cachemire
n' est pas territoire indien. Par consequent, la question
de: troupes etrangeres stationnees sur le sol indien ne
se pose pas.

122. Mr. Krishna Menon is a clever lawyer. He has
left sufficient scope in these words to argue when he
returns, after having agreed to everything, to say, "The
meaning of my words were 'our territory', which was
Indian territory but not Kashmir territory-which was
not our territory." Therefore we should not be dismayed by the use of these words by Mr. Menon because
he has left a loop-hole for himself.

'.

-~

~~."_.

"Le Gouverneme~t indien ne permettra en aucun
cas la presence de troupes etrangeres sur son sol. "
[76geme seance, par. 153.]

"The Government of India will in no circumstances
permit foreign troops on its soil." [769th meeting,
para. 153.]
I submit, Mr. President, that Kashmir is not Indian
soil. The question of any foreign troops going on Indian
soil does not therefore arise.

:

'_ .'

124. Now, this thing must be clearly understood, that
this United Nations force is going into Kashmir with the
consent of both parties, in the sense that both parties
have agreed to demilitarize, and both parties have
agreed to withdraw their forces. It is in pursuance of
that agreement which has been made by India and
Pakistan before you here, for demilitarization, tha.t this
force is going. Therefore, for anyone to think or
imagine that this force is going against the wishes of
the people of Kashmir, or of India, or of Pakistan,
would be wrong.

124. Il doit etre bien entendu que cette force des Nations Unies se rend at< Cachemire avec l'assentiment
des deux parties, puisque les deux parties ont accepte
la demilitarisation ainsi que le retrait de leurs fo rces.
C'est en execution de cet accord de demilitarisation
que l'Inde et le Pakistan ont conclu ici meme que cette
force penetrera au Cachemire. Par consequent, quiconque penserait qu'elIey est envoyee contre la volonte
de la population du Cachemire, ou contre la vOlonte
de l'Inde ou du Pakistan, .serait dans l'erre"r.

125. If India said today: "We will not admit the force",
then it would be going against its agreement made
before the Council that they will demilitarize. This
force is now being sent there from the Pakistan side to
occupy the frontiers, to prevent war between the two,
and to remove fear from the mind of each that the
other will invade if they withdraw. Therefore, when this
United Nations force has gone to the cease-fire line,
then India, haVing already agreed to withdl'aw its forces
according to the resolution-international treaty, I call
it-must withdraw. Therefore if anybody argues, andI
want to address this point to Mr. Sobolev, that these
troops are going there-forced on India-he is wrong.
We are agreeing to it, and India has already agreed to
demilitarization, therefore its consent is presumed.

125. Si I'Inde disait aujourd'hui "nous ~'".nc;,pterons
pas la presence de cette force", elIe.. 'rmnaftrait
l'engagement pris devant le Conseil de demilitariseI'.
Cette force se rendra sur place pour occuper les
frontieres, pour empecher une guerre entre les deux
parties, et pour que chacune des parties n'ait pas a.
craindre que l' autre n' occupe le territoire qu' elle aura
evacue. En consequence, lorsque la force des Nations
Unies sera arrivee a la ligne de demarcation, l'Inde,
qui a deja accepte de retire l' sesforcesconformement
a la resolution - que j'appelIe traite international devra quitter le territoire. n serait donc faux de pretendre - je fais cette remarque a l'intention de
M. Sobolev - que ces troupes se rendent dans l'Inde
pour imposer une solution. Nous acceptons l'envoi de
35

~.

__.-._ _.. .. _-- .. ,..

~

..

~

"~'-".~~"--~---_:~

forced, and
have the time
126. Consequently I think the only way of ensuring
peace now in that area is that the United Nations troops
should go there, and we allow them to go to our area to
occupy our cease-fire line. In which case, India already
having agreed, and now I a,m sure it will agree againwhen the President goes' there-that if our troops go, it
will be willing to go. If we confirm the original agreement, then India's agreement can also be presumed,
then the troops can go in. But we ourselves do not want
to hand over the cease-fire line to a few policemen
from the United Nations, and then tomorrow India may
invade our side and be a danger to Pakistan. The troops
are being sent and will be sent only when there is a
presumption that both parties are willing to agree to
demilitarize and accept these trooI-a. We are giving
our acceptance now. India'S acceptance, the President
will secure, I hope, wl;len he goes to New Delhi.

127. Therefore the question of forcing the troops into
that area does not arise. If anybody has been arguingespecially the Russian delegate-I hope he will bear in
mind my interpretation of the request for troops: that
it is the willingness ofthe parties to receive the troops
that will take the troops there. If India is fighting and
will not in any case allow the United Nations troops to
go there, then we may not be willing to allow our troops
to move out in order to make room for the United
Nations troops unless India has also agreed. Therefore
we must help the President in solving this problem. We
must give him a chance. We must give him this authority. When he has been to New Delhi, then he will
return to report to you and there will be sufficient
time for every member of the Security Council to
reconsider this matter in connexion with the troops.
At the moment we are only authorizing the President
to go and to negotiate with India to find out wheL'1er
India is Willing to receive the troops or not, and if so,
on what conditions; and if it is not, how are they going
to implement the international treaty?

128. Nothing is going to happen with regard to these
troops until the President returns and reports to you
on the opinion of India with respect to this subject. Then
the Council will have plenty of time to assess the situation and consider this point. I am saying this because
yesterday a certain :rumour was spread by a certain
quarter-which did not come from the Soviet Union, I
know. That is why I felt it necessary to explain the
question in this way since I did not have an opportunity
of seeing the representative of the Soviet Union to
explain this to him before. The troops are not being

129. The Co
proposed by t
resolution [S
as well as the
Security Co
to these amen
if adopted, th
from the res
nouncement 0
lines along w
nificant area
which the Sec
overlooked .
accepted. Th
Nations force
distinct possi
130. Further
restrict the
Council in se
itarization of
examining pr
are likely to
itarization. T
examining th
can be made.
fortunately r
ident's repor
my Governme
mounting tens

131. Mr. Kr
intervention,
of Algeria an
I cannot folIo
to theSecuri
quered by the
the right of li
Kashmir wa
years ago an
these people
for liberatio
because the p
in the Securi
refrained fro
forces of occ
to be human
waiting for
concede that
that area is 0

132. The fac
years ago but
Council sole
solution throu
kept and if t

~.
,.'.....

-~---'~--"--

.,..-'

_, - -. ...

--~--~.~_.:.-~.- -'

,

Mjlt

elle
lant
des
ase
caLent
; se
:ira
rite
ord
lien
ons
ne
une
, le
ous
.ys.

ees
eux
ion
DUS

ere
ent
Ilce
on.
ent
ier
ant

{a-

ies

se
ne

"

."

forced, and after the President returns the Council will
have the time to consider this.

les lui donner. Je souligne une fois de plus que la
presence de la force des Nations Unies ne sera pas
imposee, et que, apres le retour du President, le
Conseil aura le temps d'examiner les questions qui se
rattachent a l'envoi de cette force.

129. The Council also has before it the amendments
proposed by the Soviet Union with respect to the draft
resolution [S/3789]. The decision on these amendments
as well as the draft resolution is, of course, one for the
Security Council. We have given careful consideration
to these amendments and suggest, with due respect,that,
if adopted, the Soviet Union amendments would remove
from the resolution an authoritative and valuable pronouncement on the present status of the dispute and the
lines along which a solution must be sought. The significant area of agreement between India and Pakistan
which the Security Council is seeking to build would be
overlooked if the Soviet Union amendments were
accepted. The usefulness of the purpose of a United
Nations force which, though unexplored, has certain
distinct possibilities, would be ignored.

129. Le Conseil est egalement saisi des amendements au projet de resolution qui ont ete proposes
par le representant de l'Union sovietique [S/3789]. Il
appartient evidemment au Conseil de se prononcer sur
ces amendements comme sur le projetlui-meme. J'ai
examine attentlvement ces amendements et je me
permets de faire remarquer qu' en les adoptant on supprimerait de la resolution les affirmations autorisees
et precieuses qu'elle contient au sujet de l'etat actuel
du differend et des principes dont on doit s'inspirer
pOur parvenir aune solution. Adopter ces amendements
serait meconnaitre le terrain d'entente que le Conseil
de securite cherche a etablir entre 1'Inde et le Pakistan;
ce serait meconnaftre l'utilite d'une force des Nations
Unies, qui offre des possibilites certaines, bien
qu'encore inexplorees.

130. Further, these amendments would severely
restrict the authority of the President of the Security
Council in seeking to develop proposals forthedemilitarization of the State. The draft resoll'tion speaks of
examining proposals which in the President's opinion
are likely to contribute to the achievement of demilitarization. The amendments restrict the President to
examining the present situation and the progress that
can be made. The Soviet Union amendments wouldunfortunately remove the deadline date for the President's report on demilitarization-a provision which
my Government considers vital in view of the present
mounting tension over this dispute.

130. En outre. l'adoption de ces amendements aurait
pour effet de restreindre considerablement les pouvoirs qui ont ete accordes au President du Conseil de
securite pour lui permettre de mettre au point des
propositions en vue de la demilitarisation de l'Etat.
Aux termes du projet de resolution, il s'agit d'examiner les propositions qui, del'avisduPresident, sont
de nature II contribuer a la demilitarisation de l'Etat.
Si les amendements etaient adoptes, le President
aurait seulement pour tache d'examiner la situation
actuelle et les progr~s qu'il est possible de faire. De
plus, si l'on adoptait ces amendements, il ne serait
plus question de la date limite avant laquelle le President doit presenter son rapport sur la demilitarisatibn,
disposition qui, de l'avis duGouvernementpakistanais,
est d'importance capitale en raison de la tension
croissante que provoque actuellement le differend.

131. Mr. Krishna Menon, in the course of his last
intervention, has tried to differentiate between the case
of Algeria and Kashmir [769th meeting, para. 112], but
I cannot follow his arguments. Did he mean to convey
to the Security Council that because Algeria was conquered by the French some 130years ago it has earned
the right of liberation and self-determination, whereas
Kashmir was conquered by Indian troops only nine
years ago and therefore the struggle for liberation by
these people cannot be rated on a par with the struggle
for liberation of the Algerian people? Or is it that
because the people of Kashmir, having placed their faith
in the Security Council, have, undergreatprovocation,
refrained from reacting violently against the Indian
forces of occupation, Mr. Menon does not consider them
to be human beings worthy of the name?Is Mr. Menon
waiting for Kashmir to erupt like Algeria before he will
concede that the move for liberation by t!le people of
that area is on the march?

131. Je rappellerai, pour terminer, qu'au cours de sa
intervention, M. Krishna Menon a essaye
d' etablir une distinction entre la situation de l'Algerie
et celle du Cachemire [769~meseance,par.112].Pour
ma part, je ne puis suivre son argumentation. A-t-il
voulu indiquer au Conseil queparcequel'Algeriea ete
conquise par les Fran~ais il y a environ 130 ans elle
a acquis le droit de se liberer et de decider de son
avenir, tandis iIue, du fait q..le le Cachemire a ete
conquis par les troupes indiennes il y a neuf ans seulement, la lutte menee par le peuple de cet Etat pour sa
libe ration ne peut pas etre comparee II celle que m~ne
le peuple algerien? Ou serait-ce que, du fait que la
population du Cachemire, qui aplacesaconfiancedans
le Conseil de securite, s'est abstenue, en depit de
graves provocations, de toute manifestation violente
contre les forces d'occupation indiennes, M. Menonne
la' considere pas comme composee d'etres humains
dignes de ce nom? M. Menon attend-il que le Cachemire se soul~ve comme l'Algerie pour reconnaftre
qu'il existe un mouvement de liberationpopulairedans
cette region?

132. The fact is that Kashmir did erupt some nine
years ago but failed to engulf India because the Security
Council solemnly promised to its people a fair and just
solution through peaceful means. If that promise is not
kept and if that solution is not allowed to go through,

132. En realite, le Cachemires'estsouleveilya neuf
ans environ, mais l'Inde n'a pas eu a en subir les consequences parce que le Conseil de securite a promis
solennellement a la population du Cachemire que l'on
parviendrait, par des moyens pacifiques, II une solution

ies

lC-

la
pte
le
ro-

~he

us.
de

m-

mr
:ne

8iell

ien

)Se

es;

les

Lge

las
1hi

!r-

derni~re

rs,
lon

'e-

ms

;0-

:a-

Jir
lur

37

.

-"'-~'~':'~""~

then it is much to be feared that Kashmir may rival or
even outrun Algeria in respect of the heart-rending
happenings in the latter country.

juste et equitable. Si cette promesse n'est pas tenue
et s'iI est mis obstacle a cette solution, iI est fort II
craindre qu'il ne se produise au Cachemire des evenements dont la gravite egale ou meme surpasse celle
des deplorables evenements qui ont lieu en Algerie.

133. I am most grateful to the President and the
members of the Council for having listened to me
patiently, because I fully realize that my speech has
been quite a long one this morning, which is unusual,
and which the Council does not expect from me.

133. Je remercie le President et les membres du
Conseil de securite de la patience avec laquelle ils
m'ont ecoute. Je reconnais que j'ai prononce cematin
un discours qui aura sans doute quelque peu surpris le
Conseil, car je n'ai pas l'habitude d'etre aussi long.

134. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security
Council has heard statements by the representatives of
India and Pakistan, and by members of the Council, on
the question of Kashmir. The Soviet Union's general
position on this question was outlined at the Security
Council's meeting on 24 January [765th meeting, paras.
81 to 88].

134. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Le Conseilde securite
a entendu les declarations que les representants de
l'Inde et du Pakistan, ai~si que les membres du Conseil, ont faites au sujet de la question du Cachemire.
L'attitude generale de l'Union sovietique dans cette
question a deja ete expusee le 24 janvie:- [765eme
seance, par. 81 a 88].

135. The Soviet Union's view, and its basic premise,
is that the Kashmir question has in actual fact already
been settled in essence by the people of Kashmir themselves, who consider their territory an integral part of
the Republic of India. HaVing attained their rights as
an autonomous State within the united family of Indian
peoples, the people of Kashmir have assumed an active
part in the peaceful constructive work in which the
whole country is engaged, and have. scored considerable
successes in the field of economic, social, cultural and
political development.

135. L'Union sovietique estime que la question du
Cachemire a deja ete regMe, au fond, par le peuple
cachemirien lUi-meme, qui considere son territoire
comme etanf partie integrante de la Republique indienne. Entre avec le statut d'Etat autonome dans la
grande famille des peuples de l'Inde, le peuple du
Cachemire s'est associe activement au travail de
construction pacifique qui anime tout le pays, et il
a. remporte des succes considerables en matiere economique, sociale, culturelle et politique.

136. Some states, however, do not want to acknowledge
the great changes which have come about in Kashmir
in the last few years. They continue to foment an
artificial hue and cry on the subject of the so-called
"Kashmir question" in order to force the reconsideration of the deCision taken by the people of Kashmir
themselves. This hue and cry will in no way help to
bring about the re-establishment of normal cor..ditions
in the area, and it is diametrically opposed to the vital
interests both of the people of Kashmir and of the
peoples of India and pakistan. The object of those who
started this hue and cry is not to find a solution to the
differences still outstanding between India and Pakistan, but rather to aggravate them. In fact, they are
urging the Security Council along the same path, by
calling on it to ignore the changes that have taken place
in Kashmir and to try to force the solution of the
Kashmir question into the Procrustean bed of the old
resolutions.

136. Cependant, certains Etats ne veulent pas temr
compte des grands changements qui se sont produits,
ces dernieres annees, au Cachemire. lis continuent a
entretenir une agitation artificielle autour de ce qu'ils
appellent "la question du Cachemire", afin de provoquer une revision de la decision qui a ete prise par
le peuple cachemirien lUi-meme. Cette ·campagne
tapageuse ne peut en aucune fa~on contribuer a normaliser la situation dans cette region et elle est absolument contraire aux interets vitaux tant du peuple
du Cachemire que des peuples de 1'Inde et du Pakistan.
Les- instigateurs de cette campagne cherchent non pas
a regler les differends qui subsistent entre "1 'Inde et
le Pakistan, mais ales aggraver. En fait, Hs voudraient entrainer dans cette meme voie le Conseil
de securite, en lui demandant de ne tenir aucun compte
des changements survenus au Cachemire et de recourir, pour regler cette question du Cachemire, au lit
de Procuste des anciennes resolutions.

137. The Security Council would be committing a
serious mistake if it were to recommend any measures
whatsoever without taking into account the extent to
which they corresponded to the true situation and the
vital"interests of the people of Kashmir.

137. Le Conseil de securite commettrait une grave
erreur s'il s'avisait de recommander des mesures
sans se soucier de savoir si ceS mesures repondent
a la situation reelle et aux interets vitaux du peuple
cachemirien.

138. The Security Council cannot ignore the facts
which have been placed before it notably in the statement made by the representative of India. The facts
show that in the many years that have passed since the
Security Council adopted its resolutions on the holding
of a plebiscite, the situation in Kashmir has changed
considerably. We must not forget that the idea of a
plebiscite in Kashmir now meets with the objections
of one of the parties; that it has in fact been rejected
by that party. At the present time, the holding of a

138. Le Conseil de securite ne peut fermer les yeux
sur les faits qui ont ete cites, notamment par le representant de l'Inde. I1 est certain que de nombreuses
annees se sont ecou1.ees depuis l'adoption des resolutions dans lesquelles le Conseil envisageait un plebiscite, et que la situation dans la region du Cachemire a beaucoup change. On ne doit pas perdre de
vue que l'idee d'un plebiscite au Cachemire se _.eurte
actuellement aux objections, et meme a l'opposition
formelle, de l'une des parties. Organiser actuelle-

· i

38

plebiscite
form or an
Security C
filcts and
the area. T
to stren
these circ
served by
a clause P
Kashmir?

139. Nor,
making a r

representat
Nations fo
Nations Ch
that United
repel aggr
The Charte
for the use
goes witho
for the use
a plebiscite
United Nati
at variance
Charter and
sentiments
140. That
vote against
provisions
in the Kash
vital intere
at variance
Charter.

141. The S
to support
certain tim
mir questio
Council cou
lated, and
further effo
direct negot

142. In the
far from ha
peaceful set
of bilateral
of any sort.
with the pri
also with th
the people 0

i
I

I

143. The
us that the
and I would
a peaceful s
and Pakist
Mr. Jarring
go to the ar
India andP
means of se
indeed the p
no objection
need to tie

--.~".,~.

~"--'~-'~

-''-'''~~-'-"''''-'''~..'.-''-- ,._~-----' ,--:..;±---","--".,-,-:.:..;.-'

s tenue
t fort a.
evenee celle
erie.

plebiscite in Kashmir, with outside interference in one
form or another, as proposed by some members of the
Security Council, can serve only to excite local conflicts and to complicate the international situation in
the area. The task of the Security Council, however, is
to strengthen peace and tranquillity in the area. In
these circumstances, what useful purpose will be
served by including in the Security Council resolution
a clause providing for the holding of a plebiscite in
Kashmir? Clearly, no purpose at all.

res du

~11e ils

~matin

pris le
long.

1listes
;curite
mts de
1 Con-

139. Nor, in our opinion would there be any point in
making a reference in the resolution to the Pakistan
representative's proposal concerning the use of United
Nations forces in the Kashmir region. The United
Nations Charter provides clearly and unambiguously
that United Nations armed forces can be used only to
repel aggression and to restore international peace.
The Charter of the United Nations makes no provision
for the use of armed forces for any other purpose. It
goes without saying that the Charter does not provide
for the use of United Nations forces to impose by force
a plebiscite in any country. Thus, the introduction of a
United Nations force into Kashmir would be completely
at variance with the principles of the United Nations
Charter and would be an outright insult to the national
sentiments of the people of Kashmir.

~mire.

: cette
65eme

ion du
peuple
'itoire
lle inans la
lIe du
ail de
et il
eeco-

140. That being so, the Soviet Union delegation will
vote against the inclusion in the draft resolution of any
provisions which do not correspond to the true situation
in the Kashmir area, which fail to take into account the
vital interests of the people of Kashmir or which are
at variance with the principles of the United Nations
Charter.

tenir
duits,
llent II
qu'ils
rovo:epar
pagne
Irmaabsoeuple
istan.
mpas
Lde et
vouInsei!
Impte

141. The Soviet delegation would however be prepared
to support proposals calling for the suspension for a
certain time of the Council's consideration ofthe Kashmir question. During that time the members of the
Council could study the documents which have accumulated, and the parties directly concerned could make a
further effort to settle their differences by means of
direct negotiation.

142. In the Soviet delegation's opinion, the parties are
far from having exhausted all the possibilities for a
peaceful settlement of the Kashmir question by means
of bilateral negotiations, without outside intervention
of any sort. Such a procedure would be fully in keeping
with the principles of the United Nations Charter, as
also with the interests of the people of Kashmir and of
the people of India and Pakistan.

~cou­

au lit
~rave

mres
ldent
mple

yeux
lpremses
,oluple.chere de
mrte
ition
e11e-

,I
i

!

i

ment un plebiscite au Cachemire et y intervenir du
dehors, sous une forme ou sous une autre, comme
le proposent certains membres du Conseil de securite, cela ne ferait qu'attiser les dissensions locales et compliquer la situation internationale dans
cette region. La tache du Conseil de securite est,
tout au contraire, de consolider la paix et la tranquillite dans cette region. Des lors, a quoi servirait
d'inscrire dans la resolution du Conseil une disposition relative a l' organisation d'un plebiscite au
Cachemire? n est evident que cela ne servirait a
rien.
139. A notre avis, il n'est pas necessaire non plus
de rappeler dans la resolution l'opinion exprimee par
le representant du Pakistan touchantl'envoi de troupes
des Nations Unies dans la region du Cachemire. La
Charte des Nations Unies declare nettement et sans
equivoque que les forces armees de l'Organisation ne
peuvent servir qu'a repousser une agression ou a
retablir la paix internationale. La Charte des Nations
Unies ne prevoit aucun autre cas de recours aux
forces armees. Bien entendu, la Charte ne prevoit
pas l'emploi de troupes des Nations Unies pour proceder, par la force, a un plebiscite dans un pays quelconque. Ainsi, l'envoi d'une force des Nations Unies
au Cachemire serait absolument contraire aux principes de la Charte des Nations Unies et constituerait
une insulte au..~ sentiments nationaux du peuple du
Cachemire.
140. Pour ces motifs, la delegation de l'Union sovietique s'opposera a l'insertion, dans la resolution,
de dispositions qui ne repondent pas a la situation
reelle dans la region du Cachemire, qui ne tiennent
pas compte des interets vitaux du peuple du Cache"mire ou qui sont contraires auxprincipes de la Charte
des Nations Unies.
141. En revanche, la delegation sovietique est prete

a appuyer des propositions qui permettraient au Con-

seil de suspendre pour quelque temps l'examen de la
question du Cachemire. Les membres du Conseil
pourraient utiliser ce laps de temps pour etudier la
documentation qui s'est accumulee; de leur cote, les
parties interessees pourraient en profiter pourtenter
encore une fois de regler leurs divergences par des
negociations directes.
142. A notre avis, les parties sontloind'avoirepuise
toutes les possibilites d'un reglement pacifique de la
question du Cachemire par la methode de negociations
bilaterales et sans aucune intervention etrangere.
Cette voie est entierement conforme aux principes de
la Charte des Nations Unies et elle repond aux interets du peuple du Cachemire comme a ceux des
peuples de l'Inde et du Pakistan.

143. The sponsors of the draft resolution have told
143. Les au.:eurs du projet de resolution des quatre
us that the purpose of the resolution is to try a newpuissances nous ont dit ici que la resolution avait
and I would stress the word "new"-approachtofinding
pour but d'essayer une methode nouvelle - je dis
a peaceful settlement of the differences between India
bien nouvelle - propre a regler pacifiquement les
and Pakistan. This new approach consists in requesting
differends qui subsistent entre l'Inde et le Pakistan.
Mr. Jarring, the President of the Security Council, to
Cette methode nouvelle consiste a charger M. Jarring,
go to the area and examine with the Governments of
president du Conseil de securite, de se rendre sur
India and Pakistan the situation in Kashmir and possible
place et d'examiner avec les Gouvernements de l'Inde
means of settling the eXisting differences. If this is
et du Pakistan la situation qui s'est creee au Cacheindeed the purpose of the draft resolution, there can be
mire, ainsi que les methodes qui permettraient de
no objection to it. In that case, however, there is no
regler leur differend. Si tel est le but du projet de
need to lie Mr. Jarring's hands hy proposal' which, 39 r~solulion, nous n'y voyons pas d'ohjeclion. Maladans

·1

I
I,
i

'II
.1

I
I1
I'

I·

even at the stage of their discussion in the Security
Council, have been objected to by one or other of the
parties-and we have heard such objections in the Security Council.

ce cas, point n'est besoin de lier les mains a. M. Jarring en faisant figurer dans la r~solution des propositions qui, sitat d~battues ici, ont suscit~ l'opposition de l'une ou de l'autre partie - et le Conseil a
pu se rendre compte de l'existence de cette opposition.

144. The representative of Colombia, Mr. Urrutia,
has made a very interesting proposal here. If! understood him rightly, he proposes that the preamble to the
draft resolution, with the exception of the first paragraph, should be deleted [768thmeeting, para. 86]. The
delegation of the Soviet Union supports this idea; however, it would be desirable to modify not only the
preamble but also operative paragraph 1, by deleting
from it any proposals to which objections have been
raised.

144. Le repr~sentant de la Colombie, M. Urrutia, a
fait une proposition int~ressante. Si nous l'avons
bien compris, il propose de supprimer tout le preambule du projet de r~solution, a l' exception du premier alin~a [768~me s~ance, par. 86]. La d~l~gation
de l'Union sovi~tique appuie cette id~e, mais il lui
parait souhaitable de modifier non seulement le pr~­
ambule, mais aussi le paragraphe premier du dispositif, afin d'y supprimer ce qui a donn~ lieu a des
objections.

145. The delegation of the Soviet Union therefore
presents the following amendments [S/3789] to the draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Cuba, the United
Kingdom and the United States [S/3787]:

145. En cons~quence, la del~gation de l'Union sovi~tique propose d'apporter les amendements suivants
[8/3789] au projet de resolution pr~sente par l'Australie, Cuba, les Etats-Unis d'Am~rique et le Royaume-Uni [8/3787]:
"1. Remplacer le pr~ambule par le texte suivant:

"1. Replace the preamble by the follOWing text:
" 'Having heard the statements of the represeatatives of the Governments of India and Pakistan.'

"Ayant entendu les expos~s des repr~sentants du
Gouvernement indien et du Gouvernement pakistanais".
"2. Donner au paragraphe 1 du dispositif la rMaction suivante:
"Demande au President du Conseil de securite,
representant de la Su~de, d'examiner avec le Gouvernement indien et le Gouvernement pakistanais
la situation en ce qui concerne le Jammu et Cachemire et d'etudier les progres qu'il est possible de
faire vers un r~glement du probleme, en tenant
compte des exposes des representants du Gouvernement indien et du Gouvernement pakistanais".

"2. Amend paragraph 1 of the operative part to
read as follows:
. " 'Requests ilie President of the Security Council,
the representative of Sweden, to examine with -the
Governments of India and Pakistan the situation in
respect of Jammu and Kashmir, and to consider the
progress that can be made towards the settlement of
the problem, bearing in mind the statements of the
representatives of the Governments of India and
Pakistan;"

; \l

"3. In paragraph 3 of the operative part delete the
words: 'but not later than 15 April 1957' .

"3. Supprimer, au paragraphe 3 du dispositif, le
membre de phrase suivant: "et au plus tard le
15 avrilI957".

The last amendment is to delete the reference to a
specific date for the presentation of the report. Mr.
Jarring should be at liberty to present his report whenever he deems it appropriate.

Le dernier amendement vise a ne fixer aucun delai
pour la presentation du rapport. M. Jarring pourra
lui-meme d~terminer ce delai en fonction des circonstances.
146. Nos amendements ont pour but d'~carter du
projet de resolution les dispositions qui soulevent
une objection de la part de l'une ou de l'autre des
parties directement interessees tout en conservant
ce qui nous parait etre la proposition essentielle, a.
savoir celle qui charge le President du Conseil de
securite d'examiner avec le Gouvernement indien et
le Gouvernement pakistanais la situation qui s' est
creee au Cachemire, et de faire rapport au Conseil
de s~cuFite.

146. These amendments are intended to remove from
the draft resolution such provisions as have been
objected to by one of the parties directly concerned,
while retaining the nucleus of the proposal, as we
understand it, namely, the request to the President of
the Security Council to examine the situation in Kashmir with the Governments of India and Pakistan and to
report to the Security Council.

147. The delegation of the Soviet Union hopes that
these amendments will be accepted by the sponsors of
the draft resolution and supported by the other members of the Security CounCil. The delegation of the
Soviet Union is of course :ready to discuss with the
sllonsors of the joint draft resolution the best way of
including in it the idea underlying the Soviet amendments.

147. La delegation de l'Union sovietique espere que
ces amendements auront l'approbation des auteurs du
projet de resolution- et celle des autres membres du
Conseil de securite. La delegation de l'Union sovietique est prete, bien entendu, a examiner, en consultation avec les auteurs du projet de resolution commun, quelle serait la. meilleure fa<;on d'incorporer
dans le projet de resolution l'idee qui est a la base
des amendements qu' elle propose.
La seance est levee a 13 h. 5.

The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m.
40

SALES--AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA·ARGENTINE

FRANCE

PAKISTAN

Editorial Sudamericana S.A., Alsina 500,
Buenos Aires.

Editions A. Pedone, 13, rue Soufflot,
Paris (Ve).

AUSTRALlA.AUSTRALlE

GERMANY-ALLEMAGNE

H. A. Goddard. A.M.P. Bldg., 50 Miller
St., Narth Sydney;
90 Queen St., Melbaurne.
Melbourne University Press, Car' .• N.3,
Victoria.

R. Eisenschmidt, Kaiserstrass" 49, Frank.
furt/ Main.
Elwert & Meurer, Haupstrasse 101, BerlinSchoneberg.
A1exander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9, Wies·
baden.
W. E. Saarbach, Gereonstrasse 25-29,
Koln (22c).

The Pakistan Co-operative Book Society,
Dacca, East Pakistan (and at Chittagong).
Publishers United Ltd., Lahore.
Thomas & Thomas,.Karachi, 3.

AUSTRIA·AUTRICHE
Gerold & Co., Graben 3.1, Wien, 1.

B. Wiille'storff, Markus Sittikusstrasse 10,
Salzbur\J.
BELGIUM·BELGIQUE

Agence et Messageries d" la' Presse S.A.,
14-22, rue du Persi!, Bruxelles.
W. H. Smith & Son, 71-75, boulevard
Adolphe-Max, Bruxelles.
BOllVIA.BOLlVIE

Libreria Selec;ciones, Casilla 972, La Paz.
BRAZIL.BRESIL

Livraria Agir, Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo
and Belo Horizonte.
CAMBODIA·CAMBODGE

Papeterie-Librairie Nouvelle, Albert Por.
tail, 14, avenue Boulloche, Pnom·Penh.
CANADA

Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West,
Toronto.
CEYLON·CEYLAN

Lake House Bookshop, The Associated
Newspapers of Ceylon, Ltd., P. O. Box
244, Colombo.
CHILE·CHILI

Editorial del Pacifico, Ahumada 57,
Santiago.
Libreria Ivens, Casilla 205, Santiago.
CHINA·CHINE

f

!I

11

11

Kauffmann Bookshop, 28 Stadion Si·reet,
Athenes.
G~ATEMALA
Sociedad Econamico Financiera, Edificio
Briz. Despacho 207, 6a Avenida 14-33,
Zona 1, Guatemala City.
HAITI

Librairie "A la Caravelle", Boite postale
l11-B, Port-au-Prince.

PERU·PEROU

Libreria Internacional del Peru, S.A.,
Lima and Arequipa.
PHILIPPINES

Alemar's Book Store, 749 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL

Livraria Rodrigues, 186 Rua Aurea, Lis
boa.
SINGAPORE·SINGAPOUR

Libreria Panalnericana, Tegucigalpa.

SPAIN·ESPAGNE

HONG KONG·HONG·KONG

The Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan Road,
Kowloon.
ICELAND.ISLANDE

Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
F., Austurstraeti 18, Reykjavik.
INDIA·INDE

Orient Lon9mans, Calcutta, Bombay, Ma·
dras and New Delhi.
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., New
Delhi and Calcutta.
P. Varadachary & Co., Madras.
INDONESIA·INDONESIE

Pembangunan, Ltd., Gunung SahrJri 84,
Djakarta.

COLOMBIA·COLOMBIE

ISRAEL

Libreria America, Medellfn.
Libreria Buchholz Galeria, Bogota.
Libreria Nacional Ltda., Barranquilla.

Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35 Allenby
Road, Tel·Aviv.

CUBA

Agencia de Librerias de Salvador Nizza,
Calle Pte. Franco No. 39-43, Asuncian.

The City Book Store, Ltd., Winchester
House, Collyer Quay.

"Guity", 482, avenue Ferdowsi, Teheran.

Trejos Hermanos, Apartado 1313, San
Jose.

nama.
PARAGUAY

HONDURAS

The World Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung
King Road, 1st Section, Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Commercial Press Ltd., 211 Honan
Rd., Shanghai.

COSTA RICA.COSTA.RICA

11

GREECE·GRECE

PANAMA

Jose Menendez, Plaza de Arango, Pa.

IRAN
IRAQ.IRAK

Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad.

ITALY·ITALlE

Libreria Commissionaria Sansoni, Via
Gina Capponi 26, Firenze.
JAPAN·JAPON

Maruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome,
Nihonbashi, Tokyo.

Librerio Bosch, 11 Ronda Universidad,
Barcelona.
Libreria Mundi-Prenso, Lagasca 38, Ma·
drid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE

C. E. Fritze's Kungl. Hovbokhandel A·B,
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND·SUISSE

Librairie Payot S.A., Lausonne, Geneve.
Hans Raunhardt, Kirchgasse 17, Zurich 1.
THAILAND·THAILANDE

Pramuan Mit Ltd., 55 Chakrawat Road,
Wat Tuk, Bangkok.
TURKEY·TURQUIE

Librairie Hacnette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi,
Beyoglu, Istanbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
UNION SUD.AFRlcAINE

Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., Box
724, Pretoria.
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC.
~~EPUBLlQUE ARABE UNIE

Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte", 9
Sh. Adly Pasha, Cairo.
Libroirie Universelle, Damas.
UNITED KIIIIGDOM.ROYAUME.UNI

H. M. Stationery Office, P.O. Box 569,
I.ondon, 5 E.l (and at H.M.S.O. shops).

i

La Casa Belga, O'Reilly 455, La Habana.

j

CZECHOSLOVAKIA·TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
~eskoslovensky Spisovatel, Narodni Trida

LEBANON·L1BAN

9, Praha 1.

LIBERIA

DENMARK·DANEMARK

J. Momolu Kamara, Monrovia.

Einar Munksgaard, Ltd., Nasrregade 6,
KClbenhavn, K.

International Documents Service, Calum·
bia University Press, 2960 Broadway,
New York 27, N. Y.

LUXEMBOURG

URUGUAY

Librairie J. Schummer, Luxembourg.

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE

MEXICO·MEXIQUE

Representacian de Editariales, Prof. H.
D'Elra, Av. 18 de Julio 1333, Montevideo.

Libreria Dominicana, Mercedes 49, Ciu·
dad Trujillo.
ECUADOR.EQUATEUR

Librairie Universelle, Beyrouth.

Editorial Hermes S.A., Ignacio Mariscal
41, Mexico, D.F.
NETHERLANDS·PAYS·BAS

Libreria Cientrfica, Guayaquil and Quito.

N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, tange Voorhout
9, 's-Gravenhage.

EL SALVADOR·SALVADOR

NEW ZEALAND·NOUVELLE·ZELANDE

Manuel Navas y Cfa., 1a. Avenida sur
37, San Salvador.

United Nations Association of New Zea.
land, c.P.O. 1011, Wellington.

IJNITIED Sl~TES OF AMERICA.
ETMS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE

VENEZUELA

Libreria del Este, Av. Mironda, No. 52,
Edf. Galipan, Caracos.
VIET·NAM

Papeterie-Librairie Nouvelle, Albert Par·
toil, Boite postale 283, Saigon.
YUGOSLAVIA.YOUGOSLAVIE

Cankarjeva Zalozba, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Drzavno
Preduzece,
Jugoslovenska
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 KeskuskaTu,
Johan Grundt Tanum Farlag, Kr. All.
Helsin'!d.
gustsgt. 7A, Oslo.
KojigaJ Terazije 27/11,. Beograd.
(5BB2)
Les common des el demon des cle rensei9nements emanant de
Orders and inquiries from countries where sales agents have
pays ou iI n'exis!e pas encore de depositaires peuvent etre
not yet been appointed may be sent to: Sales and Circulation
adressees Cl la Section des ventes et de la distribution,
Organisation des Natrons Unies, New-York (Etats-Unis d'Ame·
Section, United Nations, New York, U.S.A.; or Sales Section,
rique), ou Cl la Section des ventes, Organisation des Nations
United Nations Office, Palais des Nations, Geneva, Switzerland.
Unies, Palais des Nations, Geneve (Suisse).
FINLAND.FINLANDE

Litho. in U.N.

NORWAY·NORVEGE

Price: $U.S. 0,40; 3/- stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

34:49-May 1958-1,800
