United Nations

S/PV.6316

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6316th meeting
Wednesday, 19 May 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-36796 (E)

*1036796*

S/PV.6316

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Djibouti, in which he requests that
the President of the Republic of Djibouti be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the President of the Republic of Djibouti to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of the
Republic of Djibouti, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of the
Republic of Djibouti, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of the
Republic of Djibouti.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in response to a letter dated 5 May
2010 addressed to the President of the Security Council
from the representative of Djibouti.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti.
President Guelleh (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to express my sincerest congratulations
to Lebanon on its return to the world stage and on
assuming its rightful place among other nations with
pride and dignity. Lebanon has a rich and ancient
cultural heritage. It has been plunged into internal
strife many times in its long history, but has always
been able to overcome adversity with grace and to
emerge stronger and more united. I pay tribute to and

2

commend the courage, creativity and tenacity of your
people, Mr. President.
I wish to thank you and the members of the
Council for this opportunity to present my views on the
situation in the Horn of Africa. Unfortunately, I must
say that conditions in that part of the world remain, at
best, unchanged. Certain current trends, along with
worrisome potential developments, offer the prospect
of heightened crises and a severe decline in the quality
of life for the overwhelming majority of inhabitants in
the Horn. This has seriously jeopardized the region’s
short-term prospects and requires immediate and
sustained action by the international community.
My most recent statement to the Council,
delivered on 23 October 2008 (see S/PV.6000), remains
valid today, given the paralysed nature of the situation
and the persistence of the problems facing the region
both then and now. However, thanks to improvements
in
microeconomic
management
and
growing
international investor confidence in the continent, the
future appears promising. Against a backdrop of
unparalleled economic growth, the projected damage
resulting from the growing global financial crisis is
expected to be minimal. However, although the global
economy has not fully collapsed, given the spread,
persistence and depth of the crisis, inhabitants of the
Horn, and indeed of Africa more generally, have
experienced a decline in their quality of life over the
past year.
Several factors have contributed to this, afflicting
the poorer countries. These factors include chronic
drought, the still relatively high food and fuel prices,
the increasingly dangerous effects of climate change,
stagnant if not declining official development
assistance that is well below the levels promised, and
declining foreign direct investment in non-fuel sectors
in Africa.
Conflict remains at the forefront of the
adversities confronting Africa. In this regard, again,
against the backdrop of the persistent and violent civil
and regional wars that have taken place over the past
three decades, my statement in 2008 is just as relevant
today. Afflicted as it is by extreme human suffering,
abject poverty and grief, the Horn of Africa has known
more than its share of misfortune, tragedy, dislocation
and destruction, all of which are no longer humanly,
socially, economically and politically sustainable. The
region is bracing for the outcome of the coming

10-36796

S/PV.6316

Sudanese referendum in January to determine the
future of its people. The result of the referendum will
determine the decisions to be taken concerning the
sharing of resources and the demarcation of the border.
Prospects for the Horn as a whole will greatly
depend on the outcome of the referendum. The
commitment and involvement of the international
community is sine qua non to securing an outcome that
enjoys the support of all parties and the entire country.
At the end of the day, what matters most is that the
people be able to enjoy peaceful and productive lives. I
wish to emphasize that everyone — not only those of
us in the Horn of Africa, but the entire the international
community — has a job to do.
In the Horn of Africa, it remains imperative that
we address the deteriorating and increasingly chaotic
situation in Somalia as it affects neighbouring
countries and, through international piracy, the rest of
the world. Everyone now agrees that, despite all the
enforcement efforts, piracy can be eliminated only by
addressing its root causes, such as insecurity, extreme
poverty and State failure on land.
Given the harsh measures and tactics adopted by
the extremist elements, the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) remains under considerable pressure
in its quest to govern and administer the country. The
ruthless practices and methods adopted by the
extremists have only alienated most people, who have
been ravaged by famine and civil war over the past two
decades. They have been compelled constantly to flee
violence, live in abject poverty and precarious
conditions in their own country, and cross into
neighbouring countries, adding to the misery of already
overcrowded camps that lack security and resources.
A number of Governments, including my own,
have trained and equipped troops with the aim of
gradually retaking the Somali capital from militants
backed by Al-Qaida. However, the real number of
troops has always been small and fallen far short of the
strength necessary to withstand ongoing assaults, let
alone contain them. Given the very low morale of
troops due to poor conditions of service and lack of
pay, most have failed to perform their duties as
expected. Any Government offensive to uproot the
insurgents from Mogadishu will therefore require a
series of serious prior corrective measures in the
security sector.

10-36796

The sooner we understand that Somalia is in a
tragic situation that deserves our full sympathy and
unwavering and undivided attention, the better. We
have routinely been subject over the years to mindnumbing statistics about the plight of Somalia’s
civilian population. Indiscriminate mortar attacks, the
use of civilians as human shields, the millions living in
makeshift camps on the outskirts of the city, public
beheadings, the amputation of limbs, women being
stoned to death, and so on are but a few examples of
daily human outrages occurring in Somalia. Previously,
it was the warlords who perpetrated such heinous
crimes; now it is the militants, extremists, opportunists
and religious zealots who are running this tragic show.
Daily developments in Somalia do not, of course,
bode well for the survival of the TFG. The international
community seems to be in no hurry to shift its thinking
from the business-as-usual mode to one that would
demonstrate a determination to save the people of
Somalia from mayhem, destruction and slow death. It
is against this backdrop of despair, hopelessness and
the imminent demise of the TFG that I formulate the
following scenario for consideration and action by the
international community.
First, we are deeply disturbed at the continuing
internal political squabbles that threaten the very
existence of the TFG. The Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, well-meaning Governments and
organizations, and the wider international community
must step in to intervene before matters get out of
hand. That is both crucial and urgent. Pressure must be
brought to bear now, without further delay, on the
major divisive elements within the TFG. They must be
warned in no uncertain terms that they cannot continue
to undermine the Government.
Secondly, we must also understand that the TFG’s
authority is fast shrinking with the advances being
made every day by insurgents throughout the country.
It is no secret that the TFG controls only a few blocks
in Mogadishu, and that thanks largely to the African
Union Mission in Somalia. This is no doubt a
dangerous, senseless and an unsustainable situation.
Let us imagine for a moment a city of over 2 million
people under siege by several militias and marauding
fanatical gangs, while the legitimate Government has
been rendered politically and militarily irrelevant and
inconsequential.

3

S/PV.6316

The only way we can hope to bring a semblance
of peace and security to Somalia is first and foremost
to recognize and accept the inevitable. In order to end
two decades of civil war, we need to start where it all
began — in Mogadishu. To that end, I would ask
Council members to put aside all the rhetoric,
assumptions, analyses, conditionalities, reticence and
indifference that long pervaded the Somali dossier. Let
us decide once and for all, in the absence of other
options, to clear Mogadishu and its surroundings of
extremist militias in order to secure the capital, restore
law and order, and ensure a functioning Government
that will gradually restore all vital services, while
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations begin establishing their presence in the
capital.
Many will no doubt be sceptical, but let us face
the reality that, without capturing or prevailing in
Mogadishu, I cannot see how we can avert the
possibility of Somalia plunging into an avoidable
disintegration. Moreover, Mogadishu’s liberation
would give the Government a significant solid foothold
for returning the entire country to its control. This
would be the first but most important step in a series of
efforts leading to the establishment of a sound
Government able to expand its reach and authority
across the country. What I call for will require a
dynamic change in the thinking and planning of the
Security Council and the Secretariat. It will need a
gigantic shift from the status quo to a resolute
determination to resuscitate Somalia once and forever.
All agree that reconciliation and political
compromises must continue to be aggressively pursued
in Somalia at all times. However, it is fair to say that
the current explosive situation in the country is not,
strictly speaking, due to lack of consensus,
inclusiveness or peace initiatives. In fact, the Somalis
have become allergic to the terms “peace process” and
“reconciliation”. They have heard them all too often.
What, then, are the insurgents fighting for? Without a
doubt, their goal is to topple the internationally
recognized weak TFG because that will enable groups
linked to Al-Qaida to impose their brand of governance
throughout central and southern Somalia before
spreading to other relatively stable parts of the country,
threatening peace and security in the entire region.
The unfolding tragedy in Somalia is not that of
the Somalis and the countries of the region alone;
rather, it is of concern to us all. That war-torn country’s

4

predicament can no longer be shunned, postponed or
minimized. We cannot remain indifferent. Helping
Somalia to defend and protect itself is our
responsibility and an obligation we cannot shirk or
postpone under any pretext. It is time for that lingering
reticence to give way to proactive and pragmatic
engagement in Somalia in order to achieve enduring
peace, security and stability.
As members of the Security Council are aware,
my country has always actively facilitated and
supported the many ongoing efforts against the threat
of piracy in the Gulf of Aden and beyond. While piracy
is yet to be completely eliminated, the focused and
intense collaboration of the world’s naval forces is
helping to effectively combat the attractiveness and
rewards of this scourge. The efforts to eliminate piracy
have undoubtedly helped reduce it in the Gulf of Aden
and have extended into the wider Indian Ocean.
The impact of two recent developments is worth
noting. The first was the Security Council’s recent
adoption of resolution 1851 (2008), authorizing antipiracy measures on land with the aim of severely
crippling the pirates’ capacities. The other was the
capture of a pirate base by one of the main rebel groups
fighting for control of the country. Despite the rebel
group’s assertions, no one is sure at this stage whether
it will fight piracy or join it, given that activity’s
lucrative returns. Paradoxically, piracy has brought
increased attention to the country’s dire conditions of
lawlessness, joblessness and political paralysis.
Two years ago, Eritrea decided one fine day that
it was time to drag Djibouti into the conflict in the
Horn of Africa. Eritrea’s logic was that no country
should remain immune to conflict; hence its blatant
aggression against my country’s territorial integrity.
The military clashes in June 2008 and the ensuing
bloodshed resulted in deaths, injuries and prisoners
taken on both sides, as well as the occupation of Ras
Doumeira and Doumeira Island.
The unanimous condemnation of Eritrea by the
international community, including the Security
Council, insisted on the immediate cessation of
hostilities and the withdrawal of forces to the status
quo ante. My country heeded that call and withdrew its
forces accordingly. To this day, Eritrea’s response has
been to deny the very existence of a military
confrontation, to reject any withdrawal and to condemn
the Security Council’s swift action of 12 June 2008.

10-36796

S/PV.6316

As the Council may recall, in the ensuing two
years we have been intensively involved with all
subregional, regional and international organizations
with the aim of redressing, via an immediate
withdrawal, the illegal and unprovoked occupation of
my country. In this respect, my country has never
wavered in its devotion to and faith in the Charter of
the United Nations. This is the second time in two
years that I have addressed the Council about the
occupation of my territory. My Prime Minister has
done likewise.
This demonstrates the fact that Eritrea’s reckless
incursion remains our greatest national security concern.
Indeed, we have been vindicated by the Council’s
successive actions involving the fact-finding mission’s
report (S/2008/602), its statements and resolutions.
Those include in particular resolution 1907 (2009) of
23 September 2009, which imposed sanctions on Eritrea
for its misguided and contemptuous rejection of the
Council’s demands that it end its occupation and
engage in serious dialogue and diplomatic efforts
leading to a mutually acceptable settlement of the
border conflict. The resolution also demands, in
paragraph 4, that Eritrea make available information
pertaining to Djiboutian combatants missing in action
since the clashes of 10 to 12 June 2008, so that those
concerned may ascertain the presence and condition of
Djiboutian prisoners of war.
Let me state in the clearest terms before this body
that my country’s paramount interest is to live in peace
with its neighbours while pursuing internal stability
and economic growth. We have no territorial ambitions
other than to live within secure borders and to
safeguard our sovereignty and territorial integrity. It
was against this backdrop that we welcomed the longawaited visit to Asmara by the Security Council
sanctions Committee on Somalia and Eritrea. We had
truly hoped that Eritrea, having finally accepted that
visit, would make the most of such an important
encounter by opening sincere discussions with all
parties concerned and beginning to engage positively
with a genuine desire for a lasting settlement of all
outstanding issues.
To our great surprise, however, the latest position
paper submitted by Eritrea to the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee contains the usual litany of
unsubstantiated charges, false allegations and denials.
It would appear that, rather than take advantage of this
long-awaited meeting to address key issues raised in

10-36796

resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907 (2009), Eritrea chose
instead to pursue a strategy of repackaging its familiar,
obsolete demagoguery and to deliberately squander a
golden opportunity. Clearly, its attitude towards the
Council and its neighbours displays cynicism and
contempt, always with the intent to distort known facts,
distract attention, defer action and create confusion.
None of this, I am sure, will convince a wary and
well-informed Council, some of whose members are
first-hand witnesses to the facts and actions relevant to
this matter. I must seriously caution against any notion
that Eritrea is changing or cooperating following the
committee’s visit to Asmara. We believe that it would
be truly premature, indeed unwarranted, to further
confuse the goodwill that may have been displayed
during the visit with Eritrea’s unbending and unaltered
positions on the entire range of outstanding issues. Not
one iota of its obligations under the Council’s
resolutions has been fulfilled or is even being considered
for implementation. Let us not rush to judgment, or we
will simply be overstating a non-existent and contrived
good will on the part of Eritrea. Eritrea has not
changed and has no intention of doing so. What we see
is all simply a charade.
While we are all focused, as we should be, on
Eritrea’s occupation of parts of my territory, I wish to
share with the Council some other disturbing new
developments. For almost a year, Eritrea has conducted
a systematic campaign to destabilize my country by
training infiltrators who sabotage infrastructure and
target national events in rural and urban areas in order
to cause fear and friction. We have been very vigilant
to this real, ongoing threat, which has already been
carried out within my country. I am happy to report
that, among the many infiltrators we have recently
captured, is the leader of this band of saboteurs.
It will be recalled that resolution 1907 (2009)
underscored the many ways in which Eritrea is
undermining its neighbours, including by harbouring,
financing, supporting, organizing, training and inciting
individuals or groups to perpetrate acts of violence or
terrorist acts that seek to destabilize the region, and in
particular to incite violence and civil strife in Djibouti.
I urge members of the Council to come to grips with
the wider implications of Eritrea’s intransigence and
increasing violence. The escalating tensions and
conflicts and the breakdown of law and order so
widespread in the Horn of Africa could be merely a

5

S/PV.6316

prelude to a much worse situation unless their many
causes are adequately and seriously addressed.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank His
Excellency the President of Djibouti for his statement.
I now give the floor to Council members who
would like to speak.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I welcome His
Excellency President Ismail Omar Guelleh of Djibouti
and thank him for his comprehensive and insightful
statement on several issues pertaining to the Horn of
Africa. His address has come at an opportune time,
when the Council is seized with peace and security
issues in the region, including the border dispute
between Djibouti and Eritrea, the situation in Somalia
and the fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia.
Uganda underscores the need for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in the region to ensure durable
peace and security. In that regard, we take this
opportunity to commend President Guelleh for the
positive role Djibouti is playing in the region,
especially through the Djibouti peace process that has
led to the current Transitional Federal Government
(TFG), Parliament and other institutions that are
striving to restore stability in Somalia.
We are convinced that the Djibouti peace process
represents the best opportunity for lasting peace in
Somalia. We therefore commend the continuing efforts
of Djibouti in supporting the TFG, especially in the
security sector, and its recent mediation efforts aimed
at promoting reconciliation in Somalia.
In January and December 2009, the Security
Council adopted resolutions 1862 (2009) and 1907
(2009), respectively. We commend Djibouti for
fulfilling its obligations under those resolutions and its
commitment to finding a peaceful resolution to the
border conflict with Eritrea. It is regrettable that all
efforts to get similar cooperation from Eritrea have not
yet been successful. We call upon Eritrea to comply
with its obligations, as spelled out in Security Council
resolutions, to promote peace and stability in the
region.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
naturally welcome the presence of the President of the
Republic of Djibouti, Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh. The
French delegation has taken note with much interest of
his analysis, while the situation in the Horn of Africa
remains very unstable.

6

Fighting has stopped in Ras Doumeira and
Doumeira Island, but almost two years after Eritrea’s
attack on Djibouti positions, not only is the conflict
still unresolved, but the Djibouti authorities have no
news of the soldiers captured by Eritrea. On 12 June
2008, the Security Council condemned Eritrea’s
military actions and asked the two parties to withdraw
their forces to the positions of the status quo ante.
While Djibouti did this immediately, Eritrea still refuses
to do so, in spite of the adoption of resolution 1862
(2009) on January 2009 and then, under Chapter VII of
the Charter, of resolution 1907 (2009) last December.
To date, Asmara has rejected any international mission
to the area.
The Council thus raised the pressure on Eritrea,
which was hit with an arms embargo and individual
sanctions. The Secretary-General is ready to appoint
experts to the Monitoring Group working on sanctions
for Somalia and Eritrea. We eagerly await their
recommendations in the sanctions Committee, as well
as the report on the implementation of resolution 1907
(2009) that the Secretary-General will present to the
Council in June.
It is urgent that the situation on the ground be
settled peacefully and, beyond that, that the two
countries resolve their border disputes in a sustainable
and peaceful way.
The Eritrean authorities have sent a series of
positive signals in the past few weeks, such as their
reception of the Chairman of the sanctions Committee,
Mexican Ambassador Claude Heller. It is essential that
Eritrea set no preconditions to settling its problem with
Djibouti and that it move from words to deeds. France
encourages all efforts towards dialogue and mediation
pursuant to the Security Council’s resolutions, which
require, inter alia, the return of Eritrean forces to the
status quo ante.
I also thank President Guelleh for the information
he has given to the Council on the situation in Somalia.
While the Istanbul Conference will open in a few days,
the Somali Government must come together, under the
authority of President Sharif, and deepen the political
dialogue.
Like the Ambassador of Uganda, I should like
here to pay a tribute to President Guelleh for Djibouti’s
essential role in seeking a solution to the Somali crisis.
The political agreement that is the key to the
reconciliation process was negotiated in Djibouti. It is

10-36796

S/PV.6316

on Djiboutian territory that the Djibouti and French
forces have begun to train Somali soldiers. Djibouti has
thus facilitated the training operation for 2,000 soldiers
that the European Union is launching this month, in
close cooperation with the African Union Mission in
Somalia. Beyond the political events of the last few
days, the most important thing is that the Transitional
Federal Government continues to strengthen itself
militarily so as to be able to provide the Somali people
with the basic services they need. Finally, as we all
know, Djibouti is playing a decisive role in fighting
piracy off the coast of Somalia.
France hopes that the Council will continue to
closely follow this situation and would like to thank
the Special Representative Ould Abdallah for his
efforts.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We, too, welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the President of Djibouti, Mr. Guelleh, and
thank him for his assessments.
Unfortunately, there has still been no progress in
the settlement of the Djibouti-Eritrea border conflict.
Unlike Djibouti, Eritrea has ignored resolutions 1862
(2009) and 1907 (2009). To date, diplomatic efforts to
unblock the situation have not been very effective.
In adopting resolution 1907 (2009) on sanctions
against Eritrea, the Council appropriately reacted to this
degenerating conflict. We expect full implementation
by all parties of that Council decision in the interests of
strengthening peace and stability in the Horn of Africa.
Moreover, we are convinced targeted sanctions against
Eritrea must be accompanied by reliable evidence of
the involvement of specific individuals in unlawful
acts. That is an important principle in the context of the
Council’s practice of imposing sanctions as a whole.
It is our view that Eritrea will resume constructive
interaction with the international community, including
the leadership of the Secretariat, for a prompt, effective
settlement of the situation in the region. That is also
important for strengthening the positive momentum in
the peace process in Somalia.
The attempts of an intransigent opposition to
attack the positions of Government troops and the
African Union Mission in Somalia seriously undermine
the efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to
stabilize the situation and establish effective leadership
in the country. The civilian population and staff of the

10-36796

United Nations and humanitarian organizations remain
under threat, exacerbating an already grievous
humanitarian situation in Somalia. The agenda includes
the strengthening of the coordination of international
efforts to assist the Transitional Federal Government in
the fields of security and capacity-building and in
discharging its management and legal functions. We
anticipate that the upcoming Istanbul Conference on
Somalia will enable the international community to
focus its attention on the critical needs of the Somalis.
Continuing support is also required for the African
Union Mission in Somalia, which remains an important
stabilizing factor there. It is vital to accelerate the
process of reaching the Mission’s full troop level and
to ensure appropriate logistical support.
We reaffirm once again that the Russian
Federation continues to support the efforts made by the
President of Somalia and the Transitional Federal
Government to achieve national reconciliation and
peace in the country on the basis of the Djibouti
Agreement. The international community and the
Security Council view most positively and highly
appreciate the important political mediation role played
by Djibouti and President Guelleh.
In this situation, we must attach high importance
to the role of the present Somalia sanctions regime,
which is designed to shut down the channels of support
to extremists. We call on all countries, particularly
those in the Horn of Africa region, to strictly comply
with the relevant Council resolutions.
The problem of piracy as a factor in the security
situation affects the interests of practically all countries
in the region and elsewhere in the world. Russia
continues to participate actively in international efforts
to neutralize this threat, because a long-term solution
of the problem is intimately linked to the prospects for
a successful settlement in Somalia.
The question of judicial prosecution of the pirates
remains unresolved. We hope for a prompt start of
preparatory work to establish special judicial chambers
and an international tribunal on piracy, based on
international practice and Security Council resolution
1918 (2010).
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Like my
colleagues, I would very much like to welcome His
Excellency President Guelleh to the Security Council
this morning and to thank him for his very useful
briefing and thoughts. The United Kingdom applauds

7

S/PV.6316

the positive work of Djibouti in support of peace in the
Horn of Africa. Djibouti has played an important role
in efforts to achieve a more peaceful and stable
Somalia, including by hosting the Djibouti peace
process and, more recently, through its support for the
development of the Somalia constitution and the
training of Somali security forces.
Djibouti also makes a key contribution to
ongoing anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the importance
Djibouti attaches to the Djibouti Code of Conduct and
for the allowing the use of port and shore facilities to
ensure that warships protecting the Gulf of Aden trade
artery are as effective as possible.
Somalia continues to be one of the most complex
challenges on the Security Council’s agenda. The
situation remains extremely fragile, as President
Guelleh has just outlined. The humanitarian crisis,
continued instability, the threat to wider regional
stability and piracy all remain of grave concern. This
situation is not a just a tragedy for the people of
Somalia; it is not just a threat to stability in the region:
it is also a major concern for all of us.
We continue to support the Transitional Federal
Government and its efforts to engage in dialogue and
reconciliation. The African Union Mission in Somalia
is playing a critical role in Somalia, and we are grateful
to Uganda and Burundi for their continuing commitment
to that difficult operation. We condemn all those who
seek to undermine the Djibouti peace process and the
Transitional Federal Government. To ensure progress
in Somalia, it is vital that the activities of spoilers be
addressed.
It was on the basis of Eritrea’s violation of
Security Council resolutions on Somalia and Djibouti
that the United Kingdom supported resolution 1907
(2009) in December. The resolution followed a specific
request by two regional organizations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
for the Security Council to take such action. The
United Kingdom calls on the Government of Eritrea to
comply fully with all Security Council resolutions and
to take the practical steps set out in resolution 1907
(2009). The Council would of course respond to
evidence of Eritrea’s compliance with Security Council
resolutions. We also encourage greater engagement by
Eritrea with international partners to help increase
stability in the Horn.

8

The United Kingdom remains concerned about
the unresolved border dispute between Eritrea and
Djibouti. We urge Eritrea to engage with the United
Nations on this issue and with regional mediation
efforts. It is important that both countries be able to
work together to resolve this situation.
We should also continue to seek the resolution of
other threats to stability in the region. The longstanding border dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
of great concern to the United Kingdom. We call on
both countries to implement fully the findings of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, as set down in
the Algiers Agreement. We urge both Governments to
seek to establish a dialogue between their two
countries in order to begin the normalization of
relations. It is vital that all States in the region engage
constructively to achieve progress on the range of
difficult issues that Horn of Africa currently faces.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): I would like to thank
President Guelleh for his briefing. We recognize that
Djibouti has a significant geopolitical and strategic role
to play in the Horn of Africa region. The Government
of Japan has been engaging in anti-piracy activities in
that area, deploying two naval vessels and two P-3C
maritime patrol aircraft from Djibouti in cooperation
with the Government of Djibouti.
Japan also supports building the capacity of the
States neighbouring Somalia, including through the
establishment of the training centre in Djibouti with the
support of the International Maritime Organization
Djibouti Code of Conduct Trust Fund, which was
initiated by Japan. I would like to take this opportunity
to express sincere appreciation to Djibouti for that
country’s tremendous support. Japan hopes to continue
to build upon its strong partnership with Djibouti.
I carefully listened to President Guelleh’s
statement on the situation in Somalia, in which he
described the highly volatile situation there, as recent
developments attest. Japan commends Djibouti for its
active contribution to bringing about the stabilization
of Somalia. As was expressed in the Security Council
debate last week (see S/PV.6313), it is essential that the
peace process based on the Djibouti Agreement be
promoted in parallel with the improvement of the
security situation and development in Somalia. Japan is
determined to continue to work in cooperation with
Djibouti towards peace and stability in Somalia.

10-36796

S/PV.6316

With regard to the border dispute between
Djibouti and Eritrea, it is regrettable that no
substantive progress has been seen in the
implementation of resolution 1862 (2009). It is our
view that Eritrea must cooperate in the search for a
solution through dialogue. In this context, Japan
welcomes the efforts among neighbouring countries to
promote dialogue, including those of Qatar.
The Security Council is expecting to receive a
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 1907 (2009), including on the border
issue between Djibouti and Eritrea. Japan intends to
follow up on this matter in the discussion to be
conducted following the publication of the report.
In closing, we would like reiterate our
determination, as a responsible member of the Security
Council, to work towards achieving stability in
Somalia, in the Djibouti-Eritrea situation and in the
Horn of Africa as a whole.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of President Ismail Omar Guelleh
of the Republic of Djibouti. We welcome his initiative
to address the Security Council. We feel that it is
extremely valuable for the Security Council to obtain
directly from the region’s leaders the information and
inputs it needs to shape its views and properly assess
situations as complicated as the one that the Horn of
Africa is facing. That has been the case today with the
analysis presented by President Guelleh.
My delegation will closely follow the development
of the situation in the region, because we are convinced
that the only viable option for resolving the various
current crises and disputes is dialogue and cooperation
between the countries of the region with the
international community, as well as through respect for
the efforts of the United Nations and the decisions of
the Security Council.
On the specific issue of the territorial dispute
between Djibouti and Eritrea, we believe that efforts
should be pursued to open a constructive dialogue
between the parties and to facilitate the work and good
offices of the Secretary-General. We appreciate the
parties’ continued avoidance of the use of force. We
urge Eritrean Government authorities to send clear
signals of their willingness to cooperate on this issue,
bearing in mind Eritrea’s obligation as a Member of the
United Nations to comply with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.

10-36796

Moreover, we view as positive the willingness of
Eritrean officials to engage in more constructive
communication, as demonstrated during my visit to
that country at the helm of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009), on Somalia and Eritrea. We trust that the
Eritrean Government will take concrete steps in the
framework of the dialogue begun with the Committee,
and that the Council and the relevant regional
stakeholders will take advantage of the new conditions
to promote and facilitate a substantial convergence that
will facilitate the peaceful resolution of the current
dispute with Djibouti. We hope that the Government of
Eritrea will meet the expectations that have been raised
and seize the opportunity to commit itself to a
constructive relationship with the international
community.
In addition, given the complex situation of
instability in the region, my delegation reiterates the
need for a coherent and comprehensive approach to the
situation on the Horn of Africa. In its deliberations on
the issue, the Council must take into account any factor
that could have a negative impact on regional peace
efforts. Although some situations are more pressing
than others, the Council and the international
community should address the various elements of the
crisis in the region with equal attention.
Lastly, we reiterate our gratitude to the
Government of Djibouti for its unflagging spirit of
cooperation and openness, as well as for its decisive
contribution to efforts to establish stability and lasting
peace in Somalia and the region.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We want to add our voice
to those that have expressed appreciation to President
Ismail Omar Guelleh for his very insightful briefing
and his positive contributions to the peace process and
stability in the region.
Nigeria is concerned that political instability,
civil strife and inter-State conflicts have too long been
the defining features of the Horn of Africa. The
Eritrea/Djibouti border problem and the situations in
the Sudan and Somalia have had far-reaching
implications for regional peace and security. The
situation is exacerbated by transnational and crosscutting challenges, such as religious fundamentalism,
the proliferation of arms, terrorism, piracy, the
insecurity of borders and the race for exclusive access
to natural resources. We therefore welcome the

9

S/PV.6316

concrete steps enumerated by President Guelleh to
address those problems.

goals being promoted by the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa.

In the Sudan, the recently concluded countrywide elections represent a political milestone and a
step in the right direction towards consolidating the
2011 referendum. We call on all parties to demonstrate
greater commitment to the remaining aspects of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Indeed, this is the
time to intensify the Darfur peace negotiations and to
recommit the parties to resolving all outstanding
issues, especially those related to wealth-sharing and
other referendum issues.

We believe that the region will require the
constructive participation and contribution of Eritrea to
achieve comprehensive peace in the region. That is
why we encourage Eritrea to support the Djibouti
peace process and the reconciliation efforts in Somalia.
We encourage Eritrea to comply with the provisions of
resolution 1907 (2009) in order to pave the way for the
eventual lifting of the existing sanctions based on the
progress that has been made.

We believe that without peace in Somalia there
will be no peace in the Horn of Africa. For that reason,
we share President Guelleh’s view that the way
forward is for the international community to tackle —
in his words — the root causes of Somalia’s enduring
conflict. Stabilizing Somalia is indeed a priority that
requires firm commitment. One way of doing that
would be to fully support the Transitional Federal
Government in confronting the extremely volatile and
unpredictable security challenges in the country. Until
those formidable challenges are systematically and
comprehensively tackled, the problems of insecurity
and instability in the region will endure.
The international community must be focused on
the full implementation of the Djibouti Agreement and
on Somalia’s economic development needs. In that
regard, we support the Istanbul Conference to be held
this weekend. Increased support is also required for
Somali security forces through strategic training and
the provision of adequate resources for the payment of
salaries and the implementation of the national security
and stabilization plan.
The crises in that region have several crosscutting regional dimensions. A concerted regional
approach is therefore a critical factor to the return of
peace and stability to the region. We commend the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for playing significant and crucial roles
in galvanizing and reinforcing the search for peace and
stability in the region, including in Somalia and the
Sudan. With peace in Somalia and the Sudan, Eastern
Africa would be a very strategic and important
business location in Africa. Peace in the region would
also have a profound impact on peace in Central
Africa. It would give impetus to the realization of the

10

Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me, too, welcome President Guelleh and thank him for
his remarks and his important leadership on the many
critical issues facing Djibouti and the region, with a
focus on increasing the well-being of the people,
fighting piracy and working for peace.
The Horn of Africa faces many difficult political
and security challenges, from counter-terrorism to
urgent humanitarian issues. We welcome Djibouti’s
constructive role in working with States of the region
and the international community to address them.
Today, I would like to focus on three points: Djibouti’s
leadership in providing stability to the Horn of Africa,
the critical role played by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the challenges facing the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG), and, finally
the unresolved border dispute between Djibouti and
Eritrea.
Djibouti has an important role to play in
promoting regional stability. Djibouti has hosted
important discussions on regional peace and security,
including through the Djibouti peace process and
International Maritime Organization conferences on
counter-piracy initiatives, among other things. Djibouti
has also committed 450 soldiers to AMISOM and is
involved in training the Somali national security force.
Amid the complexity of the situation in Somalia,
the United States underscores its ongoing support for
the Djibouti peace process and the Transitional Federal
Government. Despite recent political events, the TFG
needs to be unified in its efforts to implement the
Djibouti peace process and to focus on the critical
issues at hand, including governance, security and the
provision of services to the Somali people in a
transparent and accountable manner. It is also
important that the TFG work to expand its base of

10-36796

S/PV.6316

support, even as it makes every effort to include
women leaders in the political process.
The United States is committed to working with
those in Somalia who seek reconciliation, peace,
stability and economic development. We urge the TFG
to find creative ways to build a better future for
Somalia and its people. We look forward to the United
Nations development conference on Somalia that
begins in Istanbul on 21 May. That will be an
important opportunity to demonstrate the international
community’s resolve to work with Somalis towards our
common goals.
The United States supports the development of a
capable professional national security force for the
TFG. We commend the Ugandan and Burundi troop
contributions to AMISOM, which now total 6,200
personnel. The United States has supported stability in
the region, with more than $174 million directed to
providing predeployment training, equipment and
logistical support to countries contributing troops to
AMISOM. We recognize that very difficult challenges
remain. Somalia’s instability has encouraged extremism
and led to a growing refugee problem in the region.
Eritrea has failed to comply with resolution 1862
(2009). It has not withdrawn its troops from the
contested area, nor has it engaged in dialogue with
Djibouti or initiated discussions with the United
Nations. Moreover, the Monitoring Group of the
Security Council’s Somalia-Eritrea sanctions Committee
has noted in past reports that Eritrea has provided
funding, weapons and training to armed insurgent
groups that perpetuate war in Somalia and thereby
violate resolution 1844 (2008). That threatens
international peace and security by destabilizing the
region, including Djibouti.
One reason why the United States supported last
year’s resolution 1907 (2009) is because of those
violations and actions. That resolution created a robust
sanctions regime that includes an arms embargo, cargo
inspections and seizure in certain situations, and
targeted measures for individuals and entities listed by
the Council’s Somalia-Eritrea sanctions Committee.
Resolution 1907 (2009) is a clear demonstration
of the international community’s resolve to take action
against those who threaten the peace and security of
the region. The resolution is aimed at preventing
support to armed opposition groups seeking to
destabilize the region. It will also help prevent the

10-36796

obstruction of resolution 1862 (2009) concerning
Djibouti. It will help prevent obstruction of the
Monitoring Group’s work, violations of the arms
embargo and harbouring, financing, facilitating,
supporting, organizing, training or inciting individuals
or groups to commit acts of violence or terrorism
against other States or their citizens.
The United States is working with the sanctions
Committee to ensure that regional spoilers and
violators of the sanctions are held accountable. All
Member States have obligations under the sanctions
regime to enforce the arms embargoes, and we ask
Member States to share information on the designated
groups and individuals with the Committee.
We look forward to the continued good work of
the Monitoring Group. We hope that the SecretaryGeneral will be able to report to the Council, in his
upcoming report, on Eritrea’s compliance with
resolution 1907 (2009) and that positive steps are being
taken with the States involved.
Eritrea should withdraw its troops from the
contested area, engage in dialogue with Djibouti and
stop financing and supporting armed insurgent groups
in Somalia. The United States calls on Eritrea to move
forward in resolving its border issues peacefully, in
accordance with resolution 1862 (2009), and to take
steps to avoid further conflict in a region that already
faces tremendous instability.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Djibouti, Mr. Guelleh, for
his presence among us today and for his important
briefing.
(spoke in English)
In terms of talented and gifted individuals,
cultural heritage and natural resources , the Horn of
Africa is one of the richest regions in the world. At the
same time, that very region has faced instability,
insecurity, economic crisis and high political tension
for decades now.
Only a week ago, the Security Council discussed
what that means, especially for the Somali population.
In that context, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and Djibouti for playing a stabilizing
role in the region, inter alia, by having hosted the
negotiations between the then Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the Alliance for the

11

S/PV.6316

Re-Liberation of Somalia and by hosting a regional
training centre for maritime officials, in connection
with the Djibouti Code of Conduct on the repression of
piracy.
Concerning the situation in Somalia, let me take
this opportunity to once again confirm the support of
my country for the Djibouti peace process, the TFG
and the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM).
We call on all parties to join the peace process, and we
urge the Government to rapidly resolve the internal
disputes and ambiguities as important challenges lie
ahead, among them the drafting of the constitution. In
that context, we condemn any attempt to undermine or
halt the peace process by attacking the TFG, AMISOM
or humanitarian deliveries or by supporting the
insurgents. Any person or entity committing such acts
risks facing sanctions imposed by the Security Council.
I listened with interest to what Ambassador
Heller, Chairman of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009), has just told us about his trip to the
region, and we look forward to the full report on it. We
call on the Eritrean Government to urgently address the
concerns of the Security Council and the international
community, more particularly by fulfilling Eritrea’s
obligations under resolution 1907 (2009) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions.
At the same time, in more general terms, we
believe and hope that the countries of the Horn will
assume their responsibility for bringing peace and
stability to the region. Deep-rooted conflicts, such as
the border conflict between Eritrea and Djibouti and
the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea, need to be
addressed urgently for the sake of the people in the
Horn.
It is vital to continue to search for a solution to
the underlying political problems. Therefore, we also
welcome all oongoing mediation efforts by countries in
the region and urge the countries concerned to engage
constructively. No opportunity for dialogue should be
missed.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me join previous
speakers in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti,
and thank him for his presentation.
I would like to commend Djibouti for its role in
the Horn of Africa and for its efforts to promote peace

12

and stability in Somalia. President Guelleh’s sobering
remarks about the situation in Somalia deserve careful
consideration, especially at a time of rising divisions
within the Transitional Federal Government (TFG).
The upcoming conference on Somalia in Istanbul will
be an opportunity to reflect on how best to reinforce
our actions and strengthen the international community’s
assistance to the TFG.
Brazil welcomes Djibouti’s commitment to a
peaceful solution of the border conflict with Eritrea, its
continued restraint on the ground, and its full
compliance with the Council’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/20) and two resolutions on the issue.
With the African Union, the League of Arab States and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, we call
upon the Eritrean Government to acknowledge the
conflict and engage with Djibouti to effectively find a
mutually acceptable solution.
Brazil is also concerned about the situation of
Djiboutians taken prisoner during the 2008 hostilities.
We urge Eritrea to provide information on their situation
and to grant the International Committee of the Red
Cross access to them. Resolution 1907 (2009), which
imposed sanctions on Eritrea, created an opportunity
for a review of the issue within 180 days of its
adoption. The date is fast approaching. We encourage
Eritrea not to miss that window of opportunity.
The Security Council must take a balanced and
consistent approach to peace, stability and territorial
integrity throughout the Horn of Africa. Without
prejudice to the particular characteristics of each
conflict, we should consider the regional dimensions
and the interplay among the various situations in the
Horn of Africa.
That means that the Council needs also to
effectively address the border dispute between Ethiopia
and Eritrea. A solution to that problem has been lacking
for too long. At stake are long-term peace and security
in the region and the credibility of the Council.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I too would like to
warmly welcome His Excellency President Ismail
Omar Guelleh. We are honoured by his presence. His
statement, for which we thank him and which we
greatly appreciate, is further testament to the important
role Djibouti plays in its region in the search for peace
and stability.

10-36796

S/PV.6316

Having special ties with Djibouti, Turkey
commends its constructive efforts, especially in the
context of Somalia. Indeed, the peace process in
Somalia was crafted in Djibouti, and today it still bears
the name “Djibouti peace process”. Likewise, in the
context of the fight against piracy, there is the Djibouti
Code of Conduct, which we greatly welcome. Also,
Somalia’s security forces are trained in Djibouti. Those
examples alone are sufficient to illustrate Djibouti’s
constructive contribution to the resolution of the
Somali crisis.
Starting on Friday, 21 May, there will be an
important international conference on Somalia, which
Turkey will host in Istanbul. The Istanbul Conference
will provide us with the opportunity to take stock of
where we are and discuss practical ideas and
suggestions that we hope will strengthen Somalia’s
prospects for the future. The high-level session of the
Conference, to be held on 22 May, will set the stage for
a comprehensive discussion of various aspects of the
Somali crisis. We intend at the end of the Conference
to convey a strong message of political support and
solidarity to the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia. In that context, we are encouraged by the fact
that the Foreign Minister of Djibouti will attend the
Istanbul Conference. We strongly believe that
Djibouti’s participation in and contribution to the
Istanbul Conference will strengthen our efforts.
Finally, we listened very carefully to President
Guelleh’s views and remarks about the border dispute
with Eritrea. We believe that Djibouti deserves the
support of the international community, particularly as
regards the implementation of resolution 1862 (2009).
Therefore, we encourage all relevant parties to comply
with the provisions of that resolution without further
delay and to facilitate a swift and peaceful settlement
of this problem on the basis of dialogue and
cooperation.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I should
like to welcome and thank His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti,
for his presence and for his statement to the Council.
We appreciate the constructive role played by Djibouti
in the region and applaud President Guelleh’s personal
efforts in that regard.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is concerned about
violations of the sanctions regime, which are mentioned
in the report of the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group,

10-36796

transmitted by a letter dated 10 March 2010 (see
S/2010/91). In that respect, we would like to pay
tribute to Ambassador Heller for his hard work as
Chairman of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea.
We hope that his recent visit to the region will have
concrete effects.
We were also concerned as we listened to the
statement of President Guelleh; we understand the call
for urgent and firm involvement of all stakeholders that
can contribute to the common aim of achieving peace
and security in the region of the Horn of Africa.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been consistent in its
position that international conflicts, including those
originating from border disputes, should be resolved by
peaceful means and in compliance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
we welcome all efforts by the United Nations and by
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
and the League of Arab States, to try to help the parties
de-escalate tension and move towards a peaceful
solution to the crisis. We sincerely hope that those
efforts will be honestly and wholeheartedly accepted
by all parties.
On the situation in Somalia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina reiterates its full support for the
Transitional Federal Government and for the Djibouti
peace process, which depends not only on internal
factors but also on sincere cooperation by the countries
of the region. We call on all parties concerned to
genuinely respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Somalia and to make a greater contribution
to peace and security in that country.
With grave concern, Bosnia and Herzegovina
shares the position expressed by other Council members
with regard to the fight against piracy: that a long-term
solution will come about only through the rule of law
and the establishment of security on the ground.
Finally, allow us to express our best hopes for a
successful outcome of the upcoming Istanbul
Conference on Somalia, an outcome that will foster
stability, security and the reconstruction of the country.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened today’s meeting.
We welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of Djibouti. We

13

S/PV.6316

listened very carefully to his statement and we thank
him for updating us on the situation. We greatly
appreciate Djibouti’s political and diplomatic efforts to
maintain regional peace, security and stability, and in
particular to promote the peace process in Somalia. We
also wholeheartedly thank the Government of Djibouti
for its valuable support for international cooperation
against piracy.
In recent years, the persistent turbulence in the
Horn of Africa has gravely frustrated peace, security
and development in the region. Just last week, the
Security Council considered the situation in Somalia
(see S/PV.6313). The present situation in that country
remains tense. The security situation is dismal, the
humanitarian crisis grows worse and progress in the
peace process is slow. The situation in Somalia is
posing a grave threat to peace and security in the Horn
of Africa and throughout the world. The international
community should urgently work to find an appropriate
solution to the question of Somalia as soon as possible,
by actively supporting the Djibouti peace agreement
and promoting the process of political reconciliation in
Somalia, so that Somalia can restore peace and achieve
reconstruction and development.
We hope that the upcoming Istanbul Conference
will make a substantial contribution to resolving the
problems of Somalia.
China has always been very concerned at the
disputes between Djibouti and Eritrea. We hope that
both countries are able to act in the interest of their
bilateral relations and of regional peace and stability
by resolving their differences through negotiation and
dialogue, so that their traditional friendship can be
restored. We applaud the Djibouti Government’s
political and diplomatic efforts to find a negotiated
solution to the disputes with Eritrea. We support a
greater mediation role for the African Union with
respect to relations between the two countries. The
Council should do more to promote the resumption of
bilateral talks and the achievement of a negotiated
solution.
Countries in the Horn of Africa can choose their
friends, but not their neighbours. The countries of the
region share many common interests. In recent years,
we have noted that — whether on the Sudan, the
conflict in the Great Lakes region or peace and security
in West Africa — regional cooperation has yielded
significant results in addressing regional disputes,

14

easing tension and facilitating framework agreements
on relevant issues. We believe that there is quite a lot
of space for negotiation, regional cooperation and
dialogue on the question of the Horn of Africa.
We sincerely hope that countries of the region
will proceed on the basis of their long-term national
and regional interests and jointly and constructively
create a harmonious environment in which all countries
in the Horn will benefit from mutual cooperation.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Like speakers before me, I welcome the
President of the Republic of Djibouti, His Excellency
Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, and thank him for his
detailed briefing on the situation in the Horn of Africa,
in particular the relations between his country and the
neighbouring country of Eritrea. I am also grateful for
the useful information he gave us regarding the
situation in Somalia.
The situation that began in June 2008 on the
border between the Republic of Djibouti and Eritrea
can now be added to the litany of factors sowing
confusion and hindering peace efforts and the
development prospects for all Africa. Africa has other
challenges before it, in particular the practices
hindering economic development, and can no longer
afford to spend scarce resources on military ventures
that are as useless as they are unjustified. The border
dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea is a case in point,
and my country calls on Eritrea to cooperate with the
United Nations in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions on this matter, including
resolution 1907 (2009), in order to bring that situation
to a peaceful resolution.
Regarding Somalia, we share President Guelleh’s
relevant analysis and welcome the role and significant
involvement of the Government of Djibouti in the
search for a solution that would allow his country to
find peace once again and thereby regain its place in
the community of nations.
We are also aware that the Government of
Djibouti was an initiator of the Djibouti Agreement,
which enabled the establishment of the Transitional
Federal Government in Somalia. As we have stated on
several occasions, Somalia remains a Member of
United Nations. Therefore, the Organization must
assume greater responsibility towards that Member
State, which has been afflicted by chaos for more than
two decades. Greater support for the African Union

10-36796

S/PV.6316

Mission in Somalia is thus now more necessary than
ever. We hope that the Istanbul Conference on Somalia
will make a significant contribution to progress on the
issue of Somalia.
Djibouti’s involvement in the fight against piracy
off the coast of Somalia must also be applauded. On
this issue, we remain convinced that an effective
solution to the piracy issue will depend on an
appropriate response to the overall Somali problem.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Lebanon.
Like others before me, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of Djibouti, and
thank him for his kind words addressed to my country,
Lebanon.
We regret the border dispute between Djibouti
and Eritrea and hope that it will come to an end as soon
as possible. We stress and reiterate the importance of
Djibouti’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and we
reject all acts of aggression against that country. We
also stress the importance of respect for Security
Council resolution 1907 (2009), which calls on Eritrea
to withdraw its forces from Djibouti forthwith. We also
stress the importance of compliance with resolution
1862 (2009) so as to restore peaceful dialogue between
the two countries and to return the situation to the
status quo ante. We call on Eritrea to allow access to
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
as called for by Djibouti.
We applaud Djibouti for the withdrawal of its
forces and troops in compliance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Resolution 1907 (2009),
which imposes sanctions on Eritrea, was adopted as a
result of the concern that Eritrea had not complied with
previous Security Council resolutions. We stress the
importance of ending any confrontation on the border
between Djibouti and Eritrea.

10-36796

With regard to Somalia, we would like to stress
that the Djibouti peace process should be upheld, and
we stress that efforts to resolve the situation in Somalia
should not focus exclusively on the maintenance of
security and stability. In particular, we would like to
stress the following.
With regard to security, we emphasize the
importance of providing training for security forces in
Somalia, and we call on donors to provide the
resources necessary to support the security sector in
Somalia.
With regard to piracy, we stress the impact that
this scourge has on international maritime routes and
the obstacles it poses to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Somalia. Economic development and
efforts to fight poverty on land and to reach a political
solution to the situation in Somalia are factors that will
contribute to fighting piracy.
We condemn attacks against humanitarian
workers and call on donors to respond to the
humanitarian appeals that have been made. In the
absence of an international peace force, we call on
donors to support the African Union Mission in
Somalia, and we commend the African Union’s efforts
to establish comprehensive peace in Somalia.
In conclusion, we applaud Djibouti for its efforts
to revive peace in the Horn of Africa. We stress the
importance of the Istanbul Conference on Somalia and
of enhancing the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union so as to establish
stability in the Horn of Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

15
