S/2021/940

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2021
Original: English

Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2391
(2017) of 8 December 2017, in which the Council requested the Secretary -General, in
close coordination with the members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) –
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger – and the African Union, to
report on the activities of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
support provided by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in this regard. The Council adopted resolution 2584
(2021) on 29 June 2021, renewing the mandate of MINUSMA, including enhanced
support from MINUSMA to the Joint Force as authorized by resolution 2531 (2020).
2.
In his letter to the Security Council dated 4 October ( S/2021/850), in addition
to the findings and recommendations of an assessment of international support
provided to the Joint Force, the Secretary-General provided a comprehensive update
on (a) progress in the operationalization of the Joint Force; (b) international support
granted to the Joint Force and possible measures to enhance its efficiency;
(c) implementation of the technical agreement signed on 23 February 2018 between
the G5 Sahel, the European Union and the United Nations, including through a
detailed outline of the enhanced support provided by MINUSMA to the Joint Force;
(d) challenges encountered by the Joint Force and possible measures for further
consideration; and (e) the implementation by the States members of the G5 Sahel of
the human rights and international humanitarian law compliance framework of the
Joint Force, the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to
non-United Nations security forces, as well as on ways to mitigate any adverse impact
of the military operations of the Joint Force on th e civilian population, including on
women and children. Consequently, the present report provides brief updates on the
most relevant developments that have taken place since 4 October.

II. Progress in the operationalization of the Joint Force and the
Executive Secretariat of the Group of Five for the Sahel
3.
A comprehensive update on the status of the operationalization of the Joint
Force and its police component, as well as efforts to increase the capacity and
prerogatives of the G5 Sahel Executive Secretariat, was provided in the letter of the
Secretary-General dated 4 October (S/2021/850). The anticipated return of foreign
fighters and the potential influx of small arms from Libya remain a significant

21-16196 (E)

111121

*2116196*

S/2021/940

challenge for the security forces comprising the Joint Force. It is too early to ascertain
how the reconfiguration of international forces in northern Mali and the Liptako Gourma tri-border area shared by Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger will i mpact any
decision to modify the Joint Force’s footprint in this area.
4.
From 21 to 26 October, the Joint Force conducted ad hoc Operation Serres
d’Aigle, led by members of the Nigerien and Burkinabé battalions in response to an
attack against a police post in Pétèl Kolé in Burkina Faso.
5.
In accordance with the Joint Force’s 2022/23 workplan, which is to be formally
endorsed on 18 November during the next meeting of the G5 Sahel Defence and
Security Committee, the Joint Force plans to conduct two major operations in Sector
Centre per year, coupled with other ad hoc operations, as well as one major operation
each in Sectors East and West.

III. International support granted to the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and possible measures to
enhance its efficiency
A.

International support
6.
A comprehensive update on international support provided to the G5 -Sahel Joint
Force was provided in the letter of the Secretary-General dated 4 October
(S/2021/850). The most consistent and systematic direct operational support, albeit
limited in scope, is currently provided by MINUSMA pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2391 (2017) and its operative paragraph 13, as well as resolutions 2359
(2017), 2480 (2019), 2531 (2020) and 2584 (2021). Paragraphs 4–10 of the present
report provide an overview of the support provided by the Mission. Several Member
States provide bilateral support to the States members of the G5 Sahel, while others
are piloting a hybrid model that combines bilateral support with a coordination role
for regional entities. The European Union remains the most important financial donor.

B.

Implementation of the technical agreement signed between the
United Nations, the European Union and G5 Sahel States in
February 2018
Life support consumables
7.
MINUSMA continues to implement its enhanced support mandate pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2531 (2020) to provide all contingents of the G5 Sahel
with life support consumables. Since February 2018, the Mission has delivered
4.4 million litres of fuel and lubricants and 67,000 ration packs to the Joint Force, in
compliance with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to
non-United Nations security forces.
8.
Movement of cargo has started for the delivery of fuel and rations under the
enhanced support model with 716,000 litres of petroleum products and 64,000
individual ration packs expected to reach all eight battalions or nearest locations by
10 November 2021.
Engineering support
9.
MINUSMA continues to carry out maintenance works for the Joint Force’s
temporary headquarters in Bamako and has recently built three additional sanitation
facilities requested by the Force Commander.

2/5

21-16196

S/2021/940

Casualty evacuation and transport
10. In October 2021, MINUSMA transported two tons of rations and conducted one
casualty evacuation for Joint Force elements from Boulikessi to Sévaré (M ali).
Issues and challenges
11. Although the G5 Sahel had committed to granting tax exemptions for all
supplies shipped to battalions operating under Joint Force command by contractors
under the new and enhanced support model, to date only two of the f ive member
States have issued exemption notifications, while one has informed MINUSMA that
the necessary documents have been signed and should soon be submitted.
12. Battalions have yet to improve their storage capacity in order to receive the
expected quantities of petroleum products and rations. This has caused delays in
delivering life support consumables by contractors, who have already complained to
MINUSMA about demurrage fees being imposed on them at selected ports of entry
while awaiting approval to proceed with the deliveries.
13. MINUSMA has engaged the Joint Force on the above-mentioned challenges.
Temporary solutions could include delivery to drop-off points in the proximity of the
battalions where sufficient storage capacity exists or proceeding with segmented
delivery.

IV. Challenges encountered by the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel and possible measures for
further consideration
14. A comprehensive update on challenges encountered by the Joint Force was
provided in the letter of the Secretary-General dated 4 October (S/2021/850).

V. Implementation by the Group of the Five for the Sahel of
the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework of the Joint Force and the human
rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to
non-United Nations security forces
15. MINUSMA and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) continued to monitor the human rights situation in relation
to operations and other activities conducted by elements of the Joint Force. In this
context, MINUSMA and OHCHR investigated and documented allegations of serious
human rights violations, identified some progress in the protection of civilians and
conducted several technical cooperation activities. MINUSMA and OHCHR also
continued to engage the Joint Force leadership and the G5 Sahel to ensure that troops
operating under national command or under Joint Force command, respectively, can
be easily distinguished.
16. OHCHR received numerous testimonies of progress made by the Joint Force in
protecting civilians from armed groups, in particular in the tri-border area, a
significant improvement over the previous period. For example, after the attack of
12 May 2021 on Fantio village (Téra department, Tillabéri region, Niger), by
unidentified individuals that forced 3,000 people to flee their villages and seek refuge
in Téra, the Joint Force deployed to secure Fantio and its surroundings. This
deployment facilitated the return of internally displaced persons. Since then, the Joint
21-16196

3/5

S/2021/940

Force has maintained a regular presence and patrols in the area to protect civilians.
In another example, on 13 and 14 June, the Joint Force captured one of a group of
armed individuals who had looted cattle in the locality of Dolbèl, Niger, and handed
him over to the judicial authorities.
17. Furthermore, OHCHR supported the mainstreaming of relevant international
standards into various instruments and initiatives of the Joint Force. The Office
supported the drafting of the Statutes of the Regional Police Academy and the internal
regulations of the Sahel Security College, which were reviewed and adopted during
the eleventh ordinary session of the Defence and Security Committee of the G5 Sahel,
held in Bamako from 24 to 27 May. Similarly, from 17 to 19 August in Bamako, it
supported the revision process of the police component directive through the drafting
of appropriate human rights and international humanitarian law tools. This revision
process was followed by a workshop to examine the functioning, procedures,
mechanisms and principles of the police component, including the transfer and
processing of each case by the judicial process of each State member of the G5 Sahel
concerned from 20 to 29 September.
18. Additionally, OHCHR is providing technical assistance to the G5 Sahel
Executive Secretariat in the ongoing development of a regional strategy on the
protection of civilians during the reporting period.
19. In the area of capacity-building, OHCHR contributed to the pre-deployment
training of the Joint Force’s provost units in Chad, Mali and the Ni ger from 31 May
to 9 September. This was in addition to the holding of sensitization sessions on
international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law for incoming members of
the joint force command post in Mauritania in September, prior to the rotation of the
members in October. These sessions also contained modules on the human rights due
diligence policy facilitated by MINUSMA. Also, OHCHR organized a high -level
workshop in Bamako on 29 and 30 June for the leadership of the Joint Force on a
human rights-based approach to the prevention of violent extremism and on
strengthening compliance with applicable international standards in the planning and
conduct of counter-terrorism or military operations, and facilitated awareness-raising
sessions on the compliance framework for members of the Joint Force Command Post
at the sectoral level in Chad and the Niger from June to September.
20. In accordance with the need to continually enhance adherence of the G5 Sahel
to the compliance framework, OHCHR organized an after-action review workshop in
Bamako on 18 October, during which eight of the outgoing members of the joint force
command post assessed the level of implementation of the framework and proposed
15 recommendations, which would be considered for further action, as appropriate
and necessary.
21. MINUSMA and OHCHR continued efforts for strengthened implementation of the
human rights due diligence policy with regard to MINUSMA support to the Joint Force,
in line with the technical agreement between the G5 Sahel, the European Union and the
United Nations, pursuant to resolutions 2391 (2017), 2531 (2020) and 2584 (2021),
including through supporting the G5 Sahel. During the reporting period, MINUSMA
completed 18 human rights due diligence policy risk assessments for the Joint Force’s
requests for United Nations support. Subsequently, 13 measures were identified to
mitigate identified risks and enhance human rights compliance and accountability of the
Joint Force. These measures included the provision of updated information by the Joint
Force on progress in internal investigations and judicial proceedings in relation to grave
human rights violations on specific cases, the development of a standard operating
procedure on casualties incurred during operations, the adoption of a soldier’s manual
on appropriate conduct and the timely sharing of information concerning major

4/5

21-16196

S/2021/940

operations, as well as measures adopted pursuant to the standard operating procedure on
the capture, detention and transfer of detainees.

VI. Observations
22. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel is a critical initiative that
remains crucial for addressing the multifaceted challenges facing the Sahel. As the
security situation in the region continues to deteriorate and the asymmetric threat
proliferates, it is our duty and collective responsibility to embolden, support and
empower local and regional initiatives in a sustainable and effective manner.
23. It remains my conviction that a dedicated United Nations support office funded
through assessed contributions is the most effective approach to provide sustainab le
and predictable support to the Joint Force. At the same time, support models should
be designed to promote regional ownership and enhance the capacity of the Joint
Force to become self-sufficient. A fully autonomous G5 Sahel with the capacity to
support its various entities, including the Joint Force, should be our shared objective
and guide our decision-making. I would like to reiterate my call for the establishment
of a dedicated political forum to help pave the way for enhanced collaboration and
dialogue among key stakeholders with a view to enhancing the autonomy and
ownership of the G5 Sahel, ensuring a shared understanding of the most pressing
challenges ahead and agreement on how to address them, as well as the identification
of next steps by the States members of the G5 Sahel to further operationalize the Joint
Force and enhance its operational effectiveness, with the support of international
partners.
24. Regardless of any support provided, addressing governance shortfalls remains
critical to ensuring lasting stability in the Sahel. Military and security -centred
solutions alone will not suffice. I am encouraged by the efforts of the Joint Force
contingents to engage the local populations in their area of operations. Lingering
challenges in distinguishing between operations conducted in a national capacity and
those conducted under the command of the Joint Force need to be addressed and I
urge the States members of the G5 Sahel to take appropriate action. Similarly, it is
critical that the Joint Force continue to build on its efforts to prevent and mitigate
human rights violations and to protect civilians. I call upon the States members of the
G5 Sahel to intensify efforts to foster inclusion and to promote human development,
resilience and good governance and to champion human rights. The international
community must support these efforts with resolve and all available resources. The
United Nations remains deeply committed to working with the African Union and its
subregional partners to support governance-related efforts in the region.

21-16196

5/5
