S/2009/44

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2009
English
Original: French

Letter dated 14 January 2009 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005),
1722 (2006) and 1785 (2007), I have the honour to convey to you a letter which I
have received from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common
Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, transmitting the sixteenth threemonthly report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The report covers the period from 1 September to 30 November
2008 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

09-21272 (E) 200109 270109

*0921272*

S/2009/44

Annex
Letter from the Secretary-General and High Representative for
the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union
addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
[Original: English]
In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004),
1639 (2005), 1722 (2006) and 1785 (2007), I enclose herewith the sixteenth threemonthly report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see enclosure). The report covers the period from 1 September to
30 November 2008. I should be grateful if you would transmit the report to the
President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

09-21272

S/2009/44

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative of
the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union
on the activities of the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina
I.

Introduction
1.

This report covers the period from 1 September to 30 November 2008.

2.
United Nations Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005),
1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008) request that Member States, acting
through or in cooperation with the European Union (EU), report to the Council on
the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR), through the appropriate channels and at least at three monthly intervals.
This document is the sixteenth such report.
II.

Political background
3.
The ratification process of the Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA)
by the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was completed on 6 November.
4.
Municipal elections were held on 5 October. The Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats (SNSD), the Party for Democratic Action (SDA) and the Croatian
Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina (HDZ BiH) won the contests among
the Serb, Bosniak and Croat constituent peoples, respectively. On 8 November,
SNSD, SDA and HDZ BiH met to discuss the way forward and agreed on a joint
statement. The three parties made a general statement on how to advance issues
related to the workplan of the Office of the High Representative, such as State
property and the Brčko District, and issues important for European integration, such
as census and constitutional reform.
5.
On 10 November, the Council of the European Union expressed its full support
for the High Representative/EU Special Representative, Miroslav Lajčák, and his
efforts to ensure compliance with the Dayton/Paris Agreements and progress with
reform. The Council said that the signing of the SAA constituted an important
milestone in the relationship between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European
Union. However, it voiced deep concern about recent developments in the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly the use of nationalist rhetoric and
the implementation of unilateral decisions by some leaders, thereby jeopardizing
power-sharing and the foundations of the State. While reaffirming Bosnia and
Herzegovina European prospects, the Council called on the Bosnian authorities to
shoulder their responsibilities and to renew their efforts to push through the
necessary reforms for Bosnia and Herzegovina to progress on the path towards the
European Union. The Council noted with satisfaction the agreement along these
lines between three of the main Bosnian parties. It called for these proposals to be
rapidly put into concrete form and invited the Bosnian political forces to unite
around this project. The Council reiterated its support for the aim of transition from
the Office of the High Representative to a stronger European Union presence. The
Council also pointed out that the Peace Implementation Council had listed five
objectives and two necessary conditions for closure of the High Representative’s

09-21272

3

S/2009/44

Office. The Council called on the Bosnian authorities to intensify their efforts to
fulfil all those objectives and conditions.
6.
On 19 and 20 November, the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
met to review progress on the five objectives and two conditions to be delivered by
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to allow for closure of the Office
of the High Representative and transition to a reinforced EU Special Representative.
The Steering Board noted that there had been little progress in addressing reform. It
expressed deep concern about political developments since its last meeting on
25 and 26 June, notably the divisive rhetoric that challenged the sovereignty and
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the authority of the High
Representative and the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.
III.

Security situation and EUFOR activities
7.
The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained calm and
stable throughout the reporting period. Although nationalistic rhetoric continued, it
had no impact on the safe and secure environment. EUFOR continued closely to
monitor the security situation.
8.
The force of some 2,200 EUFOR troops is concentrated in Sarajevo, with
liaison and observation teams deployed throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
EUFOR continues to conduct operations in line with its mandate: providing
deterrence; ensuring continued compliance in relation to the responsibilities
specified in the General Framework Agreement for Peace, annexes 1(a) and 2; and
contributing to the maintenance of the safe and secure environment. EUFOR
continues to support the Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement agencies in
fighting organized crime in close cooperation with EUPM, and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in the search for persons
indicted for war crimes.
9.
During the reporting period EUFOR, in response to ICTY requests, and with
the support of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and local police, carried out
search operations against support networks for persons indicted for war crimes.
10. There was further progress during the reporting period in the area of joint
military affairs. EUFOR and the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina (AFBiH)
continued to conduct joint inspections of the latter’s ammunition and weapon
storage sites. By the end of September, all storage sites had been inspected. AFBiH
has now assumed full responsibility, but EUFOR continues to monitor and advise in
order to ensure the self-sustainability of AFBiH capabilities. EUFOR continued to
assist and support AFBiH with planning for the disposal of surplus arms and
ammunition: the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence disposal plan was
forwarded to the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina for final approval. EUFOR
has made the necessary technical preparations on civilian movement control (control
of the movement of weapons and ammunition by Bosnia and Herzegovina
contractors) and is ready to hand over responsibility to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina once they have adopted the necessary legislation.
11. During the reporting period, EUFOR and AFBiH continued further to develop
and conduct combined training based on AFBiH requests to intensify training in
specific military fields.

4

09-21272

S/2009/44

12. On 10 November, the Council of the European Union reviewed the operation.
It highlighted the decisive progress made by the operation towards accomplishing
its mandate, in particular the completion of the military and stabilization tasks
provided for by the Dayton/Paris Agreement. Accordingly, the Council considered
that the preparatory work for a possible development of the operation should be
continued, taking into account the future role of the EU Special Representative. The
outcome of this preparatory work will be submitted to the Council in March 2009 so
that it can take a decision on the future of the operation as soon as the conditions
have been met. In this context, the Council noted that the future development of the
operation would have to take political developments into account.
13. On 4 December, Major General Stefano Castagnotto succeeded Major General
Ignacio Martín Villalaín as Force Commander. 1
IV.

Outlook
14. The security situation is expected to remain stable despite the prospects of
continuing political tension.

__________________
1 Beyond the reporting period but included for completeness.

09-21272

5
