S/2002/984

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 September 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 9 September 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 1 to 31 July 2002.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-57889 (E)

110902

*0257889*

S/2002/984

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 July 2002) there were just over 33,300 troops
of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during the month of July remained generally
stable.
Security
3.
The most serious incidents that occurred in the province in July related to two
separate bombing incidents in the Vitina municipality, which has a history of interethnic intimidation. The first was in the vicinity of Balance, where a grenade blast
damaged a Kosovo Albanian shop, resulting in minor material damage. The second
involved a series of from five to seven explosions in the vicinity of Klokot, and
appeared to be part of a planned operation. Four Kosovo Serb abandoned houses
were severely damaged, and two KFOR soldiers were injured, although it is believed
that KFOR was not intentionally targeted. The two incidents are not thought to be
related.
4.
The number of demonstrations fell again, from 66 to 50, compared to the
number reported for the previous month. The majority of the protests related to the
arrest in June of six former UCK members for crimes allegedly committed during
the 1999 war. The biggest demonstration was held on 9 July in the centre of Pristina
and involved about 1,000 people.
5.
KFOR continued to carry out Kosovo-wide search operations in its campaign
against weapons-smuggling and terrorist activity. Weapons and ammunition were
seized on a daily basis during July and, for the month, totalled 245 weapons, 281
grenades and mines, and 27,041 rounds of ammunition.
6.
On 17 July, at the request of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), KFOR provided planning and general support as well
as technical expertise and nuclear, biological and chemical equipment to a Toxic
Industrial Material Unit of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) in an operation to
move the toxic contents of 150 corroded barrels into new barrels at a disused paint
factory in Vucitrn.
7.
On 19 July, KFOR fire and medical personnel supported the civil authorities
and the Kosovo Protection Corps in fighting a fire at the Kosovo B power station
near Obilic (10 km north-west of Pristina) which started after lightning struck a
transformer. A worker at the power station died and 34 others were treated for
smoke inhalation. Until the B power station is repaired (which may take six
months), the supply of electricity in the province has been rationed since the
remaining A power station produces only 40 per cent of the normal electricity needs
in Kosovo. Both KFOR and UNMIK are using their own generators to reduce
consumption.
8.
On 22 July, KFOR responded to an UNMIK request to increase patrols in
Dakovica to stop looting after the town was blacked out after being hit by a
whirlwind. In this incident, when roofs were blown off 50 houses, injuring many

2

S/2002/984

people and killing two children, KFOR also helped to clear the main roads blocked
by fallen tress, deliver food and medical care, and assist in traffic control.
9.
On 25 July, KFOR helped in the medical evacuation and rescue of civilians
when a bus from Montenegro crashed near the Kulina border crossing point in
Multinational Brigade (West), in which 10 people were killed and about 25 were
injured.
Border/boundary security
10. KFOR continued its activities along the borders with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia 1 and with Albania. During the reporting period, the number
of incidents related to illegal border crossing continued to decrease. Only nine
incidents were reported in July.
11. A number of incidents along the border with the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia involving exchanges of small-arms fire have been reported since May,
most occurring near the border post of Straza. No injuries or material damage have
been reported.
12. With regard to the Administrative Boundary Line with Serbia, responsibility
for two boundary crossing points was handed over to UNMIK police on 31 July in
accordance with a KFOR-UNMIK memorandum of understanding. At the present
time, there are 18 crossing points and these are located along the border/boundary
with Albania, with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and with Serbia.
Five are manned by KFOR, 11 by UNMIK (supported by KFOR), and two are
covered by patrolling. Thirteen of these crossing points are located along the
Administrative Boundary Line with Serbia.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
13. With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps, the current strength is 3,860
active members and 740 reserves. The transfer of members to the reserve is taking
place on a quarterly basis with a view to reducing the number of full-time members
to 3,052 by January 2003 and to achieving a reserve force of 2,000 by that time.
14. During the period under review, two officers were dismissed for repeated
breaches of the KPC Disciplinary Code and for making unauthorized statements to
the press. Twenty-eight cases of non-compliance were opened in July for
absenteeism and five for illegal possession of weapons.
15. The KPC Infrastructure Working Group, whose members are from KFOR,
UNMIK and KPC, began the task of inspecting sites early in July and is expected to
finish early in August. A report on the findings and recommendations will be
available by 31 August.
16. The total number of weapons destroyed under the weapons destruction
programme now stands at 20,913; during the reporting period 7,568 were destroyed.
17. The security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remain in general
compliance with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.

__________________
1 Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

3

S/2002/984

Cooperation with international organizations
18. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo, on request, and to provide
security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
19. On 2 July, UNMIK police and KFOR officials signed a memorandum of
understanding to increase the cooperation and coordination between the police and
the military forces. Primarily the memorandum of understanding will establish a
process for the transfer of responsibility from KFOR to UNMIK police for general
public security, management of demonstrations, and enforcement and control of
curfews within the Mitrovica region (including Vucitrn, Srbica, Zubin Potok,
Leposavic and Zvecan). The memorandum of understanding will be completed by
two separate technical agreements to establish mechanisms for the sharing of
information and to permit an efficient response to incidents.
20. On 9 July, KFOR took the first step to transfer responsibility for train point
security to the UNMIK police as part of the KFOR/UNMIK security transition
strategy. KFOR is providing assistance in clearing debris placed on rail tracks and
has provided area security since the end of June for train services between the
Administrative Boundary Line and the city of Lesak as an extension of KFOR
support for the security of trains, railway lines, and train stations between Djeneral
Jankovic and the municipality of Lesak provided since March 2002.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
21. The incremental approach of KFOR to refugee returns has encouraged UNMIK
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in their
policies of “freedom of movement” and “go and see visits”. The frequency of the
latter is reported to be growing, and in some cases without KFOR involvement.
There have been 874 minority returns to Kosovo in the first five months of 2002
(reported by UNHCR) of whom 383 are Kosovo Serbs and 491 are from other
minorities.
Outlook
22. The security situation in Kosovo continues to be stable, with signs of
increasing freedom of movement. The level of serious crime is low.

4
