S/PV.8975

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8975th meeting

Thursday, 24 February 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-third report of the Secretary-General on the Implementation of paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2022/100)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2576
(2021) (S/2022/103)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26727 (E)
*2226727*

S/PV.8975

The situation concerning Iraq

The next step is the election of a President of
the Republic, according to the Constitution, within
30 days of the election of the Speaker. However,
following an initial nomination period, on 7 February
the parliamentary quorum for a session to elect a
President was not met. Parliament decided to reopen
the nomination period for another three days; the
Federal Supreme Court has not yet ruled on whether
that reopening was constitutional but did rule one
candidate ineligible.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-third report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2022/100)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2576 (2021)
(S/2022/103)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/100, which contains the thirty-third
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), and
to document S/2022/103, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2576 (2021).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: Allow me to begin
today’s briefing with an overview of recent
developments concerning political appointments and
Government formation.
Following the ratification of electoral results,
the parliamentary Speaker and his two deputies were
elected on 9 January. While that was initially contested,
the Federal Supreme Court ruled on 25 January that
the inaugural parliamentary session, during which the
Speaker and his two deputies were elected, had been
held in accordance with the Constitution.
2/17

24/02/2022

Once the President is elected, he or she will,
within 15 days, according to the Constitution, charge
the nominee of the largest parliamentary bloc, that is,
the Prime Minister-designate, with the formation of
a council of ministers, to be endorsed by Parliament.
Clearly, the current situation suggests that we are not
there yet.
While political consultations continue, or, perhaps
more accurately, the political impasse continues, time
is just passing by — precious time.
Behind the headline debate of a majority versus a
consensus Government, many Iraqis are increasingly
wondering whether the national interest is actually
front and centre in the ongoing negotiations, rather
than access to resources and power, or how the pie of
political appointments and ministries will be carved
this time around.
Needless to say, the priority should be to urgently
agree on a programme of action that immediately and
meaningfully tackles Iraq’s long list of outstanding
domestic business. What I am saying is that it is more
than four months since the elections, and it is high time
to return the spotlight to where it deserves to be: on the
people of Iraq.
The people of Iraq, who continue to wait for gainful,
productive employment opportunities, safety, security,
adequate public service delivery, the full protection of
their rights and freedoms, justice, accountability and
meaningful participation of women and young people,
to name but a few.
Of course, one could be forgiven for being patient
with a prolonged Government formation phase if we were
witnessing vibrant exchanges on policy orientations,
development pathways and economic reform plans. If
that was animating the negotiations, patience would
indeed be a virtue. However, so far, we are observing
22-26727

24/02/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

quite the opposite — hampering the change and reforms
that the country so desperately needs.
Moreover, as I have pointed out countless times,
a weak home front creates vulnerabilities for instance
to Da’esh, which is ready to take advantage of any
political and security vacuum, but also to continued
external interference. In the case of Iraq, that is not a
hypothetical point.
In the meantime, the patience of the Iraqi people is
being tested. In October 2019, that patience found its
limits and very many Iraqis took the streets, protesting
a lack of social, economic and political prospects.
We know how that ended — with hundreds killed
and thousands injured. The very least that Iraqis may
now expect is a sense of urgency from their elected
representatives to overcome internal divisions, agree on
a programme informing Iraqis of what they can expect
in the next four years, manage public expectations and
rise to the challenge of meeting the aspirations of the
40 million people who call Iraq home.
I will say a few words on the Baghdad-Erbil
relationship. As the Council knows, I have consistently
emphasized the importance of a regular, structured and
institutionalized Baghdad-Erbil dialogue, with specific
timelines, to address the long-outstanding issues. As I
have said before, that is a mutual responsibility.
The fact is that the inability to overcome differences,
or even the unwillingness to find agreement, comes at
a cost sooner or later. It is also true that, if a political
vacuum exists for too long, the judicialization of what
are otherwise legislative or executive domains can
suddenly be a fact of life.
With a caretaker Government in office and political
parties engaged in negotiations on the formation of a new
Government, a Federal Supreme Court case pending
for 10 years was very recently adjudicated. Hence,
the recent Court ruling on the unconstitutionality of
the Kurdistan Regional Government oil and gas law
prompted questions by many, such as “Why now?”.
The fact is that it happened. Consequently, the
importance of that institutionalized dialogue has
only increased. Not only that — the country needs its
Parliament to act. More broadly, what I am saying is that
letting things slide is a risky business, with potentially
far-reaching consequences undermining Iraq’s stability
in the short and long run.

S/PV. 8975

I therefore once again call on all stakeholders to
focus on what really matters and to unite instead of
competing. Like it or not, the parties need each other
to be their best. Hence, all efforts should centre on
resolving outstanding issues not by way of a power
grab, but in a spirit of partnership and cooperation.
Turning briefly to the economy, between a sharp
rise in oil prices and a currency devaluation, the deficit
has been reduced and foreign currency reserves have
grown. The safety net has been expanded, notably due
to increased spending on social services in response to
the pandemic.
At first glance, that can sound encouraging.
However, there is no denying that, with important
Government proposals and efforts actively being
undermined, delayed or halted, such results cannot
be considered a direct consequence of sustainable
strategies. Fundamentally, today Iraq is no less
vulnerable to commodity price fluctuations; Iraq
suffers no less from poverty or underemployment; and
Iraq is witnessing no less corruption than it did last
year or the year before.
I repeat myself again, but durable, structural
solutions can come about only through meaningful
reform. I realize that that is easier said than done.
However, Iraq is running out of time. As an Iraqi
official put it to me some time ago, even if we had
started implementing the most urgent reforms the day
before yesterday, it will take superhuman efforts to
sufficiently address today’s financial, economic and
environmental challenges. While I would like to think
in terms of the glass being half full, his remarks are not
to be taken lightly.
Also, with regard to environmental challenges, they
present a looming threat that is far too often considered
less urgent, but it is ultimately one of the greatest global
challenges that we collectively face.
A few weeks ago, I visited Iraq’s marshlands in
southern Iraq — a dramatic, beautiful landscape,
whose biodiversity is equalled only by its cultural
significance. However, water scarcity in that region
is not just a threat on the horizon, but it is a present
danger. As is the case for other parts of the country,
the salinization of water and soils, desertification and
the disappearance of arable lands are nothing less than
existential environmental concerns. Moreover, as we all
know, water scarcity is a threat multiplier. With it come

22-267273/17

S/PV.8975

The situation concerning Iraq

24/02/2022

heightened risks of poverty, displacement, instability
and conflict.

out there, the Iraqi authorities realize that they cannot
stop there.

Much, but not all, of that scarcity can be explained
by climate change. Water flows are also actively being
reduced by neighbouring countries. Furthermore,
potable water and irrigation infrastructure and
maintenance are significantly lagging behind. Iraq’s
water resources have been managed ineffectively for
too long.

Turning from the Al-Hol camp to the suspected
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant combatants currently
in custody in north-eastern Syria, which again is an
unsustainable situation, moreover, as is the case for a
camp such as Al-Hol, such facilities fuel resentment, as
well as inspiring terrorists, from breakout operations
to large-scale attacks, as we have seen. In addition, the
fact that some fighters and associated family members
have been able to make their way out suggests that it
would be better to control the situation and manage
returns rather than take the chance of missing them as
they slip back undetected into any country.

In other words, Iraq is acutely vulnerable to the
effects of water scarcity due to climate change and
reduced inflows from its rivers. While I know that
this is a priority for the current caretaker Government,
I would like to emphasize that shared ownership of
this crucial file across the political spectrum will
prove essential.
Another issue is the camps and prisons across the
border, hosting many Iraqis, in north-eastern Syria, to
be precise. All of us will have closely followed recent
events that have yet again made the risks associated
with that slow-moving catastrophe clear. The situation
in those camps and prisons presents unprecedented
challenges, with implications for the region and far
beyond. They are ticking time bombs.
Over the past three years, the Council has heard
me repeat that the legacy of yesterday’s fight against
Da’esh could very easily turn into tomorrow’s war and
that we should not wait for young children to come of
age in a camp such as Al-Hol. Those children, living
in dire circumstances, never asked to be part of that
mess. However, they find themselves deprived of their
rights and at risk of forced recruitment and exposure to
violent extremism.
Of course, I recognize that a number of States have
upheld their responsibilities by taking back children
and, in some cases, limited numbers of women. I can
only hope that other States will soon follow suit. As a
growing number of countries have shown, that can be
done successfully.
The fact is that the current situation is not
sustainable. Keeping people indefinitely in the restricted
and poor conditions of those camps ultimately creates
greater protection and security risks than taking them
back in a controlled manner.
Meanwhile, Iraq has demonstrated courage. So
far, around 450 families, or some 1,800 persons, have
been repatriated to Iraq. As thousands of Iraqis are still
4/17

Here, too, Iraq deserves to be commended. Not
only has the Iraqi Government made a start with the
repatriation of Iraqi families in Al-Hol, but it has also
begun repatriating Iraqi combatants of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. Essentially, what I am saying is
that in the interest of everyone, the ultimate security
argument, as opposed to the short-term political one, is
to recognize that a continued status quo is the riskiest
option. To appease festering grievances, prevent the
emergence of new conflicts and defuse ticking time
bombs, it is important to anticipate and mitigate. It is
important to step up and get things done.
Turning now to the issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, on 16 February the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq facilitated
the return, from Kuwait back to Iraq, the last six sets
of human remains that were determined not to be part
of the Kuwait or Saudi Arabia lists of missing persons.
With that transfer, the identification process of all
human remains discovered in Samawah, in Muthanna
governorate, in 2019 and 2020 has been concluded.
As I have stressed before, it is imperative for the
Government of Iraq not to lose that momentum, but
instead to take advantage of the experience gained so
far and move towards the overall conclusion of this
important humanitarian file.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the importance of a
sense of urgency. It is urgent for Iraq’s political leaders
to overcome divisions, set aside partisanship and bury
personal vendettas. Iraq truly has immense potential.
If only that potential were fulfilled, how bright Iraq’s
future could be.
22-26727

24/02/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative HennisPlasschaert for her briefing and ongoing leadership on
this critical file. We truly appreciate the support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
to Iraq’s peace and stability.
I welcome the Permanent Representative of Iraq to
today’s meeting.
The United States again congratulates the
Iraqi people on successfully holding free and fair
parliamentary elections in October that were largely
peaceful. That is a testament to the Iraqi people and
their desire for transparent and good governance.
We remain hopeful that those elections will yield a
Government that reflects the will of the Iraqi people
and responds to their urgent needs.
Before and after polling, the Iraqi people rejected
violence intended to coerce and intimidate politicians,
election authorities, journalists, women and activists.
They rebuffed attempts by some to restore old
power structures. They stayed strong in solidarity
for democracy.
The attack on the residence of Prime Minister
Al-Kadhimi in November was the most visible attempt
to thwart the democratic process and nullify the election
results amid repeated threats of violence directed
against Iraqi citizens working to safeguard Iraq’s
democracy. Despite all those threats, the Independent
High Electoral Commission, with assistance from
UNAMI, implemented a secure, technically sound
voting and counting process, monitored by international
observers. After electoral and judicial authorities
confirmed the vote tallies and adjudicated challenges,
the Federal Supreme Court in December ratified the
election results, thereby paving the way for Iraq to
proceed with forming a new Government. As a result of
those polls, an historic number of women and members
of religious and ethnic minority groups won seats.
Reformist newcomers have established themselves as
a new force in Iraqi politics. Democracy has gained a
stronger foothold in Iraq.
Now it is time for Iraq’s leaders to come together
and form an inclusive Government — one capable of

S/PV. 8975

and committed to addressing the aspirations of the
Iraqi people. The Iraqi people need a Government of
that kind because they need security. We have seen
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
remains bent on using violence to wreak havoc. In
the meantime, we commend Iraqi security forces for
their brave fight against ISIS and will continue to
support Iraq in that effort, in line with our strategic
framework agreement. The United States looks forward
to working with the new Government, once it has
formed, to strengthen our strategic partnership on our
many shared interests, including economic reform and
anti-corruption measures.
Inclusive and transparent institutions and
systems, including the judiciary, are critical to the
next Government’s formation and to Iraq’s future. I
was proud to see Iraq participate in the Summit for
Democracy in December. Now it is time for Iraq’s
leaders to meet those commitments and set an example
for the world.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and
welcoming the Iraqi representative to today’s meeting.
We express our appreciation for the work that has
been done to address the questions surrounding missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property. Very important progress has been
made on this file and we recognize its significance.
The certification of the election results by the
Federal Supreme Court in December last year represents
a critical step towards the consolidation of democracy
in Iraq. It has set in motion the constitutional process,
which should be followed by the election of a new
Speaker of the Parliament and a new Government. We
regret to see that the constitutional process has been put
on hold, especially after the postponement of the vote
on the election of the new President by the Parliament
on 7 February.
The largest political parties should take
responsibility and move the country forward by allowing
for the formation of a new and able Government to
meet the immediate challenges that the Iraqi people
face. We cannot emphasize enough the importance of
the full and meaningful participation of women in that
process, as the best guarantors of an all-inclusive and
representative Government.

22-267275/17

S/PV.8975

The situation concerning Iraq

Equally, we see a need for the major forces to look
beyond sectarian lines and unite their forces to serve
the common good of all Iraqis. Dialogue among the
relevant parties and at all levels is the only way to
achieve that common goal.
We remain concerned about the high levels of
political violence. Such attacks on the democratic
future of Iraq must be condemned. All parties must
avoid the use of threats or violence to resolve political
disputes. Dialogue, not violence, must be the way to
form a Government that can address economic, climate
and humanitarian challenges, while also fighting
the pandemic.
I represent a young democracy that has had
immense achievements. We have experienced firsthand how democratic processes can be slow. They
cannot be taken for granted and do not come easily.
Respecting constitutional principles and deadlines is
critical to ensuring democratic rule, especially in a
country that faces so many challenges. It is in the spirit
of friendship and sincere desire to see Iraq flourish that
we call on all parties to redouble their efforts, respect
the constitutional process and resolve all outstanding
issues through dialogue and negotiation.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African States
members of the Security Council (A3): Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya. We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
informative briefing on developments in Iraq and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), which we are following closely. We
also welcome the participation of our colleague, the
Permanent Representative of Iraq, in this meeting.
Our intervention will focus on the political, security
and human rights issues.
It is apparent from the Special Representative’s
briefing that Iraq remains in the grip of a post-electoral
stalemate, which owing to the persistence of political
dissension has resulted in an institutional crisis, with the
indefinite postponement of the election of the president
of the Republic by Parliament, initially scheduled for
7 February 2022. The announcement in May 2020 of
the holding of early parliamentary elections offered a
source of hope for the Iraqi people, especially young
people who, through their demonstrations, essentially
demanded the establishment of the rule of law, the end
6/17

24/02/2022

of external interference and fairer and more effective
economic and social policies.
With the support of UNAMI, the legislative
elections of 10 October 2021 were held peacefully,
although the announcement of the results was marred by
tensions that led to electoral disputes. The willingness
of all political actors to remain within the framework
of the Constitution demonstrated their commitment to
peace and stability in Iraq, which gave rise to optimism.
However, the post-electoral stalemate and the inability
of political parties to reach an agreement do not serve
the Iraqi people, who exercised their constitutional
right to choose their leadership and enjoy prosperity.
We call on the various political parties represented
in Parliament to engage in dialogue and compromise to
achieve the formation of a consensus Government. We
similarly call for refraining from all forms of violence
and the need for the peaceful and expeditious formation
of a Government that is capable of addressing the
challenges facing Iraq. The future of the country is
at stake.
We recall with satisfaction the significant
participation of women in the recent elections, winning
195 seats and exceeding the 25 per cent quota provided
for in the Constitution, which was a clear illustration
of the inclusive nature of the elections. The outcome
should result in the significant representation of women
in the formation of the Government and Iraqi society
in general, which we urge the Government of Iraq to
prioritize. We also take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for the law against domestic violence, which
seeks to protect women.
With regard to the security situation, the A3
remains deeply concerned about the continued attacks
being perpetrated by Da’esh in several governorates of
Iraq against civilians and Iraqi security forces and the
persistent threat they pose to security and stability in
the country. Ensuring the safety and security of Iraqis
is fundamental to the overall stability, reconciliation
and prosperity that we would like to see in Iraq. In that
context, we reaffirm our support for the security of Iraq
and the fight against terrorism, and join in the call to
address the underlying factors conducive to the spread
of terrorism and violent extremism.
Concerning the recent violent attacks carried out
on 21 January by Da’esh in the district of Al-Azim,
in which 11 soldiers were killed, we must hold the
perpetrators of such crimes, whose activities affect
22-26727

24/02/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

the entire region, to account. In addition, mines and
unexploded bombs are among the greatest challenges
facing the Iraqi authorities in enabling the displaced
to return to their homes in the liberated areas in the
north of the country, particularly in the governorates
of Ninawa and Kirkuk. As an illustration of the latter,
another child was killed on 19 February in an explosion
caused by a live mine in Dhi Qar governorate. We call
on the international community to support Iraq in its
fight against that scourge.
With regard to the human rights situation in Iraq,
we note the activities being undertaken by UNAMI,
together with other stakeholders, to promote human
rights and build capacity to address the areas of justice,
accountability and the rule of law in Iraq. We reiterate
the call on the Government of Iraq to take further
measures to hold persons accountable for human rights
violations and abuses against demonstrators and civil
society actors. For example, during the period from
1 October to 31 December 2021, UNAMI documented
28 incidents involving nearly 115 civilians, including
50 deaths and 65 injuries, including among women and
children. Those barbaric acts have been attributed both
to Da’esh and to unidentified armed militias. In that
vein, we welcome the publication of the joint report
of UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, entitled “Human Rights
and Freedom of Expression: Trials in the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq”, which examines the criminal
proceedings in four emblematic cases tried by the Erbil
Criminal Court.
We acknowledge and commend the efforts of the
Government of Iraq, with the support of the international
community, in fulfilling its obligation to Kuwait
with regard to the compensations called for by the
United Nations and the United Nations Compensation
Commission, in accordance with resolutions 687 (1991)
and 692 (1991). The same applies to Iraq’s accession to
the Paris Agreement, which also sends a strong message
that should be noted. We acknowledge UNAMI’s
continuous support for the efforts of the Governments
of Iraq and Kuwait on the subject of missing Kuwaitis
and third-country nationals, as well as the work of the
Tripartite Commission and the International Committee
of the Red Cross.
We applaud the recent advances made in including
new initiatives to provide information that could help
identify the location of undiscovered burial sites and
further encourage the Government of Iraq to continue

S/PV. 8975

to build on the progress made in the search for missing
Kuwaiti national archives.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for UNAMI
and the relevant agencies of the United Nations system
in their continued and multifaceted support alongside
with the Government and the people of Iraq. Time is
of the essence. We call on all political actors to secure
a political deal that accommodates the interests of all
the parties in order to overcome the ongoing impasse.
That is the only path to the country’s peaceful political
transition that will safeguard the interests of the
Iraqi people.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
begin by thanking Special Representative Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative and insightful
briefing. I would also like to welcome our Iraqi
colleague to this meeting.
Since this is the first briefing on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in which we are
participating during our current term on the Security
Council, we would like to reiterate Brazil’s support for
the historic work that the Mission has undertaken since
2003.
Throughout the past two decades, UNAMI has been
essential to aiding Iraq in its efforts towards stability
and development.
UNAMI’s work also holds a very specific meaning
for us as Brazilians, as its creation on 14 August 2003
preceded the Canal Hotel attack by five days. That
attack took the lives of 22 people at the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad, including that of Special
Representative for Iraq and High Commissioner for
Human Rights Sérgio Vieira de Mello. UNAMI’s
efforts since then honour their sacrifice and constitute
a symbol of courage and determination in the pursuit
of peace.
Since 2003, the Iraqi people have faced immense
challenges — from post-war reconstruction to the
building of democratic institutions to the fight against
terrorism. None of these challenges has entirely gone
away, but we have witnessed hard-earned and welldeserved progress on all of those fronts. Iraq must be
commended, most recently, for the holding of safe,
transparent and well-organized elections on 10 October
2021. We applaud the efforts of the Iraqi Independent
High Electoral Commission and other institutions in
that regard, and we recognize the essential work of

22-267277/17

S/PV.8975

The situation concerning Iraq

UNAMI in supporting the Iraqi State. The Council’s
decision to reinforce UNAMI’s capabilities before the
election was an opportune and fruitful one.
The announcement of the final election results on
30 November and the ratification of those results by
the Supreme Court on 27 December were important
milestones, and we count on Iraqi political actors to
capitalize on the moment and complete the Government
formation process as soon as possible in order to
respond to the legitimate and urgent aspirations of the
Iraqi people.
This year has seen important developments and
achievements for Iraq, some of which have been
recently discussed in this Chamber. On Tuesday, we
adopted resolution 2621 (2022), recognizing that Iraq
had fulfilled its obligations established under Article
VII of the Charter of the United Nations regarding the
payment of compensation related to the events of 19901991. That was a momentous achievement. Accordingly,
the resolution determined the forthcoming termination
of the United Nations Compensation Commission after
three decades of activity.
As Iraq turns yet another page of its recent past, it
also endeavours to fulfil its true vocation as a source
of regional stability and as a bridge between different
cultures, political outlooks and religious perspectives.
The Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and
Partnership, held in August, is a promising example of
that. The burgeoning ties of friendship and cooperation
between Iraq and Kuwait are another.
UNAMI’s activities are essential for supporting
positive trends in Iraq and for aiding the Iraqi
Government and people as they face the current
challenges. Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
can count on our continued support.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her
briefing. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Iraq to this meeting.
It has been four months since the Iraqi people
came together to vote in parliamentary elections. We
look forward to the formation of a new Government
that will meet the needs and aspirations of the Iraqi
people, in particular women, youth, and marginalized
communities. It is vital that all Iraqi political actors take
the steps necessary to form a Government expeditiously.
8/17

24/02/2022

Let me also underline that the historic participation
of women as candidates and voters — indeed surpassing
the 25 per cent constitutional quota — should be
reflected in their meaningful leadership in the next
Government and Cabinet.
We also commend the intention of the Independent
High Electoral Commission to conduct a postelection review. Such a lessons-learned process is
important for strengthening the capacities of Iraq’s
electoral institutions.
The security situation in Iraq continues to be fragile
and volatile. We are concerned about the continued
terrorist activity by the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant and the spread of violent extremism. In that
regard, we underline the importance of strengthening
capacities on human rights compliance and adhering
to the principle of proportionality during counterterrorism operations, while carefully considering the
role of marginalization, exclusion and injustice. We
applaud the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)to the Iraqi authorities to
strengthen their compliance.
Furthermore, we are encouraged by the recent
Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict in Iraq (S/2021/437), which detailed the
significant decrease in grave violations against children
between 2019 and 2021.
We are, however, deeply concerned about the
sharp increase of children detained on security-related
charges. Children should be treated primarily as
victims. Alternatives to detention, such as long-term
and sustainable reintegration, should be actively sought.
It is clear that accountability, justice, rule of law and
human rights are at the centre of addressing the longterm drivers of conflict and instability in Iraq. Norway
would like to again raise the issue of strengthening
accountability mechanisms for human rights violations
and abuses and, in particular, for violence perpetrated
against demonstrators and political and civil society
actors, as well as sexual and gender-based violence.
In that regard, we commend the Special
Representative for holding multiple round-table
meetings with Government and civil society
representatives, advancing support for the adoption and
enactment of the draft anti-domestic violence law.
Norway welcomes the ongoing implementation of
climate change adaptation activities in Iraq — a critical
22-26727

24/02/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

area of importance for furthering long-term stability
in both Iraq and the region. We welcome the increased
reporting on this issue in the most recent UNAMI report
(S/2022/103), as those efforts should be an inspiration
for greater international and regional support for both
Iraq and for other countries facing such challenges.
Finally, let me turn to the relations between
Baghdad and Erbil. We welcome their willingness to
cooperate on security. We urge the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to continue
their dialogue to resolve outstanding issues and to
promote increased cooperation.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I thank Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing. She and her
colleagues from United Nations missions and agencies
on the ground have our full support, and I welcome our
Iraqi to the meeting as well.
We meet at an important moment for Iraq’s
democracy. Following October’s elections, we look
forward to the timely formation of a Government
that meets the legitimate needs and aspirations of
the Iraqi people. The first session of the Council of
Representatives, held last month, and the election of a
speaker were important steps in that process.
I want to commend the valuable work of the
Independent High Electoral Commission and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
including in the post-elections phase. Following
its own electoral-observer mission, the European
Union will present a comprehensive final report
with recommendations to the Iraqi authorities later
this month.
Women won a historic 95 seats in October’s election,
exceeding the 25 per cent quota. As Ms. Amal Kabashi
told the Council in November (see S/PV.8910), women
must now also be full participants in negotiations on
Government formation. She also reminded us that
significant barriers to women’s participation have yet to
be addressed. We echo her calls for the swift adoption
and enactment of the draft anti-domestic violence law
and for the necessary resources and structures to be put
in place for the full implementation of the milestone
Yazidi Female Survivors Law.
Regrettably, the security situation in Iraq remains
volatile. I strongly condemn the recent attacks carried
out by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, including
on 21 January. Those attacks are a stark reminder to us

S/PV. 8975

all of the group’s malevolent intentions and capabilities.
There has also been an alarming uptick in rocket and
drone attacks, including directly into Baghdad’s Green
Zone. We call on all actors to exercise restraint, and we
echo UNAMI’s message of 2 February calling for full
respect for Iraqi sovereignty and territorial integrity at
all times.
Tragically, children are often the most vulnerable
to the precarious security situation — and to explosive
remnants of war in particular. In the past year, over 100
children were killed or maimed by explosive remnants
and improvised explosive devices in Iraq. More
concerted efforts in demining and mine risk education
are required. The safety of Iraq’s children must be
ensured, and their futures must be safeguarded.
We welcome two further rounds of returns from
Al-Hol camp in December and January. We recall
the obligation of the Iraqi authorities to ensure
safe, voluntary and dignified returns, as well as to
address issues such as a lack of basic services and the
stigmatization of returnees.
I welcome and commend Iraq’s accession to the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In the face of
significant water scarcity, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General mentioned, the implications
of climate change for Iraq are myriad. Climate change
threatens food security, people’s livelihoods and
progress on gender equality, as well as contributing
to internal displacement. Joint action to mitigate and
adapt to the challenges posed by climate change will
be crucial.
Finally, we once again welcome the fulfilment
of the mandate of the United Nations Compensation
Commission and commend the Governments of Iraq
and Kuwait for their cooperation with the Commission.
We look forward to further positive developments in
Iraq-Kuwait relations, and in particular in the search
for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing property.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her briefing and for the
exceptional commitment she has shown to Iraq since
the beginning of her tenure. I also wish to welcome the
presence of the representative of Iraq here today.
France shares the conclusions of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/103) on the October

22-267279/17

S/PV.8975

The situation concerning Iraq

elections. We welcome in particular the significant
increase in the number of women elected as members
of Parliament. That development is an important step
towards greater participation by Iraqi women in the
political life of their country.
As the Special Representative said, putting an
end to the current political vacuum is essential for the
stability of Iraq and the region as a whole. France fully
supports the democratic process in Iraq. The time has
now come to agree on the appointment of a President
and to form a Government capable of responding to the
challenges of the country and meeting the expectations
of the population. We reject any attempts to destabilize
the country or of external interference.
I emphasize the urgency of forming a Government
because the Iraqi people have legitimate expectations of
their representatives. During the 2019 demonstrations,
they clearly expressed their aspirations for democratic
change, economic reforms, social justice and greater
transparency. Those demands must be met.
France also wishes to recall the importance of
cooperation between the federal authorities and the
autonomous region of Kurdistan on issues of common
interest, in particular security and oil resources.
We therefore call on them to resume the dialogue
established in recent months, as it is in the interests of
both federal Iraq and the autonomous region.
The threat posed by Da’esh remains strong, despite
the efforts of the international community. We must
collectively pursue our efforts to fight terrorism,
wherever it is found, with constancy and determination.
France reiterates its full support for Iraq in its fight
against Da’esh and will continue its commitment in that
regard as part of its contribution to the Global Coalition
against Da’esh.
In that context, the protection of diplomatic
compounds, as well as of the bases hosting Coalition
forces, is essential. Similarly, coordination between
Baghdad and Erbil on security matters is a key factor in
an effective and sustainable fight against Da’esh.
Finally, I would like to welcome the unanimous
adoption by the Council of resolution 2621 (2022) on
22 February, which puts an end to Iraq’s financial
obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. That constitutes a success for Iraq,
Kuwait and the United Nations, as well as a reminder
that only through respect for international law can the
10/17

24/02/2022

foundations for lasting reconciliation and stability be
laid. I also welcome the excellent cooperation between
Iraq and Kuwait on the issue of missing Kuwaitis and
third-country nationals and the progress made on the
return of Kuwaiti property. We encourage both States
to continue their cooperation in that regard.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom commends the continued work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) and the
work of Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert.
I also welcome our Iraqi colleagues to the Chamber
today. I wish to make four points.
First, we welcome the successful ratification of
Iraq’s election results and the steps taken towards
Government formation. We condemn the recent rise in
attacks against political parties. We echo the Special
Representative’s call for all Iraqi political actors
to work towards a peaceful and constructive postelection environment and, most important, towards
a Government that can deliver for the Iraqi people.
We commend UNAMI’s continued support to the
Independent High Electoral Commission and to the
Electoral Commission’s post-election review.
Secondly, we commend the increased participation
by women as both candidates and as voters in Iraq’s
elections. We call for the meaningful representation of
women in Iraq’s next Government. We urge the swift
adoption of the draft anti-domestic violence law as a
crucial form of protection for women.
Thirdly, our collective efforts to secure the
lasting defeat of Da’esh remain essential. The Global
Coalition against Da’esh continues to stand alongside
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government to tackle the Da’esh threat. The United
Kingdom welcomes the commitment of the Government
of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to
enhance their security cooperation to eradicate the
Da’esh threat.
Finally, we thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her update on missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property. The progress made on the identification
of the remains of missing persons represents an
important step forward. We commend the commitment
of Iraq and Kuwait to continued cooperation on that
important matter.
22-26727

24/02/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

In conclusion, we call on all Iraqi political actors to
intensify their efforts to support the peaceful formation
of a Government that can deliver for all Iraqis. We call
on the international community to be ready to support
that Government in tackling the pressing challenges
it will face in providing security, delivering services,
reforming the economy and moving away from
dependence on hydrocarbons.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing and welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Hussein, to today’s meeting.
At the end of last year, Iraq successfully concluded
the elections to the National Assembly, and the domestic
political process entered a new stage. We commend
the Iraqi Government and people on their tremendous
efforts and sincerely look forward to the Iraqi factions
taking this opportunity to further strengthen their unity
and build consensus on the way forward for political
arrangements through dialogue and concertation under
the constitutional and legal framework, thus laying a
solid political foundation for the realization of longterm peace, stability and prosperity in the country.
We view positively the electoral support provided
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) in accordance with the Council’s mandate.
At the conclusion of the elections in Iraq, we hope
that UNAMI will complete the finalization of
electoral support as soon as possible and devote more
resources and energy to supporting the Iraqi national
development priorities.
When conducting human rights and humanitarian
work, there is a need to follow the mandate strictly, pay
attention to communication and coordination with the
Iraqi Government and strengthen the screening and
verification of information.
Iraq continues to face complex security challenges.
Since last December, the Security Council has issued
two press statements condemning the terrorist attacks
in Iraq (SC/14725 and SC/14774). The international
community should stand firm in its support for Iraq to
eliminate extremist terrorist forces such as the Islamic
State and consolidate the hard-won achievements in the
area of counter-terrorism.
China appreciates Iraq’s recent repatriation of a
large number of its own citizens from Al-Hol camp
in Syria. We also call on the countries concerned to

S/PV. 8975

demonstrate their sense of responsibility, as Iraq has
done, and to advance the identification and repatriation
of foreign terrorist fighters and their families who are in
Iraq as soon as possible. Iraq has repeatedly protested
against foreign unilateral military operations in Iraq,
and we urge the parties concerned to respect in earnest
Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
China appreciates Iraq’s efforts to develop goodneighbourly and friendly relations with the countries
of the region while welcoming the close cooperation
between Iraq and Kuwait on the issue of missing
persons and properties and supports the Council’s press
statement on the positive progress made in that respect.
Two days ago, the Council adopted resolution 2621
(2022) declaring that the United Nations Compensation
Commission had completed its mandate and deciding to
terminate that mandate. That is a significant milestone
in regional peace and post-conflict reconciliation.
We sincerely hope that Iraq and Kuwait will take this
opportunity to continue to deepen their partnership,
actively respond to common challenges and inject
positive energy into the stable development of the region.
Over the past 30 years, the situation in Iraq has been
characterized by upheaval, and people have endured
great hardship. At this new historical starting point,
the international community should firmly support
Iraq in independently choosing a development path
that suits its own national conditions and actively help
Iraq rebuild its infrastructure, accelerate economic and
social development and improve people’s livelihoods
and well-being.
China is a sincere friend of the Iraqi people. During
the most difficult period in Iraq’s security situation,
Chinese enterprises remained in Iraq, providing the
necessary guarantee for people’s livelihoods and the
economic operations of Iraq. After the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease, China dispatched anti-pandemic
expert teams to Iraq and provided multiple batches of
anti-pandemic materials and vaccines.
China will continue to work with the international
community in support of Iraq’s efforts to achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing today. I welcome
the Permanent Representative of Iraq to this meeting.

22-2672711/17

S/PV.8975

The situation concerning Iraq

At the outset, I express my heartfelt condolences
to all the families that lost loved ones in the terrorist
attacks in Iraq, including the recent cowardly terrorist
attack in Diyala governorate, which resulted in the
deaths of 11 Iraqi security personnel. We strongly
condemn all such acts of terrorism.
The people of Iraq, despite facing economic and
security challenges, expressed their will through the
ballot during the recently ratified parliamentary election.
We welcome the increased participation of women in the
election and their success in winning more than 25 per
cent of the seats. The critical situation facing Iraq now
requires all parties to assume greater responsibility
to overcome the current political stalemate. I reiterate
India’s support for the democratic process in Iraq. We
encourage all political parties to work together for the
early formation of a new Government.
Meanwhile, we are witnessing politically motivated
attacks on leaders, party offices and other institutions.
Violence and intimidation should not be the tools for
redressing political grievances. We urge all parties to
reject violence and resolve their political differences
through dialogue and legal avenues.
In that context, the continued possession of arms
and weapons in large quantities outside of State control
poses a serious challenge to stability in Iraq. There
is also an urgent need for all regional actors to stop
using Iraqi territory as a launch pad for targeted attacks
on other countries in the region. A strong, stable and
sovereign Iraq would lead to greater security and
stability in the region.
The Secretary-General’s report dated 10 February
2022 on the implementation of resolution 2576 (2021)
(S/2022/103) states that between 23 November 2021 and
5 January 2022 there were 123 attacks by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) on security forces,
in addition to the continued targeting of community
leaders and civilians. That staggering statistic is cause
for serious concern. The signs of a re-emergence of
ISIS in Iraq are a matter of grave concern and call for
urgent action by the international community.
Despite the success of the Iraqi security forces
in combating that group, ISIS remains active in the
country and the region, with its affiliates functioning
independently in many places around the world. We
reiterate our firm conviction that terrorism in one part
of the world is a grave threat to peace and security in
the entire world.
12/17

24/02/2022

The people of Iraq recently celebrated the fourth
anniversary of the victory over ISIS. Many brave
Iraqi men and women sacrificed their lives to ensure
the defeat of ISIS. As a country that has long borne
the brunt of terrorism, India is acutely aware of its
human cost. We are confident that people of Iraq will
continue to be vigilant against a resurgence of ISIS or
its affiliates.
It is also critical that the international community
and Iraq’s partners continue their support and assistance
to enable the Iraqi security forces in the fight against
terrorism and build their capacity to address future
threats. Such support and assistance should ensure the
irreversible defeat of ISIS.
The violations of Iraq’s sovereignty on the pretext of
counter-terrorism operations in northern Iraq must end.
Iraq’s neighbours should work with the Iraqi authorities
to address all security challenges that they face.
We welcome the cooperation between the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait to achieve an amicable
solution to the issue of missing persons and the return
of Kuwaiti properties. It serves as a model of how
countries can come together and achieve post-conflict
reconciliation through constructive engagement. We
recognize the significant support provided by the
International Committee of the Red Cross to facilitate
progress on that issue. We hope that all parties will
continue to strengthen their cooperation until the
matter is resolved to the mutual satisfaction of Iraq
and Kuwait.
India and Iraq have historically enjoyed strong
people-to-people ties. India has always responded to the
urgent needs of Iraq. For example, recently more than
30 Iraqi children with congenital heart disease whose
surgeries had been delayed due to the coronavirus
pandemic were operated on at an Indian hospital in
collaboration with Iraq’s Ministry of Health.
As a steadfast supporter of a democratic, pluralistic,
federal, unified and economically strong Iraq, India will
remain a willing partner of Iraq’s economic recovery,
reconciliation and reconstruction. India will continue
to provide its full support to efforts for peace, security
and development in Iraq.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
22-26727

24/02/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

for her briefing, and we echo previous speakers in
welcoming the delegation of Iraq to this meeting.
I will focus my statement on three points: first,
the political transition; secondly, security issues; and,
thirdly, humanitarian assistance.
The ratification of the election results by the
Federal Supreme Court on 27 December ushered in
a new chapter in Iraq’s political life. The incoming
Government will be faced not only with the challenge
of implementing structural reforms, but also with
rebuilding public confidence in the institutions. We
trust that the political forces will reach an agreement
on the formation of an inclusive Government that
addresses the legitimate aspirations of the entire
population. We note with satisfaction that 95 of the 329
seats will be held by women, representing 29 per cent
of the total. We urge that such participation by women
also be reflected in the next ministerial Cabinet.
The numerous incidents of violence attributed to
the activities of terrorist groups, including Da’esh, are
of concern. We urge the Iraqi Federal Government
and the Kurdish Regional Government to deepen
security cooperation and to resolutely promote the
implementation of the Sinjar Agreement. We also
urge regional and international partners to continue
to support Iraq’s efforts in such areas, particularly
the capacity-building of the security forces. However,
Mexico reiterates its concern about wrongly invoking
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations in the
context of combating terrorism.
We have noted the fact that some 1.2 million people
are still displaced and that humanitarian organizations
report poor housing and health conditions given the
funding shortfalls. The activities of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the World Health Organization in dealing with the
coronavirus disease remain of paramount importance.
My delegation commends Iraq’s efforts to promote
the voluntary return and integration of Iraqi families,
including 245 minors, from the Al-Hol refugee camp
in Syria, and we encourage other States to follow
such steps.
Finally, we acknowledge the particular programmes
of the World Food Programme and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
address the major environmental challenges, which
need to be comprehensively tackled, especially with

S/PV. 8975

regard to food security. In that regard, we congratulate
Iraq on its recent accession to the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
for her comprehensive briefing. We express our full
support for the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
Today we are participating in a briefing on
UNAMI for the first time since we were elected to the
Security Council. I would therefore like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Iraqi people on several
recent positive developments, in particular the holding
of successful and generally peaceful parliamentary
elections last October. In that regard, we commend
the tireless efforts of the Independent High Electoral
Commission, with the support of UNAMI, to organize
and conduct the elections.
Following the appointment of the Speaker of
Parliament last month, the next stage, which is crucial,
will be the formation of a new Iraqi Government in
order to complete the reconstruction and stabilization
process and continue the positive engagement with
Arab and regional partners based on the principle of
good-neighbourliness. In that regard, we commend
the role of Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi and
his efforts to strengthen Iraq’s unity in the face of the
various challenges to be overcome.
Iraq continues to be subject to attempts to weaken
its security and stability and undermine its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. In that regard,
we reiterate our categorical rejection of continued
foreign interference in Iraq’s internal affairs under any
pretext. We also stress the importance of a commitment
to and respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs, in accordance
with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. Such a commitment is necessary to spare the
region further tension and violence and prevent threats
to regional and international peace and security.
In addition, we condemn the recent escalation of
terrorist attacks against officials, civilians and vital
infrastructure in Iraq, including the attack carried
out by Da’esh in Diyala governorate last January,
which killed 11 Iraqi soldiers. We express our sincere
condolences to the people and the Government of
Iraq and stress the importance of the international

22-2672713/17

S/PV.8975

The situation concerning Iraq

community’s continued support for Iraq so that it can
achieve security and implement the rule of law across
its territory. The international community should also
support Iraq’s efforts to combat the remnants of Da’esh
and other militias and terrorist groups, in accordance
with international law. Accordingly, we support Iraq’s
refusal to have its territory used as a foothold for any
terrorist act, whether in Iraq, the region or elsewhere.
Iraq is in dire need of international support
so that it can continue to implement development
and reconstruction programmes, promote peaceful
coexistence and consolidate the gains that it has
made to date. For its part, my country reiterates its
commitment to supporting Iraq’s efforts to rebuild
areas liberated from Da’esh and places that promote
religious coexistence, including by providing more than
$50 million to fund the joint project between UNESCO
and the United Arab Emirates to rebuild a mosque and
two churches in Mosul. The foundation stone of that
important project will soon be laid.
In parallel with those efforts, we stress the
importance of meeting the needs of Iraqi women,
especially given the horrific crimes to which they have
been subjected at the hands of Da’esh. Such efforts will
help to strengthen women’s participation in building
safe and stable societies. We also share the Iraqi
people’s aspiration for the full, meaningful and equal
participation of Iraqi women across all sectors.
On another note, we welcome the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 2621 (2022) two days
ago, commending Iraq’s successful repayment of all
compensation related to its invasion of Kuwait. We also
hail the progress made on the issue of missing Kuwaitis
and third-country nationals, including Kuwait’s
announcement last December that it had completed
DNA testing and analysis on all remains received from
Iraq in August 2019 and September 2020. We recognize
the need to continue making progress on this important
file and the issue of missing Kuwaiti property.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of respecting
Iraq’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. We also reiterate our commitment to supporting
Iraq and the aspirations of its brotherly people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
14/17

24/02/2022

We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Iraq. We
note the role and the contribution of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in ensuring
stabilization in the country.
We welcome the fact that the Government of
Iraq has implemented its international obligations to
compensate all claimants for the losses and damage
suffered as a result of the events of 1990. In that regard,
we welcome the final report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Compensation Commission
for Iraq (see S/2022/104, annex) and the adoption of
resolution 2621 (2022), which concluded its mandate.
We are concerned about the ongoing instability in
Iraq, which is exacerbated by the complex socioeconomic
situation, along with the spread of the coronavirus
disease. We hope that Iraq’s spare resources, which it
will have now that all compensation payments have
been made, will have a positive impact on the wellbeing of the Iraqi society. In turn, the international
community must support Baghdad as it drafts a package
of comprehensive measures aimed at rebuilding the
country’s socioeconomic and humanitarian sectors.
We welcome the endorsement late last year
of the results of elections to the Iraqi Council of
Representatives, held in October 2021. We trust that
the parties elected to the Parliament will agree, in a
timely manner, on a candidate for President and on the
composition of a new Government that should enjoy
the support of all major political factions and ethnic
and faith-based groups. We support the stabilization
of Iraq, including through the maintenance of security
and legal order. In that regard, we note with concern
the ongoing heightened terrorist threat. Despite Iraq’s
success in the area of counter-terrorism, the security
situation remains fragile due to, inter alia, the increase
in clandestine terrorist activity. We are convinced
that the only way to effectively counter the threat is
through the broadest-based coordination of counterterrorism efforts.
In that context, we commend the work of the
Baghdad Quadripartite Information Centre, involving
the militaries of Russia, Iraq, Iran and Syria. We
believe that the mechanism plays an important role in
coordinating counter-terrorism measures in Iraq and
Syria. We will continue to support Iraq in building
the capacity of its law enforcement bodies, first and
22-26727

24/02/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

foremost by promoting bilateral military and technical
cooperation. Nonetheless, we believe that it is crucial
for all parties involved in combating terrorism in Iraq to
respect the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate
their actions with the authorities in Baghdad. We
reiterate that any illegitimate military presence in Iraq
is unacceptable. Foreign military formations can be
deployed only upon the consent of local authorities or
based on a relevant Security Council resolution.
We note the progress in rebuilding trust and
settling existing disputes between Baghdad and Erbil.
Further improvement in their relations will help Iraq
to strengthen its security. Resolving current ethnic and
sectarian issues will enable the country’s economic
potential to be effectively harnessed for the benefit of
the entire Iraqi population.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that Iraq
must not become an arena for regional confrontation. For
our part, we highly appreciate Baghdad’s commitment
to building good-neighbourly relations, as well as the
diplomatic potential for regional de-escalation, on the
basis of resolution 598 (1987) and the Russian concept
of collective security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating His Excellency the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation on
the Russian presidency of the Security Council during
the month of February.

S/PV. 8975

and his two deputies. The Federal Supreme Court
is now assessing the eligibility of candidates for the
presidency of the Republic of Iraq, in accordance with
the provisions of the Iraqi Constitution. For its part,
the Government is considering ways to implement
the binding decisions issued recently by the Federal
Supreme Court.
Allow me to briefly mention the most important
developments in the post-election situation in Iraq.
With regard to the security situation, the Iraqi
Government would like to thank the Security Council
for its significant solidarity and support to the Iraqi
Government and people, demonstrated in two press
statements (SC/14725 and SC/14774) in which the
terrorist acts perpetrated in Iraq between November
2021 and February 2022 were condemned. We will
never allow terrorism to remain a hindrance to the
Government’s plans and efforts in various fields,
foremost of which are development, strengthening
security, stability and social peace.
Iraq reiterates its call for its territories not to be used
as an arena for settling scores or for advancing political
interests on the pretext of combating terrorism. That
would jeopardize its security and stability. We stress
respect for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular for the sovereignty of Member
States, good-neighbourly relations and the promotion
of cooperation. Iraq calls on the Security Council to
give serious consideration to those issues. All member
States must be totally committed to respecting the
aforementioned principles.

I also express my thanks and gratitude to Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for her briefing.

Iraq has demonstrated that it honours its
commitments, in particular the repatriation of Iraqis
detained in the Al-Hol camp in Syria. Over the past
three months, the Iraqi Government has repatriated
approximately 1,000 civilians in two stages. They
have returned to Jada’a-1 camp in Nineveh governorate
and have been provided with psychosocial and social
rehabilitation. Some 1,796 Iraqis have returned to
Iraq since May 2021. Similarly, Iraq repatriated 1,900
terrorists from Syrian camps.

The Federal Supreme Court certified the final
results of the parliamentary elections for 2021. The
Court also confirmed the decision of the Independent
High Electoral Commission. The decision was declared
to be in line with the Iraqi Constitution. The first
session of the Iraqi Parliament took place on 9 January
and resulted in the election of the Speaker of the House

We are extremely concerned about the recent attacks
perpetrated by Da’esh terrorist gangs on detention
prisons in Syria, which led to the escape of a number
of terrorist leaders who had been detained there. Iraq
therefore calls on the various regional and international
bodies to strengthen cooperation and redouble efforts
to more effectively combat the terrorist threat, in

I thank Her Excellency Ms. Mona Juul, Permanent
Representative of the Kingdom of Norway, for the
efforts she made during her presidency of the Council
in January.

22-2672715/17

S/PV.8975

The situation concerning Iraq

particular through the repatriation by Member States of
their citizens who are currently in Iraq and Syria.
While the international coalition’s combat role
in Iraq has come to an end, we continue to cooperate
with it in the context of providing support, advice and
training for Iraqi forces, in particular the Iraqi army,
in order to build capacity to protect our territories and
democratic institutions.
I would like now to refer to violations committed
by Turkey. The Turkish Parliament extended for two
further years the mandate to deploy military troops to
Iraq and Syria, as of 31 October 2021. This decision
violates Iraq’s sovereignty and demonstrates Turkey’s
indifference to Iraq’s efforts to foster dialogue on
wise measures and alternative options to address the
situation on the ground. In particular, Iraq stresses its
rejection of the use of its territories for settling accounts
or other political purposes under the pretext of fighting
terrorism and jeopardizing its security and stability.
With regard to the liberated areas, the secretariat
of the Council of Ministers continues to cooperate with
the United Nations Development Fund (UNDP) in Iraq
in implementing programmes and projects in liberated
areas and restoring stability there. It also helps displaced
persons who are returning voluntarily to their liberated
regions by implementing critical projects in the areas
of education, health and infrastructure. The Iraqi
Government is well known for not returning displaced
persons coercively. The Government has statistics
and an official database pertaining to the number of
returned people.
The Government has also been working on an
e-governance programme and a digital exchange
mechanism, in addition to a joint programme on
combating violent extremism. We have given priority
to societal reconciliation and organized training
workshops to improve skills, especially after extending
the UNDP programme in Iraq until 2023. We have
also made the second payment designated by the Iraqi
Government to support the programme with a view to
rehabilitating the liberated regions.
The Iraqi authorities have adopted administrative
regulations
to
facilitate
cooperation
with
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Iraq in the
area of providing humanitarian aid. We approved 419
out of 419 requests in December 2021 and January 2022.
16/17

24/02/2022

With regard to basic services, we have worked
to provide such services in the areas of health,
agriculture, housing and education, including projects
pertaining to water, roads and bridges, in addition to
Internet coverage.
With regard to women’s empowerment, we
continue to work towards empowering Iraqi women
and to provide them with social support, including
economic support for women by establishing a road
map and identifying priorities and needs, taking into
account federal budgets. We also identify expenses and
make sure to organize training sessions on preparing
the correct budgets.
Concerning the fight against the coronavirus
disease pandemic, the Ministry of Health has launched
an awareness campaign on protection from and
symptoms of the pandemic. We encourage citizens to
take the vaccines. Those over the age of 65 and all those
with health problems, in addition to health workers,
are authorized to take the booster vaccine. Moreover,
the Ministry of Health continues to undertake field
surveys for early identification of pandemic patients by
using rapid tests and vaccination campaigns at health
institutions, governmental institutions and universities.
So far, more than 8 million Iraqi citizens have received
at least one vaccine dose.
With regard to the relationships between Baghdad
and Erbil and between the Federal Government of
Baghdad and the Kurdistan Regional Government,
talks are being held at the highest levels, in particular to
resolve the outstanding issues, including those related
to the federal budget and coordination between the
Iraqi security forces and the Peshmerga forces, in order
to address security gaps and fight Da’esh. Moreover,
the Ministry of Finance recently approved a transfer
of 200 billion Iraqi dinars to the Kurdistan Regional
Government. That is the fifth such transfer to pay the
salaries of Kurdistan civil servants for November.
Concerning the fight against desertification
and climate change, projects are under way in the
governorate of Najaf to irrigate 100,000 acres and
combat desertification, spearheaded by the Ministry of
Water Resources.
With regard to the relationship with the sisterly
State of Kuwait, we are working to strengthen ties
with the State of Kuwait, which is a priority for Iraq,
in particular to ensure that the reparations dossier of
$52.4 billion is closed. Iraq is committed to honouring
22-26727

24/02/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8975

our commitments in that regard, notwithstanding the
challenges we had faced and our significant spending
on fighting terrorism. Furthermore, on 22 February,
the Security Council convened a historic meeting
(see S/PV.8972) at which the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Fuad Hussein, listened to the briefing
by the President of the United Nations Commission
on Compensation for Damage Resulting from Iraq’s
invasion of Kuwait in 1990. The Commission presented
its final report and confirmed that Iraq has fulfilled all
its obligations upon paying $52.4 billion in reparations
for more than 1.5 million claims all over the world.
Accordingly, resolution 2621 (2022) was adopted and
confirmed that the Iraqi Government has met all its
international commitments related to the losses caused
by the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in 1990.

The Ministry of Defence continues to contact
potential witnesses in that regard. On 1 November
2021, it met with a witness who claimed that he
had information on a site in Babel governorate. On
17 November 2021, an exploratory mission took place
in that region with the International Committee of
the Red Cross and in the presence of the witness. On
24 November, the Ministry of Defence also received a
call from another potential witness.

Iraq is firmly committed to turning the page on
the past with our neighbour sisterly Kuwait, and we
continue to give special priority to the missing-persons
and missing property dossiers under Chapter VI of
the Charter and in accordance with resolution 2107
(2013). During the most recent period, we provided the
Kuwaiti Embassy in Baghdad with information, books
and microfilms.

With regard to the Khamisiyah site, it could contain
up to 180 human remains. A request was submitted to
the International Committee of the Red Cross in order
to obtain satellite imagery of that site. That request was
also submitted to one of the members of the Technical
Subcommittee in November 2021. However, searches
for remains have not been decisive with one of the
witnesses until now. We have continued training Iraqi
personnel on a Greek device from 7 to 18 November
2021 in order to allow the exhumation of other deeply
buried human remains.

Concerning the missing-persons dossier, Kuwait
recently identified the remains of a number of Kuwaiti
citizens, which were exhumed in Samawah in Iraq and
moved to the State of Kuwait in 2019 and 2020. The
remains of 59 Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
were identified. Iraq welcomed the return by the State
of Kuwait of 6 unidentified remains to Iraq under the
supervision of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and with UNAMI’s support.
The Technical Subcommittee and the Tripartite
Commission recently held a meeting at which it was
decided that the search for missing Iraqi and Kuwaiti
persons would be expedited. Iraq is launching a
humanitarian appeal in Arabic and English to Iraqi
citizens or any person who has any information to
provide concerning the burial sites of Iraqi, Kuwaiti
or third-country human remains during the second
Gulf War or Kuwaiti property, including the Kuwaiti
national archives.

The Iraqi Ministry of Defence confirmed that it
was following up on the burial site with the relevant
authorities in the city of Salman Pak, based on the
information available. There are two other sites in the
city of Samawah believed to contain 151 human remains
in one of them. Eighty-nine of them were exhumed
while the other site contains 100 human remains.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his firm stance in supporting Iraq through
insisting on respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country. I also value the continued
support of the international community for Iraq and its
people to achieve prosperity and stability. I also value
in the name of the Republic of Iraq the efforts made by
the Head and staff of UNAMI. They have supported
Iraq in various fields, in particular at the humanitarian
and development levels during the period covered by
the Secretary-General’s report.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names on the list. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

22-2672717/17
