United Nations

A/RES/69/196

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 January 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2014
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/69/489)]

69/196. International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking
in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 66/180 of 19 December 2011 and 68/186 of
18 December 2013, entitled “Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice
responses to protect cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking”,
Recalling also the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/25 of 15 November
2000,1 as well as the United Nations Convention against Corruption, adopted by the
Assembly in its resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003,2
Recalling further the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, adopted
by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization on 14 November 1970,3 the Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported Cultural Objects, adopted by the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law on 24 June 1995,4 and the Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, adopted at The Hague on 14 May 1954, 5
and the two Protocols thereto, adopted on 14 May 19545 and 26 March 1999,6 and
other relevant conventions, and reaffirming the necessity for those States which
have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to and, as States parties,
implementing those international instruments,
Alarmed at the growing involvement of organized criminal groups in all forms
and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences, and observing
that illicitly trafficked cultural property is increasingly being sold through all kinds
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
3
Ibid., vol. 823, No. 11806.
4
Ibid., vol. 2421, No. 43718.
5
Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511.
6
Ibid., vol. 2253, No. 3511.
2

14-67686 (E)

*1467686*

Please recycle

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

of markets, inter alia, in auctions, in particular over the Internet, and that such
property is being unlawfully excavated and illicitly exported or imported with the
facilitation of modern and sophisticated technologies,
Recognizing the indispensable role of crime prevention and criminal justice
responses in combating all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and
related offences in a comprehensive and effective manner,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening crime
prevention and criminal justice responses to protect cultural property, especially
with regard to its trafficking,7
Welcoming the initiatives promoted within the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme network and the cooperative network
established among the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL), the International Institute for the Unification of
Private Law, the World Customs Organization and the International Council of
Museums in the area of protection against trafficking in cultural property, and
encouraging those entities to continue to play an active role in that area,
Recalling that the theme of the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015, will
be “Integrating crime prevention and criminal justice into the wider United Nations
agenda to address social and economic challenges and to promote the rule of law at
the national and international levels, and public participation”, and considering that
one of the workshops to be held within the framework of the Congress will focus on
strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice responses to evolving forms of
crime such as cybercrime and trafficking in cultural property, including lessons
learned and international cooperation,
Reiterating the significance of cultural property as part of the common
heritage of humankind and as unique and important testimony of the culture and
identity of peoples and the necessity of protecting cultural property, and reaffirming
in that regard the need to strengthen international cooperation in preventing,
prosecuting and punishing all aspects of trafficking in cultural property,
Recognizing that, in its resolution 66/180, it requested the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, in consultation with Member States and in
close cooperation, as appropriate, with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, INTERPOL and other competent international organizations, to
further explore the development of specific guidelines for crime prevention and
criminal justice responses with respect to trafficking in cultural property,
Recognizing also that, in its resolution 68/186, it welcomed the progress made
in exploring the development of non-binding guidelines on crime prevention and
criminal justice responses with respect to trafficking in cultural property, stressed
the need for their expeditious finalization, bearing in mind the importance of the
matter for all Member States, and requested the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime to reconvene the expert group on protection against trafficking in cultural
property for Member States to review and revise the draft guidelines, with a view to
finalizing and submitting the draft guidelines to the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-third session,
_______________
7

2/11

E/CN.15/2013/14.

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

Recognizing further that the International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and
Other Related Offences, contained in the annex to the present resolution, can be
considered by Member States in the development and strengthening of their
policies, strategies, legislation and cooperation mechanisms to prevent and combat
trafficking in cultural property and related offences in all situations,
1.
Welcomes the work of the meeting of the expert group on protection against
trafficking in cultural property held in Vienna from 15 to 17 January 2014 to finalize
the International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with
Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences;
2.
Adopts the International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related
Offences, contained in the annex to the present resolution, and underlines that the
Guidelines represent a useful framework to guide Member States in the development
and strengthening of their criminal justice policies, strategies, legislation and
cooperation mechanisms in the area of protection against trafficking in cultural
property and other related offences;
3.
Strongly encourages Member States to apply the Guidelines to the
maximum extent possible, where appropriate, in view of strengthening international
cooperation in this field;
4.
Encourages Member States to undertake efforts to overcome practical
difficulties in the implementation of the Guidelines in their constant endeavour to
combat trafficking in cultural property, in all situations and on the basis of common
and shared responsibility;
5.
Strongly encourages Member States to evaluate and review their
legislation and legal principles, procedures, policies, programmes and practices
related to crime prevention and criminal justice matters, in a manner consistent with
their legal systems and drawing upon the Guidelines, in order to ensure their adequacy
for preventing and combating trafficking in cultural property and related offences;
6.
Invites Member States and other relevant stakeholders attending the
Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to
discuss good practices and challenges in promoting international cooperation to
combat trafficking in cultural property under workshop 3 (Strengthening crime
prevention and criminal justice responses to evolving forms of crime such as
cybercrime and trafficking in cultural property, including lessons learned and
international cooperation);
7.
Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to
provide advisory services and technical assistance to Member States, upon request, in
the area of crime prevention and criminal justice responses with respect to trafficking
in cultural property and other related offences, in cooperation with relevant
international organizations and making use of the work of the institutes of the United
Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network, as appropriate;
8.
Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to make the
Guidelines widely available, including through the development of relevant tools,
such as handbooks and training manuals;
9.
Further requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, where
appropriate, in consultation with Member States, to develop a practical assistance
tool to assist in the implementation of the Guidelines, taking into consideration the
technical background document developed for the elaboration of the Guidelines and
the comments made by Member States;

3/11

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

10. Invites Member States to use all relevant tools developed by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, including the Sharing Electronic Resources and Laws
against Organized Crime knowledge management portal and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Database of National Cultural
Heritage Laws, and also invites Member States to provide to the Secretariat legislation
and case law related to trafficking in cultural property, for inclusion in the portal;
11. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary
resources for the purposes described above, in accordance with the rules and
procedures of the United Nations;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-fifth session on the implementation of
the present resolution.
73rd plenary meeting
18 December 2014

Annex
International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and
Other Related Offences
Introduction
1.
The International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related
Offences have been developed in recognition of the criminal character of such
offences and their devastating consequences for the cultural heritage of humankind.
Pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 66/180 and 68/186 and Economic and
Social Council resolution 2010/19, draft guidelines were developed by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in consultation with Member States and in close
cooperation, as appropriate, with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)
and other competent international organizations.
2.
The first draft of the guidelines was reviewed at an informal expert group
meeting, held from 21 to 23 November 2011, composed of 20 experts from around
the world with expertise in various fields related to the subject matter of the
guidelines, including representatives of INTERPOL, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the International Institute for
the Unification of Private Law. Based on the valuable comments and advice on
improving the draft, a second draft was presented to and discussed by the openended intergovernmental expert group on protection against trafficking in cultural
property at its second meeting, held from 27 to 29 June 2012. Taking into account a
compendium, prepared by the Secretariat, of comments made by Member States on
the draft guidelines, the expert group reviewed and revised the guidelines at its third
meeting, held from 15 to 17 January 2014, with a view to their finalization.
3.
The Guidelines are based on crime prevention and criminal justice aspects of
protection against trafficking in cultural property, taking into consideration a review
of current practices and initiatives in several countries in addressing the problem of
trafficking in cultural property, as well as principles and norms arising from the
4/11

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

analysis of the following international legal instruments: the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;8 the United Nations Convention
against Corruption;9 the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the
Event of Armed Conflict 10 and its First10 and Second Protocols; 11 the Protocol
additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the
protection of victims of international armed conflicts; 12 the Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property; 13 the Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported
Cultural Objects adopted by the International Institute for the Unification of Private
Law;14 and the Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage.15
4.
The present set of non-binding guidelines is available to Member States for
their consideration in the development and strengthening of crime prevention and
criminal justice policies, strategies, legislation and cooperation mechanisms to
prevent and combat trafficking in cultural property and related offences in all
situations. Their development follows the expression, by the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council in their resolutions, of alarm at the growing
involvement of organized criminal groups in all forms and aspects of trafficking in
cultural property and related offences, and of the need to promote international
cooperation to combat crime in a concerted manner.
5.
The Guidelines have the purpose of serving as a reference for national
policymakers and as a tool for capacity-building in the area of crime prevention and
criminal justice responses to trafficking in cultural property and related offences, in
coordination with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and other competent international organizations, as appropriate. On the
basis of the guidelines finalized by the intergovernmental expert group and
submitted to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, and taking
into consideration the technical background document containing the version of the
guidelines dated April 2012, and the comments made by Member States, the
Commission may ask the Secretariat to develop a practical assistance tool, as
appropriate, to aid in the implementation of the Guidelines.
6.

The Guidelines contain four chapters:

(a) Chapter I contains guidelines on crime prevention strategies (including
information and data collection, the role of cultural institutions and the private
sector, the monitoring of the cultural property market, imports and exports, and
archaeological sites, as well as education and public awareness);
(b) Chapter II contains guidelines on criminal justice policies (including
adherence to and implementation of relevant international treaties, the criminalization
of specific harmful conduct or the establishment of administrative offences, corporate
liability, seizure and confiscation and investigative measures);

_______________
8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
10
Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511.
11
Ibid., vol. 2253, No. 3511.
12
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
13
Ibid., vol. 823, No. 11806.
14
Ibid., vol. 2421, No. 43718.
15
Ibid., vol. 2562, No. 45694.
9

5/11

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

(c) Chapter III contains guidelines on international cooperation (including
matters related to jurisdictional basis, extradition, seizure and confiscation, and
cooperation among law enforcement and investigating authorities, as well as the
return, restitution or repatriation of cultural property);
(d) Chapter IV contains a guideline on the scope of application of the
Guidelines.
I.

Prevention strategies

A.

Information and data collection

Guideline 1. States should consider establishing and developing inventories or
databases, as appropriate, of cultural property for the purpose of protection against
its trafficking. The absence of registration of cultural property in such inventories
shall by no means exclude it from protection against trafficking and related
offences.
Guideline 2. States should consider, where possible under their national legislation,
the relevant cultural property as registered in the official inventory of a State that
has enacted laws on national or State ownership, provided that the owner State has
issued a public formal statement to that effect.
Guideline 3. States should consider:
(a) Introducing or improving statistics on import and export of cultural
property;
(b) Introducing or improving statistics, where practical, on administrative
and criminal offences against cultural property;
(c) Establishing or improving national databases, as appropriate, on
trafficking in cultural property and related offences and on trafficked, illicitly
exported or imported, stolen, looted, illicitly excavated or illicitly traded or missing
cultural property;
(d) Introducing mechanisms to enable the reporting of suspicious dealings or
sales on the Internet;
(e) Contributing to international data collection on trafficking in cultural
property and related offences through the United Nations Survey on Crime Trends
and Operations of Criminal Justice Systems, conducted by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and the INTERPOL database on stolen works of art and
through other relevant organizations;
(f) Contributing to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization database of national laws and regulations pertaining to cultural
property.
Guideline 4. States should consider, as appropriate, establishing a central national
authority or empowering an existing authority and/or enacting other mechanisms for
coordinating the activities related to the protection of cultural property against
trafficking and related offences.
B.

The role of cultural institutions and the private sector

Guideline 5. States should consider encouraging cultural institutions and the private
sector to adopt codes of conduct and to disseminate best practices on policies on the
acquisition of cultural property.
6/11

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

Guideline 6. States should encourage cultural institutions and the private sector to
report suspected trafficking in cultural property cases to law enforcement
authorities.
Guideline 7. States should consider promoting and supporting training on cultural
property regulations for cultural institutions and the private sector, in cooperation
with relevant international organizations, including rules on the acquisition of
cultural property.
Guideline 8. States should encourage, as appropriate, Internet providers and webbased auctioneers and vendors to cooperate in preventing trafficking in cultural
property, including through the adoption of specific codes of conduct.
C.

Monitoring

Guideline 9. States should consider, in accordance with the relevant international
instruments, introducing and implementing appropriate import and export control
procedures, such as certificates for the export and import of cultural property.
Guideline 10. States should consider creating and implementing monitoring
measures for the market of cultural property, including for the Internet.
Guideline 11. States should, where possible, create and implement programmes for
research, mapping and surveillance of archaeological sites for the purpose of
protecting them against pillage, clandestine excavation and trafficking.
D.

Education and public awareness

Guideline 12. States should consider supporting and promoting public awareness
campaigns, including through the media, to foster among the general public a
culture of concern about trafficking in cultural property, for the purpose of
protecting that cultural property against pillage and trafficking.
II.

Criminal justice policies

A.

International legal texts

Guideline 13. States should consider adopting legislation criminalizing trafficking in
cultural property and related offences in accordance with applicable existing
international instruments, in particular the Organized Crime Convention, relating to
trafficking in cultural property and related offences.
Guideline 14. In bilateral cooperation, States may consider making use of the model
treaty for the prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of peoples in
the form of movable property.16
B.

Criminal and administrative offences

Guideline 15. States should consider defining the concept of “cultural property”,
including movable and immovable cultural property, when necessary, for the
purposes of criminal law.
Guideline 16. States should consider criminalizing, as serious offences, acts such as:
(a)

Trafficking in cultural property;

_______________
16
Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana,
27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.1, annex.

7/11

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

(b)

Illicit export and illicit import of cultural property;

(c) Theft of cultural property (or consider elevating the offence of ordinary
theft to a serious offence when it involves cultural property);
(d)

Looting of archaeological and cultural sites and/or illicit excavation;

(e) Conspiracy or participation in an organized criminal group for trafficking
in cultural property and related offences;
(f) Laundering, as referred to in article 6 of the Organized Crime
Convention, of trafficked cultural property.
Guideline 17. States should consider introducing in their criminal legislation other
offences, such as damaging or vandalizing cultural property or acquiring, with
conscious avoidance of the legal status, trafficked cultural property, when such
offences are related to trafficking in cultural property.
Guideline 18. States should consider introducing obligations, as appropriate, to
report suspected cases of trafficking of and related offences against cultural property
and to report the discovery of archaeological sites, archaeological finds or other
objects of relevant cultural interest, and, for those States that have done so, to
criminalize the failure to meet those obligations.
Guideline 19. States should consider making it possible, in a way not contradictory
to their fundamental legal principles, to infer a perpetrator’s knowledge that an
object has been reported as trafficked, illicitly exported or imported, stolen, looted,
illicitly excavated or illicitly traded, on the basis of objective factual circumstances,
including when the cultural property is registered as such in a publicly accessible
database.
C.

Criminal and administrative sanctions

Guideline 20. States should consider providing proportionate, effective and
dissuasive sanctions for the above-mentioned criminal offences.
Guideline 21. States may consider adopting custodial sanctions for some selected
criminal offences so as to meet the standard, required under article 2 (b) of the
Organized Crime Convention, for “serious crime”.
Guideline 22. States should consider the adoption of bans and disqualifications, and
the revocation of licences, as complementary criminal or administrative sanctions
whenever possible.
D.

Corporate liability

Guideline 23. States should consider introducing or extending liability (criminal,
administrative or civil in nature) of corporations or legal persons for the abovementioned offences.
Guideline 24. States should consider introducing proportionate, effective and
dissuasive sanctions for corporate offences of trafficking in cultural property and
related offences, including fines, bans or disqualifications, revocation of licences
and revocation of benefits, including tax exemptions or government subsidies,
where possible.

8/11

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

E.

A/RES/69/196

Seizure and confiscation

Guideline 25. States should consider introducing criminal investigation and the
search, seizure and confiscation of trafficked cultural property, as well as the proceeds
of crimes related to such trafficking, and ensure its return, restitution or repatriation.
Guideline 26. States should consider, in a way not contradictory to their
fundamental legal principles, the possibility of requiring that the alleged offender,
the owner or the holder (if different) demonstrate the lawful origin of cultural
property liable to seizure or confiscation for trafficking or related offences.
Guideline 27. States should consider introducing confiscation of the proceeds of the
offence or of property of a value equivalent to such proceeds.
Guideline 28. States may consider using confiscated economic assets for financing
expenses for recovery and other prevention measures.
F.

Investigations

Guideline 29. States should consider creating specialized law enforcement bodies or
units, as well as providing specialized training for customs officials, law
enforcement personnel and public prosecutors, with regard to trafficking in cultural
property and related offences.
Guideline 30. States should consider enhancing coordination, at both the national
and international levels, among law enforcement bodies in order to increase the
probability of discovering and successfully investigating trafficking in cultural
property and related offences.
Guideline 31. States may consider, in the investigation of the above-mentioned
offences, especially if related to organized crime, allowing for the appropriate use
by their competent authorities of controlled delivery and other special investigative
techniques, such as electronic or other forms of surveillance and undercover
operations, within their territory, and allowing for the admissibility in court of
evidence derived therefrom.
III. Cooperation
A.

Jurisdiction

Guideline 32. States should consider establishing their jurisdiction over the abovementioned criminal offences when such offences are committed within their
territory or when committed outside their territory by one of their nationals, in a
manner consistent with the principles of sovereign equality, the territorial integrity
of States and non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other States, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and the Organized Crime Convention.
B.

Judicial cooperation in criminal matters

Guideline 33. States that have not yet done so should consider becoming parties to
existing international law instruments, in particular the Organized Crime
Convention, and use them as a basis for international cooperation in criminal
matters in respect of trafficking in cultural property and related offences.
Guideline 34. States should consider providing each other with the widest possible
mutual legal assistance in investigations, prosecutions and judicial proceedings in
relation to the above-mentioned offences, also in order to enhance the effectiveness
and speed of the procedures.
9/11

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

Guideline 35. States should contribute to and regularly update the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Database of National Cultural
Heritage Laws and any other relevant database.
C.

Extradition

Guideline 36. States should consider making the crimes against cultural property
enumerated in guideline 16 extraditable offences. In the context of extradition
procedures, States should also consider adopting and applying, where possible,
provisional measures to preserve the cultural property related to the alleged offence
for the purpose of restitution.
Guideline 37. States should consider enhancing the effectiveness and speed of
extradition for trafficking in cultural property and related offences, where such
offences are considered extraditable.
Guideline 38. States should consider, in the case of refusal of extradition only on the
basis of nationality, submitting the case, when requested by the State that had sought
extradition, to the competent authority in order to consider prosecution.
D.

International cooperation for purposes of seizure and confiscation

Guideline 39. States should consider cooperating in identifying, tracing, seizing and
confiscating trafficked, illicitly exported or imported, stolen, looted, illicitly
excavated, illicitly traded or missing cultural property.
Guideline 40. States may consider putting in place mechanisms to enable the
contribution of confiscated financial assets to international or intergovernmental
bodies concerned with the fight against transnational organized crime, including
trafficking in cultural property and related offences.
E.

International cooperation among law enforcement and investigating authorities

Guideline 41. States should consider enhancing the exchange of information on
trafficking in cultural property and related offences by sharing or interconnecting
inventories of cultural property and databases on trafficked, illicitly exported or
imported, stolen, looted, illicitly excavated, illicitly traded or missing cultural
property, and/or contributing to international ones.
Guideline 42. States should consider, where appropriate, in the framework of
international judicial cooperation, enhancing the exchange of information on
previous convictions and ongoing investigations relating to trafficking in cultural
property and related offences.
Guideline 43. States should consider concluding bilateral or multilateral agreements
or arrangements in order to establish joint investigative teams for trafficking in
cultural property and related offences.
Guideline 44. States should consider assisting each other in planning and
implementing specialized training programmes for law enforcement personnel.
Guideline 45. States should consider enhancing or establishing privileged channels
of communication between their law enforcement agencies.
F.

Return, restitution or repatriation

Guideline 46. States should consider, in order to enhance international cooperation
in criminal matters, undertaking appropriate measures to recover trafficked, illicitly
10/11

International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses
with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences

A/RES/69/196

exported or imported, stolen, looted, illicitly excavated or illicitly traded cultural
property for the purpose of their return, restitution or repatriation.
Guideline 47. States should consider pondering, procedurally, as appropriate, the
owner State’s provisions on national or State ownership in order to facilitate the
return, restitution or repatriation of public cultural property.
IV.

Scope of application

Guideline 48. States should consider applying the Guidelines in any situations,
including exceptional circumstances, that foster trafficking in cultural property and
related offences, in the framework of the above-mentioned conventions and other
relevant international instruments.

11/11
