A /73/PV.40

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

40th plenary meeting

Monday, 26 November 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hoshino
(Japan), Vice-President, took the Chair.

(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

(j) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of la
Francophonie

Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/328)
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union

(k) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/111)

(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe;

(c) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Organization

(m) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Community of Central African
States

(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States

(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons

(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American Caribbean Economic
System
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community

Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/97)
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-40102 (E)

*1840102*

A/73/PV.40

(r) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/73/L.24)
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central European Initiative
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States

26/11/2018

affiliates, as well as making full use of INTERPOL
capabilities in this regard, should not be limited solely
to strengthening international efforts aimed at ensuring
that refugee status is not abused by terrorists, but rather
should be used in all screening of travellers.
We also note our understanding that refugee status
is not abused when it is granted in accordance with
States obligations under international law. We hope that
these clarifications are helpful to other Member States
in consideration of resolution 73/11.
Furthermore, we want to clarify our support for
the issuance of INTERPOL notices. These notices
should adhere to law-enforcement and international
human rights standards, and we denounce all efforts by
Member States to use these measures to target religious
and political dissidents, including China’s misuse of
INTERPOL notices to target Uighurs.

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote or position after adoption, may I
remind delegations that such explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

Finally, we want to reiterate our recognition of
INTERPOL as an apolitical international organization
that respects the sovereignty of Member States, but
stress the importance of the organization choosing
individuals for positions of responsibility from
countries that demonstrate a clear commitment to
transparency and the rule of law. We remain concerned
about the disappearance and detention of Meng
Hongwei and its implications for a key international
law-enforcement agency. Going forward, we urge
Member States to continue to elect and support leaders
in key positions within the organization who will
promote, not undermine, the values and practices that
make INTERPOL such a vital international body.

Mr. Simcock (United States of America): The
United States believes that INTERPOL serves an
important role in combating crime and encouraging
international cooperation in crime prevention and
criminal justice matters.

Mr. Kashaev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We make this statement in explanation of
position after the adoption of resolution 73/15, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe” (see A/73/PV.39).

The United States supports the intent of resolution
73/11, which is to ensure the continued coordination
between the United Nations and INTERPOL.
However, we believe that some of the language in the
resolution might be misconstrued. In order to avoid
such a misunderstanding, we would like to clarify our
understanding of paragraph 2. In particular, we want
to clarify that the term “in this context” with respect
to information-sharing refers broadly to counterterrorism efforts. We stress that information-sharing
for terrorist-screening purposes, which increases the
chances of positive identification of terrorists and their

The Russian Federation supports resolution 73/15
and, in general, is in favour of developing cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
We believe that the resolution will give new impetus
to cooperation between the two organizations on a
wide range of matters. One aim of this cooperation
is preventing violence against women, as declared in
the Council of Europe’s Istanbul Convention. Russia
stands ready to continue to develop cooperation with
the United Nations and the Council of Europe on
this important matter. At the same time, the Istanbul
Convention itself contains provisions that run counter

(x) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Organization for Migration
(y) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)
(z) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea

2/5

18-40102

26/11/2018

to Russian legislation, Russia’s family-policy concept
document, and principled approaches to the protection
and promotion of traditional family values.
Moreover, with respect to the Council of Europe’s
platform for the protection of journalists, we note that
it was created in the absence of consensus and reflects
the opinion of a narrow group of non-governmental
organizations. The platform itself is not a mechanism
for monitoring treaty obligations in the framework
of the Council of Europe. Therefore, we believe it
premature to refer to the experience of the functioning
of the structure as positive.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I remind
him that statements in the exercise of the right of reply
are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and
to five minutes for the second intervention and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Al-Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would like to exercise
its right of reply to address the misconceptions and
unfounded accusations made by the observer of the
League of Arab States at this morning’s plenary under
agenda item 128 (d), entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States” (see
A/73/PV.39).
At the outset, my delegation states that it will never
stoop to the level of the Arab League observer, who
was aggressive and unprofessional when he spoke about
Syria, one of the founding members of the League.
Syria will always be in favour of Arab cooperation.
In that context, we officially underscore that, during
today’s afternoon break, we contacted a large number
of representatives of Arab States, who categorically
confirmed to us that the observer’s attacks and
unfounded accusations against the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic were not part of the original
statement, which was supposed to reflect the position
of the Arab League on the item under discussion. They
assured us that the Arab League observer had gone
beyond the bounds of his mandate, thereby confirming
our assertion this morning that the Governments of one
or two States members of that regional organization
have hijacked and monopolized the decisions and
positions of the Arab League.

A/73/PV.40

I would like now to address the Charter of the
League of Arab States, which is the organization’s
founding law, and the minutes of its official meetings.
The observer of the Arab League, who is a diplomat
and a former professional ambassador, claimed
before the Assembly this morning that the decision to
suspend Syria’s membership in the League was legal
and unanimous. I call on that professional diplomat to
review the minutes of the 12 November 2011 meeting
of the Foreign Ministers of the League. According
to the record of that meeting, three member States
expressed their opposition and reservations with regard
to the decision to suspend Syria’s membership of the
League. Furthermore, that professional diplomat stated
that the decision to suspend Syria’s membership in the
League was legal even though he is fully aware that
the League’s Charter explicitly states that a member
can be suspended only at a summit meeting and by the
unanimous decision of all member States. I do not wish
to dwell on the details, and we do not have a problem
with the League as an organization, but we will never
remain silent when someone attempts to misrepresent
or distort the truth.
I would ask the observer and the members of the
Assembly to take a look at the record of the meeting
which I have referred to so that they may verify the truth
of what I am saying. On 12 November 2011, the Chair
of the Arab League Council, who was then the Prime
Minister of Qatar, submitted a draft decision to suspend
Syria’s membership. The Permanent Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic asked the Secretary-General
of the League to let the Council members read the
advisory opinion issued by the organization’s Office
of Legal Affairs on the question of suspension of
membership, which explicitly stated that the decision
to suspend a League member is similar to a decision to
expel a League member. Such a decision should be taken
by member States at a summit meeting and adopted
unanimously. As a founding member of the League of
Arab States, we respect the stature and history of the
organization. For that reason, I will not delve into the
pressures to which the Secretary-General of the League
was subjected in order to keep that advisory opinion
from being made public to the member States.
The Arab League observer told the Assembly today
that the League did not impose any unilateral coercive
economic measures against the Syrian people. I believe
that the untruth of that statement will be ascertained
by reference to decision No. 7442, adopted by the Arab

18-401023/5

A/73/PV.40

League in November 2011, which imposed a number
of unilateral coercive economic measures against
Syria, including the suspension of transactions with the
Central Bank of Syria; the suspension of governmental
trade exchanges with the Syrian Government; the
freezing of Syrian Government financial assets; the
suspension of financial transactions with the Syrian
Government; the suspension of all transactions with
the Commercial Bank of Syria; the suspension of all
funding by Arab central banks to trade exchanges
involving the Commercial Bank of Syria; a request to
Arab central banks to monitor financial transactions
and commercial credits; the suspension of all funding
by Arab States for projects on Syrian territories;
a request to all Arab airlines to stop their flights
to and from Syria; and — the following is a strange
measure — the suspension of all the broadcasting of
Syrian Government and private channels through
Arab satellites.
I would like to ask the Arab League observer the
following question. If the foregoing measures do not
amount to an economic embargo against the Syrian
people, how does he comprehend the unilateral coercive
economic measures that the United Nations rejects,
condemns and calls for an end to?
The Acting President: I request the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to kindly wrap up his
statement, as 10 minutes have elapsed.
Mr. Al-Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): In conclusion, we in Syria continue to
believe that the League of Arab States can regain its
role and credibility. However, what we heard today
from the League Observer confirms what we said this
morning, namely, that there is a movement afoot within
the organization to co-opt its decisions and stances
and to oppose and silence the majority of the League
membership, which supports in deeds and not only in
words, the efforts that the Syrian Government is making
to eliminate terrorism and move forward with a Syrianled political process free of any foreign interference,
while ensuring the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, reconstruction and recovery.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (k), (l), (o), (u), (v), (w) and
(y) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
4/5

26/11/2018

The Acting President: I would like to appeal
to those Member States intending to submit draft
resolutions on the remaining sub-items to do so as soon
as possible.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of the item and the remaining
sub-items.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
Draft resolution (A/73/L.20)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Mexico to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.20.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour for Mexico to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.20, on the impact of rapid technological change
on the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and targets.
Mexico is convinced that the General Assembly is
the ideal space to raise awareness among States and in
our societies about the paradigm shift of technological
progress. This year we have witnessed the profound
multidimensional effects of rapid technological change,
which affect all countries in the economic, social and
environmental spheres. New technologies can change
the destiny of our nations and communities and are
potential tools for States and agencies of the system to
implement public policies to achieve the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
The draft resolution before us seeks to strengthen
the United Nations architecture with regard to rapid
technological change and the SDGs and their 169 targets.
It calls for coordination, which currently does not exist,
between the Technology Facilitation Mechanism and its
three components and the Commission on Science and
Technology for Development. Artificial intelligence
is mentioned as a key element among the technologies
that can help meet the 2030 Agenda. We call for the
issue of technological change to be included as a topic
in the next follow-up cycle of the implementation of
the Agenda and in the work of the high-level political
forum and for its discussion in the regular agenda of the
Assembly to be ensured.
18-40102

26/11/2018

We are working to forge stronger links and
coordination within the United Nations system to take
advantage of the opportunities presented by rapid
technological change. The emergence of these new
technologies, in particular that of artificial intelligence,
represents an evolutionary and existential challenge for
humankind. The debate must be broad and translated
into positive elements for our societies.
As the Foreign Minister of Mexico pointed out in
the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.22), the future of
humankind, in the light of these new technologies, is
neither predestined nor unchangeable. It depends on the
actions and decisions that we take together.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.20,
entitled “Impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

A/73/PV.40

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.20, the following countries have also become
sponsors of: Andorra, Colombia, France, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Panama, South Africa, Switzerland and
the United Kingdom.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.20?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/17).

A/73/L.20

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 133?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

18-401025/5
