UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3293
16 October 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-THIRD MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Saturday, 16 October 1993, at 10 a.m.

President:

(Brazil)

Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. SARDENBERG

Mr. RICHARDSON
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86903 (E)

S/PV.3293
2
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE QUESTION CONCERNING HAITI
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Canada and Haiti,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with

the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Longchamp (Haiti) took
a place at the Council table; Mr. Malone (Canada) took the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document S/26586,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Canada,
France, the United States of America and Venezuela.
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council
to document S/26587, which contains the text of a letter dated
15 October 1993 from the President of the Republic of Haiti
addressed to the Secretary-General.
The first speaker is the representative of Haiti, on whom I
now call.

S/PV.3293
3
Mr. LONGCHAMP (Haiti) (interpretation from French):

I

should like first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for this month and to
wish you success in discharging your mandate.
The circumstances compelling the Council to meet today are
extremely grave.

As all are aware, last Thursday, 14 October, the

Malval Government’s Minister of Justice, Mr. Guy Malary, while in
the company of three other individuals, was assassinated by a
commando group that riddled his car with bullets before leaving the
scene calmly and without fear of apprehension.

That crime revolted

the Government and threw the population into a state of
consternation, and it shows clearly that there is no longer any
limit to violence in Haiti.
Mr. Guy Malary was an eminent jurist, a confirmed democrat and
a true patriot who wanted the well-being of his country.

He was

profoundly committed to the noble cause of a better Haiti for the
young generation, in particular for his five-year-old son.

Since

his appointment to office he had discharged admirably the immense
task of bringing to the Haitian people an effective judicial system
within the rule of law that my Government wishes to install.
Since the signing of the Governors Island Agreement, groups of
armed civilians, commonly known as "attachés" - who, by all
accounts, are auxiliary personnel of the Armed Forces and the
police - have been waging a terror campaign to intimidate anyone
who in any way, from within or without the country, wants to help
restore democracy in Haiti.
The assassination of Minister Malary is very revealing of that
sector’s systematic opposition to the transition process and to the
return of President Aristide.

Minister Malary was precisely the

person charged with presenting to the Haitian Parliament a bill on
the separation of the Police and the Armed Forces and on the
establishment of the future police force of which he was to take

S/PV.3293
4
(Mr. Longchamp, Haiti)
control, as well as on the reform of the judicial system.
This act and those responsible for it should be condemned in
the sternest terms by the international community.

The

international community must make it clear beyond all doubt to the
perpetrators of that crime that it is determined to carry out to
the end the process of restoring democracy.

A handful of criminals

cannot be allowed to defy with impunity the international community
and hold hostage an entire people that desires to recover its
rights and its freedom.
So that Mr. Malary’s death will not be in vain and so that the
long list of victims of repression will be closed out, it is
important that the Council monitor strictly the application of
measures reimposed under resolution 873 (1993).

The more these

measures are respected, the faster and surer will be the results,
which will put an end to the suffering of a people that has already
made so many sacrifices for the sake of democracy.
The international community must bring pressure to bear so
that all the provisions of the Governors Island Agreement and the
New York Pact will be complied with and so that Haiti will finally
regain peace, which will allow its people to live in security and
its sons and daughters to stop paying with their lives, as did
Mr. Guy Malary, for their dream of seeing democracy and the rule of
law flourish.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Haiti for

his kind words addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any

objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements before the voting.

S/PV.3293
5
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

We meet today

in a spirit of sadness, anger and determination.
Five days ago Haiti’s military leaders violated a solemn
Agreement reached at Governors Island last July to resolve
peacefully the governmental crisis in their country.

Armed

demonstrators acting with police and military support created an
intolerable situation in Port-au-Prince.

Canadian and United

States troops, on a United Nations mission, could not enter Haiti
under those conditions.

This personnel, sent in peace at the

request of the Haitian Government, was not armed for combat and had
no desire for confrontation.

In the absence of the secure

environment repeatedly promised by the Haitian military, we refused
to put the personnel ashore.
Because Haiti’s military leaders violated the Governors Island
Agreement, this Council voted unanimously on 13 October to reimpose
mandatory economic sanctions, including a ban on shipments of
petroleum and petroleum products to Haiti.

In demonstration of our

continued desire for cooperation rather than confrontation, we also
extended to Haiti’s military an invitation and an opportunity to
reconsider the fateful course upon which it had embarked.
Two days ago our invitation met with gunfire.

Guy Malary,

Haiti’s courageous new Minister of Justice, was murdered in broad
daylight and in cold blood.

This was an act of profound cowardice.

The individuals responsible for this heinous crime betrayed their
country and their countrymen.
Today, for the second time in four days, the Security Council
meets to restate its commitment to the Governors Island Agreement
and to the peaceful return of elected President
Jean-Bertrand-Aristide.

Together we have recognized the need to

act promptly and firmly.

The draft resolution we are voting for

today calls upon all States to cooperate in ensuring that no ships

S/PV.3293
6
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
arrive in Haiti in violation of the economic sanctions previously
adopted.
We understand with sorrow that this course, chosen not by us
but by Haiti’s military leaders, may cause additional suffering to
the vast majority of Haitian citizens who desire only peace,
freedom and economic opportunity.

It is contrary to our every

desire that such hardships should be imposed.

But we take solace

in our knowledge that the purpose of these sanctions is ultimately
to relieve hardship and to liberate Haiti from the stranglehold now
inflicted by a small group of wilful, misguided men.
The economic sanctions which this body is now determined to
enforce will not enter into effect until Monday.

We call upon

Haiti’s military leaders to take immediate steps this weekend to
reaffirm their commitment to the Governors Island Agreement.

There

is still time for them to heed the will of their own people and the
will of the international community.
The course of events in Haiti in recent days has been deeply
disappointing to us all.

Those responsible have done a grave

disservice to themselves and to their country.
was not necessary.

This confrontation

This killing is without purpose.

has gone on too long.

The suffering

But our sadness and our shock only add to

our resolve and to the resolve of free people everywhere to end the
crisis in Haiti and to do so in a manner that will lay the
groundwork for social and economic progress, safeguarded by
democratic rule.
Finally, let me say this to those who continue to thwart the
return of democracy to the troubled nation of Haiti.

After today’s

action by the Security Council there should be no doubt about the
determination of the United States and the community of nations.
My Government will use its diplomatic and military power to see

S/PV.3293
7
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
that economic sanctions work and to ensure that these sanctions
serve to shield the flickering flame of Haitian democracy.
Mr. OLHAYE (Djibouti):

Along with the international

community, I am sure, my delegation has reacted with both shock and
sadness to the violent intransigence of the Haitian junta.

We had

held the desperate hope that the disintegration of that unfortunate
country would end with the signing of the Governors Island
Agreement just three months ago.

There can be no doubt, however,

that, with the public execution two days ago of the Minister of
Justice of the democratically elected Government of
President Aristide, the junta is prepared not only to defy the
Haitian people but the entire world.

Coming as this event does

directly on the heels of the refusal to allow the United Nations
training team to disembark and deploy, it would appear that the
whole military and police apparatus in Haiti is above and beyond
any law or legal control.
We can but totally agree with Prime Minister Robert Malval
when he laments that:
"We have the legitimate power; they have the force.
us face it.

But let

Where are we going to get security?"

That is pointedly the same question we face in this Council, for in
Haiti today there is no security for members of the transitional
Government, whose lives are now shown to be in serious jeopardy, or
for United Nations military and police personnel, who are confined
and prepared to flee at any time, or even for the vast majority of
Haitians who believe in and support the democratic rule of law.
The head of the junta apparently claims to be willing to step
down, as he agreed in the Governors Island Agreement, if Parliament
passes a suitable amnesty, yet we find this same institution
deliberately hampered in its deliberations to consider such a
motion.

S/PV.3293
8
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
The ground has been laid, it seems, for a rejection of both the
terms and the spirit of the accord and for the military and police
to continue their stranglehold on and domination of this desperate
country.

Hope for continued progress in restoring democracy is

being undone, and again the resolve of the Council and the
international community is being tested.

Consequently, we see no

alternative but to reimpose the sanctions we so recently suspended,
as we did on Wednesday with the support of President Aristide.
Given the continuing oppression and killing, we can only conclude
the junta fails to appreciate the depth of our resentment at their
persistent and flagrant violations.
Therefore, my delegation totally supports the additional
embargo measures proposed in the draft resolution before the
Council today.

If the junta is prepared quickly to show its

defiance, the Council must likewise demonstrate that it is ready to
raise the cost.

Consequently, my delegation welcomes the

deployment of naval vessels by the United States to Haitian waters.
This will buttress the capacity of the United Nations to interdict
all shipping bound to and from Haiti to prevent any
sanctions-busting.

We have no doubt that this step will encourage

all members to cooperate in this endeavour to their fullest extent.
We highly laud the steadfast determination of Mr. Dante Caputo and
his aides to stay the course in the face of pervasive risks to
their lives.
In the end, though, we are saddened by the necessity for such
measures, for undoubtedly they will most heavily affect the Haitian
people who can least bear it.

If reports that the junta has

anticipated these steps and is well supplied with oil and arms are
true, we can expect a lengthy confrontation before the situation is
reduced to a totally unacceptable level.

This will only call for

additional and stronger Council measures.

But the junta and the

S/PV.3293
9
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
police must have no illusions; they must understand that we are
going to take the steps necessary to restore democracy and finally
end the terrible ordeal of the people of Haiti.
Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
The international community has an irrevocable commitment to
democracy in Haiti.

This Organization and the Organization of

American States (OAS) facilitated the electoral process of
December 1990 and of 1991, which enabled the people of Haiti, for
the first time in their history, democratically and freely to elect
those governing them.

The universal condemnation of the

coup d’état of September 1991, which frustrated the hopes for
democracy that had emerged from those elections, and the successive
efforts by the United Nations and the OAS to restore democratic
order in Haiti have been made clear by the various resolutions
adopted by both organizations.
The commitment made to Haiti by the international community
would appear to be on the verge of coming to naught as a result of
the behaviour of the military and police authorities of Haiti, who,
in open defiance of the United Nations, continues to promote and
encourage acts of harassment and aggression against the legitimate
Government of Haiti and against the international community, as
represented by the OAS and United Nations missions in Haiti.
The assassination of the Minister of Justice of Haiti and of
those who were with him is yet another step in the escalation of
violence going on in Haiti to obstruct international action violence to which the military authorities, and more specifically
those who control the police force in that country, remain
indifferent and complaisant.
The threats against the United Nations officials - in
particular against the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Dante Caputo - and the demonstrations in the capital show that the

S/PV.3293
10
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
military and police authorities continue to be opposed to
fulfilling the commitments solemnly entered into in the Governors
Island Agreement, and have pledged themselves to prevent their
fulfilment.
The recent events in Haiti and the general insecurity
prevailing in that country, which have prevented the deployment of
the United Nations Mission and led to the evacuation of
international personnel already there, constitutes open contempt
for the will of the international community, as expressed in
Council resolutions, in its efforts to restore democratic order and
its determination to ensure the conditions for the consolidation of
democratic legality in that country.
Today we find ourselves faced with grave new developments.
They suggest the impossibility of translating into reality the
commitment to ensure the return of President Aristide on 30 October
and jeopardize the entire international effort to restore democracy
in Haiti.

S/PV.3293
11
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
In the face of these developments we have no alternative but
to exercise the options afforded by the Charter.

In so doing the

Council adopted resolution 873 (1993), thus showing the
international community’s resolute determination.

The draft

resolution we are considering today is aimed at complementing that
resolution and at ensuring its effective implementation.

For these

reasons Venezuela, together with the other countries members of the
group of "Friends of the Secretary-General for Haiti", is
submitting for the approval of the Security Council draft
resolution S/26586, which, we trust, will be unanimously adopted as
further confirmation of the international community’s resolve.
In conclusion, I should like to express utter repudiation and
condemnation of the assassination of the Minister of Justice for
Haiti.

From this forum we convey our condolences to President

Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to the lawful Government of Haiti, and to
the late Minister’s widow and family.
Finally, we call upon the Haitian authorities to identify and
punish those responsible for this crime and to take effective
measures to avoid a repetition of such abhorrent assassinations,
the ultimate purpose of which is obviously to terrorize political
leaders and the public and to frustrate United Nations action to
promote democracy in Haiti.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
In recent days the international community has been deeply shaken
by the latest episode of violence perpetrated by forces opposed to
the restoration of democratic order in Haiti, when groups of armed
civilians, in open defiance of the United Nations, assassinated the
Minister of Justice of the lawful Government of Haiti,

S/PV.3293
12
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
Mr. François-Guy Malary and other individuals.
This grave, condemnable development is, unfortunately, part
and parcel of the virtual refusal of the military authorities and
those responsible for security in Haiti to comply with Security
Council resolutions and Agreements they themselves had entered into
for the restoration of constitutional normalcy in Haiti.
The total impunity with which groups of armed civilians are
sowing terror among the people at large, thanks to the complicity
of the de facto authorities, reveals that the latter still intend
to test the limits of the international community’s patience.
The draft resolution before the Council is based on
Chapters VII and VIII of the Charter; its sole purpose is to ensure
the effective enforcement of the embargo measures adopted under
Security Council resolutions 841 (1993) and 873 (1993).

We wish to

emphasize that those measures are not aimed at the people or the
lawful Government of Haiti, whose President,
Mr. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, has requested the Council to ask States
Members of the United Nations to take the necessary action to
implement those measures.

Indeed, given the exceptional present

circumstances, this draft resolution is aimed at a minority that
are oppressing the people of Haiti and cynically standing in the
way of compliance with the Agreements to which, just a few short
months ago, they lent their assent.

In so doing, that minority is

showing contempt not only for the majority will of the people of
Haiti itself, but for the international community as well.
My delegation stresses the continuing validity of the

S/PV.3293
13
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
statement by the President of the Security Council issued on
17 September last, in which the Council put the de facto
authorities on notice that they would be held responsible for the
security and safety of United Nations personnel in Haiti.

Today we

firmly reiterate that warning.
I take this occasion to pay tribute to the work done in Haiti
by Mr. Dante Caputo and by the staff of the United Nations and the
Organization of American States (OAS), who have shown valour and
selflessness in the service of the mission entrusted to them.
Last week the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Haiti,
Mrs. Claudette Werleigh, in her statement to the General Assembly,
made an appeal to the international community to keep up the
pressure on the forces thwarting the Haitian people’s aspirations
for democracy.

The Security Council is today demonstrating that

this appeal has not gone unheard and that the international
community remains committed to restoring democracy and
constitutional order to Haiti, under conditions that would favour
national reconciliation among all those truly prepared in good
faith to join this process.
For all these reasons, the delegation of Spain will vote in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by Canada, France, the
United States, and Venezuela.
Mr. JESUS (Cape Verde):

My country fully shares the

disappointment of the Council and the world at the deliberate
failure of the Armed Forces of Haiti to abide by their obligations
under the Governors Island Agreement.
After much suffering inflicted upon the Haitian people as a
result of the coup d’état that deposed democratically elected
President Aristide, and after great effort on the part of the
international community to restore the democratic regime and bring

S/PV.3293
14
(Mr. Jesus, Cape Verde)
stability to that country, we are still faced with a recalcitrant
group of people that insist on ruling the country militarily, using
violence and killings and plunging the Haitian people into an even
more desperate situation.
The Council should make it unambiguously clear to the illegal
military and police rulers of Haiti that they will be held
responsible for the killings committed to keep them in power.
We regret deeply that the United Nations Mission in Haiti has
been prevented from carrying out its mandate.

We take this

opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Dante Caputo for his personal
commitment to the restoration of democracy in Haiti.

We admire his

courage and that of all the military personnel responsible for his
safety.
The illegal rulers of Haiti must know that acts of
intimidation and wanton violence, which they have regularly used to
maintain themselves in power - such as the recent assassination of
the Minister of Justice - will only strengthen the determination of
the Council and of the whole world to restore the democratic regime
in Haiti and bring the elected President back to power.
This determination on the part of the Security Council has
been shown by the reimposition of sanctions this week.

Today we

are taking further steps by adopting measures to monitor and ensure
compliance with and implementation of the sanctions imposed.

My

delegation could not agree more with such a decision of the Council.
The PRESIDENT:

I now put to the vote the draft resolution

contained in document S/26586.

S/PV.3293
15
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 875 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.

S/PV.3293
16
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

The

unanimous adoption of this resolution, which strengthens the
measures contained in resolution 873 (1993), adopted barely three
days ago, attests to the Security Council’s unswerving
determination to secure full implementation of the Governor’s
Island Agreement.

Those measures are part of a clear-cut political

strategy that will also form the basis of the international
community’s reactions to subsequent developments in the situation
in Haiti.
France was deeply moved by the base crime perpetrated against
Mr. Guy Malary, Minister of Justice, who had loyally served the
legal Government.

It strongly condemns those responsible for that

assassination as well as for any other violent act.

A process of

peace and restoration of democracy in a country cannot be held
hostage to a few armed individuals.

My Government would recall

that it is incumbent upon the military authorities to restore
public order, to ensure the safety of members of the legal
Government headed Mr. Robert Malval and to make it possible for the
United Nations Mission in Haiti to be deployed without delay.
This is not the first time that the Security Council has
implemented measures calling for the use of maritime monitoring of
the implementation of sanctions.

In our view, those rules of

engagement, which have proved their effectiveness, must be based on
established rules.
France is of the view that the withdrawal of the
Commander-in-Chief of the Police Force and of the Commander-inChief of the Armed Forces of Haiti must occur immediately, in
keeping with items 7 and 8 of the Governor’s Island Agreement.
My Government will continue to take steps to help to bring
about the return of President Aristide on 30 October and the full
restoration of the rule of law in Haiti.

S/PV.3293
17
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

Hungary

voted in favour of resolution 875 (1993) on Haiti and, in light of
the very serious and urgent turn of events in that Caribbean
country, we support its prompt implementation.

The measures

contained in the resolution are a logical step in the policies the
Security Council is pursuing with regard to the military
authorities in Haiti.
We consider it to be intolerable that that regime is able to
continue with total impunity to defy the relevant resolutions of
the Council and to obstruct implementation of the will of the
international community.
We are particularly pleased with the firmness with which the
Council has taken action to see to it that its own resolutions are
respected.

We feel that the same firmness and commitment are also

required in other conflict situations in order to preserve the
credibility of our actions and to see to it that our resolutions
are not ignored by those - whoever they may be - to whom our
warnings are directed.
Hungary hopes that the recent position taken by the Security
Council with regard to the crisis in Haiti, including today’s
action, will promote an effective and integral implementation of
the Governors Island Agreement, the return of President Aristide to
Port-au-Prince and the restoration of democracy in Haiti.
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is deeply concerned with the recent
developments in Haiti.

We have taken note of the unswerving

efforts made by the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and the Organization of American States (OAS) for the political
settlement of the Haitian question and hope that these efforts will
help curb and end the recent recurring violence in Haiti.
China has all along supported the peace process in Haiti and

S/PV.3293
18
(Mr. Li Zhaoxing,(China)
urged the Haitian parties concerned to cooperate fully with the
international community and the United Nations, to adopt forthwith
practical and effective measures and to implement strictly the
Governors Island Agreement, the New York Pact and the relevant
Security Council resolutions in order to create conditions for an
early restoration of peace and stability in Haiti.
The Security Council, in handling the Haitian question, should
fully solicit and respect the views of the OAS and the Latin
American countries and bring their role into full play.

Given the

unique and exceptional situation now prevailing in Haiti, and in
light of the formal request of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide,
supported by the Latin American countries and the OAS, the Chinese
delegation voted in favour of the resolution just adopted.
The measures authorized in the resolution are special actions
taken under the unique and exceptional circumstances in Haiti, and
they should not establish a precedent.

We always hold that all

international disputes should be settled by peaceful means and
oppose the use or threat of force.

The fact that we voted in

favour of the resolution does not mean any change in our position.
Meanwhile, in carrying out measures authorized by the resolution,
countries should take only actions commensurate with the specific
situations prevailing at the time, strengthen coordination with the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative and
keep the Security Council informed on a regular basis.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):
profoundly discouraging one.

This past week has a been a
Japan condemns in the strongest

possible terms the recent tragic events in Port-au-Prince.

Haiti’s

military rulers and the thugs and assassins they recruit must be
made to realize that they are fighting a losing battle.

Their

actions will only delay, but never prevent, the restoration of

S/PV.3293
19
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
democracy in Haiti, and it is particularly important for the
Haitian people to know that the international community will not
abandon them in their struggle to regain their fundamental rights
and democratic freedoms.
Japan believes that this objective will be advanced by the
resolution we have just adopted.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The dangerous turn of events in Haiti is a source of

serious concern for the Russian Federation.

The sharp

deterioration of the situation in that country is the result of the
course taken by the leadership of the military and security forces
in Port-au-Prince in opposition to the evolution of the democratic
process, the restoration of the legitimate civilian Government and
the return of the nationally elected President,
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Since their allowing the disruption on 11 October of the
disembarkation at Port-au-Prince of the advance contingent of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti, the military authorities in that
country have followed a course of direct resistance to United
Nations efforts to restore democracy there.

Security Council

resolution 873 (1993) of 13 October on the reimposition of economic
sanctions should have been a serious warning to the military
authorities in Port-au-Prince.

However, following the

assassination of the Minister of Justice of the legal Government of
President Jean-Bertrand-Aristide on 14 October, the campaign of
pressure upon and threats against the international personnel in
Haiti and against the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Dante Caputo, have demonstrated that the Haitian
military authorities are clearly challenging the international
community.

S/PV.3293
20
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
In those circumstances the resolution we have just adopted is a
step essential to the expression of the Security Council’s
determination to complete the political settlement in Haiti, to
ensure implementation of its previous decisions and to realize the
international community’s efforts to settle the protracted crisis
in Haiti.

S/PV.3293
21
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
This step is aimed above all at preventing an exacerbation of
the situation in Haiti, which threatens to deteriorate even further
in a country where generally recognized human rights and
constitutional law and order are being grossly violated.

It is

high time the military authorities there understood that the
Security Council will not allow this cynical challenge to the
international community, represented by the United Nations, to go
unanswered.
In calling upon the present military authorities to return to a
strict implementation of the terms of the Governors Island
Agreement, meeting the true prerequisites for a speedy restoration
of democracy to Haiti, we demand the immediate removal of the
obstacles to the deployment of the United Nations Mission and the
establishment of all the conditions necessary for the Mission to
begin its work.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

Pakistan voted in favour of

resolution 875 (1993) as a matter of principle and conviction.

We

also feel a sense of regret that the tightening of sanctions has
been necessary, but are convinced that the course pursued by the
Security Council is correct.
The Haitian army and police, who have usurped power, reneged on
solemn agreements and thwarted the course of democracy, as well as
the will of the international community, must know that their cruel
and inhuman policies will not be allowed to continue.

The Security

Council remains firm in the discharge of its responsibilities.
the same time, we salute the Special Envoy of the Secretary-

At

General, Mr. Dante Caputo, in his brave, persistent and valuable
efforts to bring about peace in Haiti.

S/PV.3293
22
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now make a statement in my

capacity as the representative of Brazil.
For Brazil it is particularly distressing to witness the
accelerated deterioration of the situation in Haiti, a member of
the Latin American and Caribbean Group of States.

It is hard to

express the great sorrow we experience at the recurring incidents
of violence which tell a sad but, we hope, not irreversible story
of missed opportunities for democracy in Haiti.
The Governors Island Agreement and the transition process
embodied in it brought us renewed bright hopes for the future of
the Haitian people.

We had indeed expected that the military and

police authorities would understand the clear message sent by the
international community and by the Security Council.
Unfortunately, that renewed hope was soon to be frustrated by
events - tragic events - involving to a large extent the
responsibility of those authorities.

The activities of armed

groups of civilians, carried out with complete impunity, have
created in Haiti a climate of terror and violence which over the
last few days has escalated in a way that has shocked the whole
international community.
We express our recognition of the continued dedication and
courage of the Special Envoy of the Secretaries-General of the
United Nations and the Organization of American States,
Mr. Dante Caputo, whose efforts, under particularly difficult
circumstances, continue to be crucial.
The Security Council has already expressed its outrage at the
killing of supporters of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.

Three

days ago the Council condemned the acts of intimidation that
prevented the disembarkation of a United Nations contingent in
Port-au-Prince and decided to reimpose the sanctions measures
provided for in resolution 841 (1993), aimed at bringing the
Haitian military authorities to compliance with the Governors

S/PV.3293
23
(The President)
Island Agreement.

It is with great and deep sorrow that we now

mourn the late Minister of Justice, Mr. Guy Malary, assassinated in
a cowardly way just two days ago.
It was thus out of grave concern and a sense of urgency
impressed on us by the seriousness of the latest events in Haiti
that, yesterday and today, we have faced the need to address a
unique and exceptional situation with equally exceptional and
unique measures, particularly the authorization for Member States
to use measures that may include the halting of inward maritime
traffic, with the exclusive purpose of enforcing the sanctions
related to oil and arms established in resolutions 841 (1993) and
873 (1993).
That uniqueness and exceptional character is not only a result
of the extraordinarily deplorable political and humanitarian
situation that now prevails in Haiti.

It is embodied, above all,

in the fact that the action decided upon today by the Security
Council was taken in response to a formal and explicit request by
the legitimate Government of Haiti for the strengthening of the
provisions of resolution 873 (1993).

It is the view of the

Brazilian Government that that request, which is referred to in the
preamble of the resolution just adopted, was essential for the
Security Council to act as it did.
In addition to that, the sui generis nature of the resolution
adopted today is also reflected in the fact that the measures which
it is intended to enforce emanated originally from the Organization
of American States, which has recommended to the United Nations
that it give mandatory effect to the sanctions adopted at the
regional level.
Under those circumstances, after carefully pondering the
various implications of the situation in Haiti, Brazil decided to
lend its support to the resolution adopted today, on the

S/PV.3293
24
(The President)
understanding that it does not and will not constitute a precedent
for the work of the United Nations.
The Latin American and Caribbean region rightly takes pride in
a diplomatic tradition that is based on a permanent concern for the
peaceful solution of problems and the non-use of force in
international relations.

Brazil highly values that tradition,

which we have no doubt will continue to flourish in the years to
come.
The decision taken today can be understood only as a means to
ensure the strict implementation of the sanctions measures
previously imposed by this Council with relation to the supply to
Haiti of petroleum, petroleum products, arms and related matériel.
It is thus clear that the authorization given in operative
paragraph 1 of the resolution adopted today is restricted in scope,
space and time by the clearly limited purpose which constitutes its
raison d’être and is intended to have effect only until those
sanctions measures are suspended or terminated.
The Brazilian Government hopes that this outcome will be
achieved, sooner rather than later, on the basis of the early
restoration of democracy to Haiti.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council.
There are no further speakers on my list.

The Security Council

has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the

matter.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.
