S/PV.7710

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7710th meeting

Thursday, 9 June 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lamek. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Sornarajah
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-16501 (E)
*1616501*

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to once again engage with the Council on the occasion of
my Office’s twenty-third report on the Darfur situation.
It has been more than a decade since the Security
Council, through resolution 1593 (2005), referred the
situation in Darfur to my Office. Resolution 1593
(2005) served as a message of hope for the victims
of Darfur subjected to grave crimes under the Rome
Statute that they would finally see accountability and
justice for their suffering.
Today, those victims’ quest for justice is as far from
being realized as it was 11 years ago. More worrying
still, grave crimes continue to be committed in Darfur,
resulting in further victimization and suffering. This
reality is to be lamented by all people of good conscience.
Over the years since the adoption of resolution 1593
(2005), my Office’s message to this body regarding the
Sudan’s flagrant disregard of the Council’s resolutions
has been principled, consistent and clear. Sadly, my
Office’s countless appeals to the Council for action to
address the persistent failure of the Sudan to comply
with its international obligations have not been heeded.
I respectfully note that, regrettably, the Council has
been equally consistent in its conspicuous silence over
the Sudan’s non-compliance with its own resolutions.
This inaction on the part of the Council has had
adverse consequences. First, it has emboldened
Mr. Al-Bashir to continue travelling across international
2/20

09/06/2016

borders, despite the fact that two arrest warrants have
been issued against him by the Court. Secondly, the
Council’s failure to act in response to 11 findings of
non-compliance issued by International Criminal Court
(ICC) judges has equally emboldened States, parties as
well ascertain non-parties to the Rome Statute, not only
to facilitate Mr. Al-Bashir’s travels to their territories
but to invite and host him. A reasonable observer
cannot be faulted for asking how many more such
findings must be rendered by the Court to spur this
Council into action. The victims’ groups with which
I will be meeting later today will surely and, indeed,
rightly, have such questions on their minds.
This evolving trend risks setting an ominous
precedent that, unless it sees redirection, will not bode
well for similar genuine efforts aimed at bringing
those responsible for mass atrocities to justice. What
message are we sending to would-be perpetrators if
those against whom international warrants have been
issued for the world’s most egregious crimes can
travel freely, and without any repercussions for those
who facilitate or, worse, keep suspects of atrocity
crimes as company. Above all, such non-feasance has
emboldened some States to publicly express pride
in disregarding the Council’s authority. This trend
of non-compliance with resolutions under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations continues
to exacerbate victims’ frustrations and should be a
matter of great concern to us all. It should therefore be
particularly concerning that violations of a Chapter VII
resolution have become routine without any resulting
condemnation or appropriate action by the Council.
With your indulgence, Sir, I would like to place the
accent on several important observations in this regard.
First, it is imperative for the Council to fully
appreciate and embrace its inter-institutional
relationship with the International Criminal Court
within the framework of the Rome Statute, and in
full respect for the respective independence of these
important institutions. More specifically, the Council
must recognize that once a ruling of non-compliance
has been referred to it pursuant to article 87.7 of
the Rome Statute, it is dutybound to act to give due
consideration to the judicial ruling and to take decisive
action as appropriate. To do otherwise would not only
deprive article 87.7 of the Statute of its object and
purpose and frustrate the ends of justice, but also erode
public confidence in the Council. The Council cannot
and must not remain silent and non-responsive on such
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

judicial findings, which are, after all, inherently linked
to the resolution referring the situation of Darfur to
my Office.
I invite and encourage Council members to
give due consideration to the constructive proposal
submitted by New Zealand, calling for a structured
approach in dealing with the Court’s findings of
State non-compliance. A formula that has in the past
proved useful for meaningful exchange of ideas is the
informal interactive dialogue between my Office and
the Council. To be sure, increased interaction between
my Office and the Council will enable us to jointly
reflect and generate proposals on strengthening our
existing inter-institutional relationship in a manner that
results in more effective outcomes. This is the least we
can do to reassure the victims of Darfur that they have
not been forgotten, and that both the Council and my
Office are fully engaged in and committed to finding
solutions that will ultimately ensure accountability and
by extension bring peace and stability to Darfur.
My second broad observation relates to the
obligations of states and cooperation. Quoting from
the International Court of Justice’s advisory opinion
on Namibia, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the ICC noted
in an instance of non-compliance with Mr Al-Bashir’s
arrest that
“[w]hen the Security Council adopts a decision
under article 25 in accordance with the Charter, it
is for member States to comply with that decision ...
To hold otherwise would be to deprive this principal
organ of its essential functions and powers under
the Charter.”
The Pre-Trial Chamber in the same decision further
emphasized the critical role of the Council in enforcing
compliance with resolutions adopted under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. To be clear, the
Sudan’s failure to cooperate with the Court amounts to
non-compliance — not least, it is in breach of resolution
1593 (2005). That resolution has in effect brought the
Sudan under the full breadth and ambit of the Rome
Statute legal framework.
Regarding non-State parties, when they fail to
cooperate in the arrest and surrender of suspects
against whom warrants of arrest have been issued by the
Court in the Darfur situation, they do so with complete
disregard for resolution 1593 (2005), which urges them
to do the contrary — that is, to fully cooperate with
the Court. As it concerns Rome Statute States parties,

S/PV.7710

a failure to arrest and surrender would constitute not
only a violation of resolution 1593 (2005), but a breach
of their Rome Statute obligations — indeed, their treaty
obligations. In either case, these breaches undermine
the cause of international criminal justice and are a
direct attack on the credibility of the Council, which
referred the situation in Darfur to my Office.
Despite these challenges, my Office is continuing
its investigations with a view to delivering justice to
the victims of grave crimes under the Rome Statute
in Darfur. A list of obstacles complicates our work. A
lack of access to the territory of the Sudan, resource
constraints and non-execution of the long-outstanding
arrest warrants have all contributed to the slow progress
in investigations.
Nevertheless, my Office’s strong belief that justice
and accountability are key to lasting peace in Darfur
continues to motivate us to exert every effort within
the means and abilities at our disposal to advance the
investigations as effectively as possible. Leads that have
the potential to yield additional evidence continue to be
followed even as the modest Darfur team of my Office
divides its time and energies between the Darfur dossier
and other cases that are equally demanding. Despite
these difficulties, we will not falter. Our commitment
to the victims of the crimes under the Rome Statute in
Darfur and elsewhere is what inspires us and propels
my Office forward to overcome challenges and to
ultimately obtain the desired results. We are unbending
in this commitment.
My Office shares the Council’s expression of deep
concern in its resolution 2265 (2016) at the increased
violence and insecurity in Darfur, the significant
increase in the number of persons who have been
internally displaced since 2014, and the restriction of
humanitarian access to conflict areas where vulnerable
civilian populations reside. I am concerned about a
significant increase in aerial bombardments and ground
attacks, resulting in over 400 civilian deaths and up to
200 villages destroyed as reported. In addition, 107
incidents of sexual crimes against women were reported,
resulting in 225 victims. Seventy per cent of these
alleged incidents involved gang-rape, and 19 per cent
involved girls under the age of 18 years. Troops aligned
with the Government of the Sudan and unidentified
assailants are the main alleged perpetrators.
Over 129,000 people have been displaced from
Jebel Marra since mid-January. There might be

16-165013/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

thousands more displaced, hidden in the mountains of
Jebel Marra, but as the Council is undoubtedly aware,
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations
have no access to those areas. There were five reported
incidents of attacks on humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers, with one peacekeeper killed, in this
reporting period.
In relation to allegations of ongoing crimes, my
Office is concerned over reports of the activities
of the Government of the Sudan’s Rapid Support
Forces (RSF). The RSF were allegedly again involved
in the commission of crimes during the reporting
period. In one such attack in Central Darfur between
30 December 2015 and 1 January 2016, the Sudanese
Armed Forces, RSF and Janjaweed attacked villages
in East Jebel Marra. The attack was supported by air
raids and artillery fire. Between four and six civilians,
including two children, were allegedly killed during
the ground attack. In another attack on 21 January,
aerial bombardments reportedly killed 48 women and
destroyed six houses.
As mentioned in my latest report, my Office notes
that the modus operandi of the attacks employed by the
Government of the Sudan is similar to the manner in
which the attacks were carried out in 2003 and 2004.
The continuation of the Government of the Sudan’s
military attacks in Darfur in that manner must be
halted. In our assessment, the arrest and surrender of
Mr. Al-Bashir and other accused in the situation in
Darfur may assist in stopping those crimes.
In conclusion, the Security Council must no longer
tolerate the continuing deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Darfur, the continuing non-cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan and, in particular, the
refusal of the Sudan to arrest and surrender suspects
within its territory to the custody of the Court. It is
within the powers of the Council to reverse those
trends through concrete action and resolve. Meaningful
follow-up in response to the Court’s findings of
non-compliance is one concrete step that the Council can
take to project its commitment to the victims of Darfur
and to accountability as indispensable and indivisible
component of peace and security. Again, I urge the
Council to give serious consideration to the proposal
made by New Zealand for a structured approach to
dealing with the Court’s findings of non-compliance
referred to the Council.
4/20

09/06/2016

To be sure, without stronger and committed action
by the Council and State parties, the situation in the
Sudan is unlikely to improve, the alleged perpetrators
of serious crimes against the civilian population
will not be brought to justice and the prospects for a
lingering conflict will become more acute. Justice and
accountability for the grave crimes under the Rome
Statute must not be sacrificed at the altar of political
expediency. The maintenance of international peace
and security and the cause of international criminal
justice are intrinsically linked. Indeed, the former is in
many ways contingent upon the latter.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In recent weeks, we have repeatedly voiced
at the Security Council and at the General Assembly
our assessment of the activities of International
Criminal Court (ICC). They largely have to do with the
Darfur investigation.
We have taken note of the twenty-third report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court on
the investigation into the situation in Darfur. We were
surprised at the tone used by the Prosecutor in addressing
demands to the Security Council for so-called followup to the referral of the situation in Darfur. We expect
from the ICC Prosecutor detailed reporting on her work,
rather than some sort of assessment of the activities of
the Security Council, its authority and positions. We
consider it inappropriate to attempt to bring influence
to bear on the Council. All this ones again makes one
wonder about the point of this kind of dialogue between
the Security Council and the ICC.
It should be noted that there is no consensus, even
among State parties to the Rome Statute, when it comes
to implementing certain arrests warrants issued by
the ICC. In a number of cases, the African Union and
its members have pointed to contradictions between
ICC requirements and their own obligations under
international law concerning the immunity senior
State officials. We understand the position of African
countries on the issue of the ICC. We think it is justified.
Unfortunately, as has been demonstrated in practice in
recent years, not all members of the Council are ready to
heed that position. Our delegation was interested in the
initiative to establish a special ministerial committee of
the African Union to address the concerns of African
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

countries with regard to the ICC. We also supported
the idea of convening a dialogue between the Security
Council and representatives of such a committee. We
hope there will soon be such a meeting in New York.
We would like to comment on some facts and
figures included in the Prosecutor’s report. We call
attention to unverified information about the number of
civilian victims and displaced persons in Darfur. Those
findings have not been corroborated by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
The report essentially relays to the Security Council
assertions from Radio Dabanga. Based in The Hague,
the station is known, among other things, for blatantly
spreading misinformation and for its connections with
the Sudanese armed opposition. As it is known, there is
currently an operation under way in Darfur against the
Sudan Liberation Army. That group stubbornly refuses
to engage in negotiations with Khartoum. Those
insurgents have rejected the moratorium on military
operations and have attacked both Government forces
and civilian targets and civilians themselves. The
militias in Darfur have also adopted a destructive
position. In particular, they have refused to sign the
African Union road map — a peace plan backed by
the Secretary-General and the Chair of the African
Union Commission.
Experts of the Security Council sanctions
committee on the Sudan have confirmed violations of
international humanitarian law by Sudanese rebels,
including the recruitment of child soldiers. In the
report of the Prosecutor information about that and
other wrongdoing by the insurgents undermining peace
and security in Darfur is conspicuously absent. Such a
one-sided assessment by the ICC against the legitimate
Government of the Sudan is unlikely to add credibility
to impartiality of the ICC.
Finally, speaking not only about the Darfur
investigation but more broadly, we would like once
again to emphasize the importance of striking a balance
between the interests of serving justice and those of
achieving lasting peace and stabilizing the situation.
Those tasks are of equal importance and require a
comprehensive and balanced approach.
Ms. Sornarajah (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking Prosecutor Bensouda for her twenty-third
report and for briefing us today on the activities of her
Office concerning the situation in Darfur.

S/PV.7710

Like others here, the United Kingdom is deeply
concerned about the increased violence in Darfur this
year, in particular in Jebel Marra, as the Prosecutor
set out, where as many as 130,000 people have just
been displaced. We continue to hear reports of forced
displacement, restrictions on humanitarian aid, and
attacks on civilians by the Rapid Support Forces and
other militias. That cannot continue. It is clear that a
lasting peace agreement is long overdue. We urge all
parties to engage with the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel road map as a viable way forward.
We are especially concerned to hear of widespread
allegations of intercommunal clashes and serious
sexual violence and gender-based crimes plaguing
large parts of Darfur. Our concern is only heightened
by the culture of impunity that prevails in the region.
All forms of sexual and gender-based violence are
utterly unacceptable. Crimes such as those are one of
the many reasons that the United Kingdom continues
to support the Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict
Initiative. Justice must be delivered to survivors, and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) has an important
role to play in doing so. We call on all parties to end the
violence against civilians and the abuses and violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
The United Kingdom is frustrated that fugitives
from the Court continue to travel with impunity. This
reporting period has actually seen an increase in
travel. We are particularly disappointed that President
Al-Bashir was able to travel to, and be hosted by, State
parties. Together with our international partners, we
have raised our concerns with the relevant Governments.
I hope that other members of the Security Council
will do so too. As the Prosecutor is aware, the United
Kingdom is a strong supporter of the International
Criminal Court. We continue to make clear that we
expect compliance with its arrest warrants for all those
indicted, including President Al-Bashir, and we remind
the relevant countries of their legal obligations as well.
The Government of the Sudan has persistently failed
to meet its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
In doing so, it weakens the rules-based international
system. We call upon the Government of the Sudan,
as we all countries, to cooperate fully with the ICC so
that justice can be delivered, perpetrators can be held to
account and impunity can be ended.
In the light of all of these obstructions and
difficulties, the Prosecutor should be congratulated

16-165015/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

09/06/2016

on the progress her Office has made to advance its
investigations, including by gathering new documentary
evidence and interviewing witnesses. We understand
the resource constraints that the Court is under but
nevertheless urge her to continue in its essential work.

perception of the Court, as well as the effective handling
of the concerns of victims of serious crimes, necessarily
requires open dialogue and close cooperation as the
only way to ensure their synergy in the combat against
impunity that Africa has consistently waged.

We call on all ICC States parties to meet their
obligations under the Rome Statute, all States to respect
resolution 1593 (2005), and the Government of the
Sudan to cooperate fully with the ICC. Having referred
the situation in Darfur to the Court, the Council must
support the Court in fulfilling that mandate and take
effective follow-up action in relation to non-cooperation
with the Court.

Indeed, through their mass ratification of the Rome
Statute, African countries expressed their commitment
to combating impunity across the world, which makes
Africa the largest regional group among the Assembly
of States Parties, whose presidency my country
currently holds.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom believes that
achieving justice for victims should be at the heart of
the international community’s response to mass atrocity
violence. It is vital that fugitives from international
justice not enjoy impunity. Only yesterday, many here
noted the fact that the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia had brought accountability to the
victims of Radovan Karadžić more than 20 years after
the end of that conflict. In doing so, they have shown
that justice has no expiration date and that justice can
be achieved when an international tribunal is supported
in fulfilling its mandate.
Let me close by reiterating the United Kingdom’s
commitment to the ICC. I call on others to do the same.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should first
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this briefing today and to welcome the Prosecutor,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and thank her for her report and
her briefing on the status of the investigations and
procedures led by her Office in Darfur pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).
In a world where the need for justice and
reparations for the wrongs endured by millions of
victims is imperative, the role and the importance of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) have become
indisputable. That is why the universal combat
against impunity and to uphold the rule of law is vital
everywhere, including in Africa, where it was reiterated
in the Constitutive Act of the African Union.
Senegal has great faith in these unshakable
principles, and that is why we are endeavouring to
promote dialogue on matters relating to the relationship
between the African Union and the ICC. Indeed, we
are firmly of the belief that changing the negative
6/20

I turn now to the situation in Darfur. My country
remains convinced that there can be no military
solution there and that the only way to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting peace is through dialogue
and reconciliation. While welcoming the efforts of the
Sudanese Government in the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, which prioritizes
a political settlement of the situation, we would
nonetheless appeal to all parties to end the hostilities.
Furthermore, it is imperative that the international
community take into account the issue of the crimes
committed so as to find a solution to the question of
impunity, as called for by the African Union in its appeal
for the re-establishment of peace and justice in Darfur,
which should be heeded. That is why we continue to
condemn most firmly all forms of violence against
civilians, in particular against women and children,
in Darfur. Similarly, the attacks against humanitarian
workers and the staff of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur are unacceptable,
and the perpetrators must be held accountable.
We believe that the time has come to heal the
wounds inflicted and to work for reconciliation in order
to establish a lasting and definitive peace in Darfur. It
is my belief that thanks to the openness and cooperation
that parties must demonstrate to resolve common issues
in the interests of peace, discussions could lead to a
positive contribution to the shoring up of the principles
and ideals that unite us all here in this Chamber.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to thank the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for introducing the twenty-third report on
the investigation into the situation in the Sudan, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2015). At the same
time, my country would like, as a State party to the
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Rome Statute, to acknowledge the work done by her
Office and the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
the fight against impunity and the promotion of justice.
Our country firmly supports the efforts of the
Prosecutor to ensure justice and accountability in the
fight against impunity, as well as the strengthening
of the international criminal justice system, so as to
make it more transparent and effective. We reiterate the
importance of international cooperation in achieving
the objectives of the Court, as well as the firm objective
of defending the strengthening of the institutions and
the effectiveness of the ICC as the only body in the
criminal sphere.
In that respect, we encourage all Member States
that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to accede to
that instrument in order to achieve its universalization
and to contribute to building the rule of law nationally
and internationally.
More than 10 years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 1593 (2005), through which the Security
Council referred the situation in Darfur to the Office of
the Prosecutor. Since then, very little progress has been
made with respect to its implementation. Although
we believe that some gradual progress has been made
through the implementation of the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as well as the
mediation efforts of former president Thabo Mbeki, the
situation in Darfur remains a source of concern.
In this respect, we share the concerns of the
Prosecutor concerning the continuation of the violence
that is affecting the civilian population. For our
country, accountability is an indispensable condition
for achieving a lasting peace in the Sudan. Hence, we
stress that those who have committed violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in
the armed conflict in Darfur must be tried. This would
help not only to break the prevailing cycle of impunity
but also to prevent the recurrence of these actions, as
well as to promote confidence in the institutions of the
Sudanese State.
In this respect, we believe that it would be
beneficial to promote an effective dialogue between the
International Criminal Court and the African Union
in order to study practical arrangements that would
facilitate the work of the Prosecutor and of the Court,
including the possibility of taking certain steps in the
region and of achieving agreements based on mutual
respect and full respect for international law. We

S/PV.7710

believe that this would complement regional initiatives
to fight impunity.
We support the efforts of the Prosecutor to ensure
that justice and accountability become a reality and also
encourage the Court to assess the situation objectively
and impartially. Its role in the impartial investigation
of the actions of all parties to the conflict is extremely
important so as to strengthen the credibility of this legal
body. The Court must work in a balanced manner in
order to promote justice and to achieve a firm, lasting
and comprehensive peace.
In that context, we are concerned by the attempts
made by some to politicize the work of the ICC, which
affect the principles on which the Court is based, such
as autonomy, independence, impartiality, transparency
and objectivity. Undermining these principles would
weaken the institutions of the Court, as we would be
applying justice in a selective fashion, using a policy
of double standards to the detriment of the spirit and
purpose of the Rome Statute.
The arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court against President Omar Al-Bashir
undermines the right to jurisdictional immunity for
the sitting Heads of State of those States that are not
party to the Rome Statute. The process to suspend
the jurisdictional immunity of a sitting President
in exercising his office so that he can be naturally
tried by justice in his country represents a procedure
set out in the Constitution of the Republic of the
Sudan. In that regard, Venezuela shares the position
of the African Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the League of Arab States and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on the matter.
However, we call upon the Government of the Sudan,
the competent regional authorities and neighbouring
States to cooperate effectively with the International
Criminal Court with respect to the arrest of those
suspects who do not enjoy jurisdictional immunity and
who are currently being investigated by the Office of
the Prosecutor for alleged crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide and whose arrest warrants have
been issued by the International Criminal Court in the
case of the situation in Darfur.
In conclusion, we encourage the strengthening of
cooperation between the International Criminal Court
and the Government of the Sudan, as well as by the
countries of the region, in order to help to find a solution
to the conflict in Darfur whereby the objectives of peace

16-165017/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and justice are achieved for the benefit of the people of
that country, in accordance with international law.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing and for the twenty-third
report on the situation in the Sudan.
At this time last year, New Zealand expressed deep
concern and called for accountability for the serious
crimes committed (see S/PV.7460). The situation has
not notably improved since then. Civilians in Darfur
continue to suffer from the consequences of conflict.
The past year also saw further attacks on peacekeepers,
some fatal, and the human rights and humanitarian
situations remained dire.
As noted by the Prosecutor, all five International
Criminal Court (ICC) indictees remain at large.
Resolution 1593 (2005) placed an obligation on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully and to
provide any necessary assistance to the Court and the
Prosecutor, as well as urged other Member States to
cooperate. Those obligations have been widely ignored.
Nor has there been any meaningful accountability at
the national level. It is not surprising that the victims
are losing hope that justice will ever be done.
The Sudan’s ongoing non-cooperation with the
Court amounts to non-compliance with a Council
resolution and its obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations. While this mostly relates to the four
Government of the Sudan indictees, the Sudan also
has not responded to the ICC requests for assistance
in the case against Abdallah Banda, a rebel group
indictee allegedly responsible for a deadly attack
against African Union peacekeepers in South Darfur
in 2007. Over the years, the Secretary-General has
relayed 11 findings of non-cooperation to the Council
with regard to that referral.
During the current reporting period, President
Al-Bashir has crossed international borders, and
further findings of non-cooperation may follow in the
coming months. The Council has yet to respond to
those findings in any meaningful way. While not every
member of the Council is an ICC State party, we share
a common interest in ensuring that the decisions of the
Council are complied with. When that does not happen,
the credibility and effectiveness of this institution
are undermined, and the message is sent that Council
decisions can be ignored without consequences. That
should be of concern to all those who value the role,
reputation and legitimacy of this organ.
8/20

09/06/2016

In December, my delegation made two proposals
that we believe could help end the current malaise in
the Council’s consideration of the issue. We believe
they are no less relevant today.
First, as noted by Ms. Bensouda, the Council needs
to be more structured in its consideration of the findings
of non-cooperation. There is currently no consistent
practice for dealing with them. In most instances, the
Council does not even discuss them. In our view, when
a finding of non-cooperation is received, the Council
should discuss it. As we would with any other issue,
we should consider what tools the Council has at its
disposal to deal with the issue, whether it be a draft
resolution or statement, or something short of that, such
as a letter from the Council or a meeting with the country
concerned, and then the Council can determine on a
case-by-case basis what response is most appropriate.
We accept that the Council may not always agree on
how to respond. But if the Council were to ignore every
issue where agreement was difficult, we would hardly
ever meet. Simply continuing to not respond is neither
productive nor credible, which goes to the effectiveness
of the Council and its willingness to stand by its own
decisions. The Banda case seems an obvious place to
start in implementing a more structured approach. We
will continue to work with other Council members on
this in the coming months.
Secondly, we need to give serious thought to how
we can achieve a more productive relationship with the
Government of the Sudan. There is a clear need for the
United Nations and for the Council to consider what can
be done to change the nature of the current relationship
with Khartoum, proceeding from a firm understanding
of the current situation on the ground.
We have been encouraged by the initial progress
made under the new leadership of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), in particular with the tripartite meetings
among the Government, the African Union and the
United Nations. But there is a long way to go. Those
positive steps have so far done little to resolve the
serious issues UNAMID faces with access and visa
issuance. But we believe the Council should look at
how it can best support a more constructive engagement
with the Government of the Sudan, including by
considering options such as a Council visit to the
Sudan. We are clear-eyed about the challenges involved
in forging a new relationship, and we need to see a
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7710

greater willingness by the Government of the Sudan to
engage constructively.

the restriction of humanitarian access to conflict areas,
where a vulnerable civilian population resides.

We have set up some tangible ways that we believe
the Council can show that it is willing to do more than
just talk about the protection of civilians. There is no
guarantee they will succeed, but given the alternative,
which is a continuation of the status quo, we believe it
is at least worth trying.

We strongly condemn the aerial bombardments
and ground attacks, which have resulted in hundreds
of civilian deaths and destroyed villages, as well as
incidents of attacks on humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers. We are no less concerned about reports
of continued violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights, in particular sexual violence and
gender-based crimes.

Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing on the current judicial
activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
on the situation in Darfur, as set out in the twenty-third
report submitted to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).
As a member of the African Union, the Republic
of Angola reiterates the African position regarding the
activities of the International Criminal Court vis-à-vis
sitting African Presidents. It should be recalled that, at
the Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union held in in January and June 2015, in Addis
Ababa and in Johannesburg, respectively, the African
Union requested the suspension of the proceedings of
the ICC against the President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar
Al-Bashir, and urged the Security Council to withdraw
its referral of the case.
In a letter dated 8 February 2016 addressed to the
President of the Security Council, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission communicated the African
Union’s resolve to send to New York a ministerial
committee of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs on the
issue of the ICC to discuss with the Security Council
the African Union’s concerns in its relationship with
the ICC. We look forward to that visit and expect that
a more constructive relationship between the African
Union and the Security Council with regard to the ICC
will emerge from that interaction.
Angola upholds the African Union position on these
issues while advocating for dialogue as the sole solution
to address and settle the political dispute in Darfur.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor
Bensouda for her useful briefing.
Ukraine remains deeply concerned about the
increased violence and insecurity in Darfur, the
growing number of internally displaced persons and

Article 27 of the Rome Statute provides that the
Statute shall apply equally to all persons without any
distinction based on official capacity. In particular, in
their official capacity as a Head of State or government,
a member of a Government or Parliament, an elected
representative or a Government official shall in no
case be exempt from criminal responsibility under
the Statute. In that regard, we believe that the arrest
warrants against suspects in the ICC’s investigation
into the situation in Darfur should be carried out and
that the Sudan must strictly comply with its obligations.
The failure of some State parties to the Rome
Statute to carry out their obligations remains another
obstacle towards delivering justice. We need to pay
particular attention to these facts in the light of the 11
judicial decisions on the issue of non-compliance and
requests for appropriate action to be taken regarding
State parties, as well as non-State parties, that have
failed to execute the ICC arrest warrants.
However, irrespective of being party or non-party
to the Rome Statute, States Members of the United
Nations should consolidate their efforts in the fight
against impunity. By failing to bring those responsible
for the gravest crimes to justice, the international
community implicitly encourages violence in the rest
of the world.
We call on all State parties to the Rome Statute
to promote cooperation and carry out the arrests of
individuals wanted by the ICC in the Darfur situation.
Finally, we would like to express our support to the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor in its work.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the presence in the Security Council
once again of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. I would like to reiterate the firm commitment of
my country to the Court and to international criminal

16-165019/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

justice, as well as its acknowledgement of the work of
the Prosecutor and the team at her Office.
More than a decade has gone by since the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the Court in the light of
the serious allegations about the commission in Darfur
of the most serious international crimes. Eleven years
later no official has been tried, the conflict continues
and civilians continue to suffer the consequences of the
conflict; eleven years later there is still no justice in
Darfur. The Sudan must cooperate with the Court and
must comply with the mandate established in resolution
1593 (2005) in accordance with the obligations that
are imposed by the Charter of the United Nations as a
member of the Organization.
We are living in a world marked by conflict in which
violations of international humanitarian law, as well as
human rights abuses, happen without any consequence
for those responsible, where accountability is the
exception and where impunity for such acts shamefully
becomes commonplace. This should not be the case,
especially since never before have we had so many
means at our disposal in order to prevent it, including
the most extensive conventional network and the most
developed international justice system in our history.
The reality shows, however, that the means are not
enough when there is no political will in order to use
them. The International Criminal Court is a perfect
example of this. It is the best instrument against
impunity that the international community has ever
had but, in the case of Darfur, the lack of cooperation
on the part of many States, some of them State parties
to the Rome Statute, and the lack of support by the
Council has not allowed them to carry out its task. As
we have said on previous occasions, if only for the sake
of consistency, the Council needs to react. We must be
concerned by the message that we convey through our
persistent inaction in the light of non-compliance for
years with a resolution adopted under Chapter VII. On
11 occasions, the Court has brought to the knowledge
of this organ different cases of non-compliance in
relation to the situation in Darfur, and on 11 occasions
the Council has been unable not just to adopt a decision,
but even to discuss the situation.
Let me refer to the latest of those notices. It was
received in December and it refers to the case of
Mr. Abdallah Banda. He is alleged to be responsible
for an attack against a contingent of the mission of the
African Union that, on 29 September 2007, resulted
10/20

09/06/2016

in the deaths of 12 of its members. In October 2007,
the President of the Council condemned the attack,
calling for
“no effort [to] be spared so that the perpetrators
[may] be identified and brought to justice.
(S/PRST/2007/35)
There is not much left to be done except for Mr. Banda
to be found and tried as the alleged perpetrator of the
attack. The Council, in line with the comments made
by the representative of New Zealand, should at least
be consistent with regard to its own demands. In the
meanwhile, the Blue Helmets serving in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) continue to lose their lives in Darfur.
The conflict in Darfur must end. Spain reiterates
its appeal to all parties to join the peace process in a
constructive spirit and with the determination of finding
a negotiated and inclusive political solution. While we
await peace, we would like to remind all parties of
their obligation to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law and to immediately put an end to
attacks against the civilian population.
We remind the Government of the Sudan of its
particular obligation to protect its population and,
once again, we call for the removal of all obstacles and
restrictions that prevent UNAMID from carrying out
its mandate, in particular with respect to protecting
the civilian population and guaranteeing humanitarian
assistance.
I would like to conclude by stating that impunity
is still a serious challenge and a threat for the peace
process and a threat to civilians, the majority of whom
are being denied the right to reparations. Those are
words that come from the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on UNAMID.
We call on the Council and all Member States,
whether they are part of the Rome Statute or not, to
cooperate to prevent a climate of impunity in Darfur
from continuing. We must understand that fighting
against impunity is also fighting against unlimited
violence and against wars without rules. It is defending
the dignity of people, which is mentioned in the
Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations. It is
preventing conflicts. And, in the end, it is fighting for
peace, because peace is not sustainable in the absence
of justice. There are not many reasons to be optimistic,
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

but we cannot abandon the struggle. That is why we
encourage Ms. Bensouda and her team to not yield in
their efforts. We must trust that some day the situation
will change and that some day her work will bear fruit
and bring justice to the victims of Darfur.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank Ms. Bensouda for
her briefing. We have taken note of the twenty-third
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, on the situation in Darfur, submitted pursuant
resolution 1593 (2005) and the activities of the Office
of the Prosecutor since her last report.
Malaysia remains concerned with the humanitarian
and security situation in Darfur. The ongoing conflicts
have resulted in civilian deaths, including of women
and children, as well as more than 129,000 people
displaced from Jebel Marra since mid-January. Given
the deplorable situation, all parties to the conflict are
reminded of their obligations under international human
rights law and international humanitarian law and
must refrain from all acts of violence against civilians,
including humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel.
It is therefore incumbent upon the Government of
the Sudan to create an enabling environment where
trust and confidence can be built. In this respect, its
compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions
would be the necessary prerequisite towards that end.
The protracted conflict in Darfur clearly indicates
that there is no military solution that will not bring
dire consequences or prolong destruction and human
suffering. It is for this reason that we welcome the
signing of the road map agreement by the Government
of the Sudan in March as a commendable step forward.
The parties that have not yet signed the agreement
should be encouraged to do so urgently and engage
constructively in a dialogue.
We also welcome the resumption of the work of the
joint working group to deliberate on cooperation with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. In the light of the spirit of constructive
engagement by the Government of the Sudan, it is
hoped that this will mark a new phase of collaboration
with the United Nations, the African Union and other
international partners towards peace and security
in the country.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing today to the Security Council on the

S/PV.7710

twenty-third report published pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). The report of the ICC Prosecutor examined
a number of challenges and puts forth comments
concerning the Court’s performance with respect to the
situation in Darfur. I would now like to highlight the
following points.
There is a common African position when it comes
to the way in which the ICC deals with certain African
matters. This position is reflected in, for example,
Decisions 547, 586 and 590, of the twenty-fourth,
twenty-fifth and twenty-fifth African Union summits,
respectively. As provided for in these decisions, Africa
is firmly committed to fighting impunity in accordance
with the Constitutive Act of the African Union. We
therefore call for the suspension of the procedures
undertaken by the ICC against President Omar
Al-Bashir, the President of the Sudan.
The aforementioned decisions of the African
Union summits urge the Security Council to put an
end to the referral of the Darfur situation to the ICC.
We therefore express our dissatisfaction at the fact that
the Security Council has not acceded to the requests
of the African Union in this area over the past two
years. Furthermore, in the light of the reservations
expressed by the countries of the African Union with
regard to the Rome Statute, the ICC must refrain from
taking measures that would affect the peace, security,
stability, dignity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the countries of the African continent. In addition,
the ICC must respect the provisions of international law
with respect to the immunities granted to heads of State
and sitting officials.
In conclusion, we reject any measure taken against
African States on the pretext that these States do not
respect or assume their responsibilities under the Rome
Statute or that they are not upholding resolution 1593
(2005). We reject any measure against States that have
not arrested or delivered President Al-Bashir to the ICC,
especially since African countries must respect their
obligations stemming from resolutions and decisions of
the African Union summit as well as the Constitutive
Act of the African Union.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China has
taken note of Prosecutor Bensouda’s briefing.
At present, the Darfur region of the Sudan is still
facing such problems as the slowness of progress in its
political process and armed groups resorting to violent
means to disrupt peace and stability in the region. China

16-1650111/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

appreciates the efforts of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel (AUHIP) to engage in diplomatic
good offices to actively promote the political settlement
of the Darfur question. We welcome the fact that the
Sudanese Government has signed the road map proposal
submitted by the AUHIP. It is hoped that it will lead
the opposition and armed groups, proceeding from the
broad perspective of maintaining peace and stability in
the Sudan, to quickly sign the road map proposal and the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur in a common effort
to seek a comprehensive and political settlement of the
Darfur question. The international community should
adopt an objective and fair position, play a constructive
role and create favourable external conditions for the
political settlement of the Darfur question.
On the question of the Sudan and the ICC, China’s
position has not changed. We welcome the fact that
the African Union (AU) has established a ministerial
committee to deal with the question of the Sudan at
the ICC. We support the holding of dialogue between
the Council and the AU ministerial committee so as
the voices of African countries may be heard and their
concerns accommodated. We believe that the legitimate
concerns of the AU and its members, including the
Sudanese Government, on ICC-related questions,
should be fully heeded.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
The Security Council referred the situation in
Darfur to the International Criminal Court in 2005.
Since then, the instability, insecurity, violence and
suffering in Darfur have continued unabated. But it is
too facile to simply recall the acts of violence that recur
year after year. That ignores the way in which these
acts compound each other. This year, for instance, we
see not only that the conflict between the Government
of the Sudan and armed opposition groups has reignited
in Jebel Marra, including such incidents as an attack
by a group of unidentified armed men that wounded
a peacekeeper from the African Union/United Nations
Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID), but also the
downstream consequences of repeated bombings
including against civilian targets.
The United Nations has verified that 68,000
people have been displaced since January of 2016 due
to the fighting, raising the total number of internally
displaced persons in Darfur to more than 2.7 million,
with 5.8 million people in need of humanitarian
12/20

09/06/2016

assistance. Further compounding the problem has been
the obstruction of humanitarian assistance, including
food and critical medical care. We remain deeply
concerned by the Government of the Sudan’s de facto
expulsion of the head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in the face of this
critical humanitarian situation.
Likewise, access restrictions and other impediments
imposed on UNAMID have hampered the Mission’s
ability to perform its most basic tasks. For instance, on
15 April, to cite just one example, UNAMID aircraft
en route to Misteri, West Darfur, had to modify
their usual flight route following a warning from the
Government of the Sudan that United Nations flights
over the Sudanese-Chadian joint forces camps would
be shot down.
The Secretary-General has reported for months
that the vacancy rates in UNAMID’s human rights
and protection-of-civilians sections are 50 and 40 per
cent, respectively. These vacancies in the human rights
and protection staff of UNAMID are unacceptable and
they are due to the systematic denial of visas by the
Government of the Sudan.
Restrictions and impediments imposed by
Khartoum have also precluded United Nations agencies
from ascertaining the scale of civilian casualties and
displacement from fighting, and from otherwise
comprehensively reporting on the situation on the
ground. These provocative acts — acts like kicking out
the head of OCHA — have also done little to awaken
the Security Council’s readiness to respond. That is
not how the system was supposed to work. Indeed,
the Security Council’s inability to agree on even the
most basic responses to extraordinary provocations is
a collective failure.
As we consider this vicious cycle and our seeming
inability to agree on how to stop it, we at least must
remain committed to reaffirming our commitment
to justice for the victims of genocide and atrocities
in Darfur. Failure to provide accountability for the
injustices the victims and survivors have incurred
emboldens further abuses in the Sudan and outside of
the Sudan. It is in that spirit and, I think, appropriate
to our discussion today about the importance of justice,
that we were surprised and disappointed to read the
op-ed that appeared in the New York Times on Tuesday,
attributed to South Sudan’s President Salva Kiir and
Vice-President Riek Machar, which called for halting
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the very hybrid court both leaders agreed to support
when they signed the peace agreement in August 2015.
This op-ed offered a variety of reasons for opposing
the efforts being led by the African Union to bring justice
to the victims of South Sudan, perhaps most notably that
“building a nation is not an easy task”. Indeed it is not,
and these two leaders certainly have an immense task
in front of them, but part of that difficulty — part of
the challenge of rebuilding a nation — lies in pursuing
both justice and reconciliation, not one at the expense
of the other. The argument in this op-ed that justice will
“destabilize efforts to unite our nation by keeping alive
anger and hatred” could not be further from the truth.
As we have seen in countless other settings after
widespread violence, reconciliation and justice are
mutually reinforcing, not mutually exclusive, and that
is precisely why both are included in the August 2015
Peace Agreement, and it is precisely why the United
States will continue to make every effort to both
support the African Union in its establishment of the
hybrid court and to promote reconciliation among the
people of South Sudan. Neither in South Sudan nor
in the Sudan is justice an impediment to unity and
sustainable peace. Indeed, in both countries, justice is
essential to it.
It is in that spirit that we thank the Prosecutor for
her Office’s continued investigations into abuses in
Darfur and for her long-standing efforts to promote
justice for attacks on civilians, including humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers by Government and armed
opposition groups. We also continue to support
UNAMID and its work, which is crucial to efforts to
alleviate the suffering of civilians and to ensurin that
allegations of atrocities can be investigated, as in the
numerous cases of conflict-related sexual violence
documented by UNAMID in 2015, and to which the
Prosecutor refers in this report.
It is critical that the Security Council, for its part,
do more to help ensure compliance with resolution
1593 (2005) and press Sudanese authorities to fulfil the
Sudan’s obligation to cooperate fully with the Court
and with the Prosecutor. While, as the Security Council
noted in a letter to the ICC, the decisions of pre-trial
chambers on the situation in Darfur have been brought to
the attention of members of the Council, this is far from
enough. We also continue to call on all Governments
not to invite, facilitate or support travel for individuals
subject to arrest warrants in the ICC Darfur situation,

S/PV.7710

and for the Sudan to fully cooperate with the ICC, and
we continue to believe that the Court’s arrest warrants
in the Darfur situation should be carried out.
History has shown that the road to accountability
can be long and difficult but that justice can ultimately
triumph against long odds. The developments in the
Extraordinary African Chambers in Senegal, including
the recent conviction of former President Hissène
Habré, are but one testament to the idea that the tenacity
of victims of mass atrocities in seeking justice should
not be underestimated, and this example shows what
is possible when Governments, regional bodies and
victims’ groups cooperate to ensure that justice is done.
I would like to emphasize this point because,
indeed, it is not just institutions and Governments that
have a role to play. Individuals can help too, and they
are essential. We are heartened by those in civil society,
from South Africa to Uganda, who have continued to
show their solidarity with those who have suffered so
much, and while it is easy to be daunted by the obstacles
to accountability, the International Criminal Court’s
investigation in Darfur has brought some measure of
hope to victims of atrocities there.
There can be both purpose and dignity in coming
forward and speaking out about atrocity crimes. We
commend the bravery of these victims and look forward
to the day when they, like the victims of the Habré
regime, see justice delivered in a court of law. The United
States will continue to work with this Security Council
and other partners in the international community to
promote an end to Sudan’s many conflicts and a just
and sustainable peace.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for convening and including this
meeting in the June programme of work. I especially
welcome the presence of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and
the introduction of her detailed twenty-third report on
the activities of her Office with respect to the situation
in Darfur, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005).
Uruguay takes this opportunity to reiterate its full
support for the role of the International Criminal Court
in strengthening the rule of law at the international
level by bringing to justice those responsible for the
most serious crimes of concern to humanity as a whole,
as defined in article 5 of the Rome Statute, wherever
they may be. In that regard, we call once again on the
States Members of the United Nations that are not yet

16-1650113/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

09/06/2016

parties to the Rome Statute to accede to it and to thereby
contribute to the universalization of this instrument,
which is vital in combating impunity and defending
all the inhabitants of the planet from atrocious crimes
that pose a serious threat to the peace and security of
all humankind.

her twenty-third report on Darfur. We are convinced
of the importance of the fight against impunity and
the rule of law. That is why Japan has consistently
supported the activities of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). I would like to assure the Prosecutor of
Japan’s full support for the work of her Office.

Uruguay shares the concerns noted in the
Prosecutor’s most recent report, which include the
deterioration of the security situation in Darfur, an
increase in aerial bombardments, ongoing rapes and
acts of sexual violence, continued forced displacement
as a result of violence, as well as obstacles, threats and
attacks on humanitarian workers and the personnel of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. Moreover, in her most recent report, the
Prosecutor reminds us, as she has in previous reports,
that the arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court have yet to be executed. The five
persons accused of war crimes and crimes against
humanity — one of them accused of genocide — have
not yet been subject to the Court’s jurisdiction and
continue to occupy high-level Government posts in their
country. This scenario reflects States’ non-cooperation
with the International Criminal Court.

In 2005, Japan, as a member of the Council,
supported resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the
situation in Darfur to the ICC. In light of the serious
violations of human rights committed in Darfur, we
believed that there was a role for the ICC in bringing the
perpetrators to justice. Japan respects the independence
and decisions of the ICC concerning arrest warrants
emanating from resolution 1593 (2005).

As a State party to the Rome Statute, Uruguay
is concerned by all cases of non-cooperation. In this
particular case, it is worth recalling that resolution
1593 (2005) which in paragraph 2 decides that the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully with the Court
and the Prosecutor. It also urges all States and concerned
regional and other international organizations to
cooperate fully. Therefore, faced with obvious
non-cooperation on several occasions and for several
years now, we believe that the Council should assume a
more active role in reviewing cases of non-cooperation
with the International Criminal Court and ensure that
arrest warrants are executed, a necessary condition to
enable the Court to fulfil its mandate.
To conclude, I reiterate Uruguay’s commitment to
the work of the Prosecutor in her investigations of the
crimes committed in Darfur, which will undoubtedly
contribute to strengthening the rule of law and the
establishment of a society where rights and guarantees
are fully respected for all its inhabitants, who have seen
their fundamental rights abused for many years now.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Let me begin by thanking
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing and for introducing
14/20

Despite the efforts of the ICC, it is regrettable that
justice has not been served on behalf of the victims
in Darfur. We note the Trial Chamber’s finding in its
decision on the Banda case that the Sudan had failed
to cooperate with the Court. We stress that resolution
1593 (2005) decided that the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur should
cooperate fully with the ICC and the Prosecutor. We
urge the full implementation of the resolution in order
to achieve justice in Darfur. It is appropriate for the
Council to follow up on this matter, particularly the
decision on the Banda case, as communicated to the
Council on 11 December 2015.
To make Darfur stable, there is no choice but to
move the political process forward. Japan welcomes
the signing by the Government of the Sudan, in Addis
Ababa on 20 March, of the road map addressing the
most important issues: the ceasefire, the delivery
of humanitarian aid and a truly inclusive national
dialogue. We call upon other parties to sign the road
map. In that regard, we appreciate the continued efforts
exerted by the State of Qatar, especially the holding
late last month of the recent Doha meeting with armed
groups and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We are concerned about the access restrictions
currently in place in Central Darfur, and call upon
all parties to grant access to the conflict areas so
that humanitarian actors can quickly address the
humanitarian situation. We are also concerned
about the decreased ability of UNAMID to function,
especially in the light of such logistical issues as the
problem of containers. In order to resolve these issues,
we look forward to further cooperation between the
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Government of the Sudan and UNAMID, in accordance
with the relevent Council resolutions, for the sake of the
Sudanese people in need.
Without the cooperation of States, the ICC cannot
execute its mandate. We urge all States, including
non-State parties and concerned regional and other
international organizations, to cooperate fully with the
ICC, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), which
binds all United Nations Member States.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for her twenty-third report and her briefing
to the Council.
As has been noted, it has been 11 years since the
Security Council adopted resolution 1593 (2005).
That decision had the clear objective to prevent new
atrocities by fighting impunity and thereby promoting
the reconciliation and stability that are prerequisites of
development. The goal of fighting impunity remains
not only fully valid today, but fully necessary.
As emphasized by the Prosecutor’s report, the
situation in Darfur remains marked by ongoing
violence. The aerial bombing by the Government of
the Sudan has intensified since the beginning of the
year, indiscriminately and disproportionately affecting
civilian populations. These ongoing attacks on
civilians remain intolerable, as are violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Women
remain the targets of completely unacceptable sexual
violence. Assaults and harassment against the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian actors, as well as the
obstacles that are placed on their movements, prevent
these organizations to carry out their mission to protect
civilians and assist the most vulnerable populations.
In this context, more than ever, justice must be
handed down and responsibilities identified so as to
prevent and deter such acts. Impunity for past crimes
and its implications for possible future crimes are
unacceptable. We therefore regret that the arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
remain unenforced. This refusal to investigate and
prosecute perpetrators can only feed the future cycle
of violence in Darfur. And yet, the Council and the
international community know the right direction and

S/PV.7710

decisions to take in order to allow Darfur to regain
peace and stability.
First, there can be no military solution to this
conflict. The settlement of the conflict in Darfur is
political by nature, and must involve the Government
and rebel groups. We regret in this regard the lack of
real progress towards establishing an inclusive process
to work for lasting peace. The African Union Peace
and Security Council has called for a comprehensive
political solution, including in its regional aspects. The
path to this goal begins with the cessation of hostilities
by all parties. France supports the efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel to advance in
this direction.
Secondly, the protection of civilians must be
fully ensured. The continuing violence and insecurity
prevent any prospect for long-term stabilization and
reconstruction. We regret that UNAMID remains
subject to access restrictions and supply and operation
blockages. It is essential that the Sudanese authorities
fully cooperate to allow UNAMID to fulfil its mandate,
in accordance with decisions of the Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council .
Thirdly, unimpeded humanitarian access to civilian
populations and the displaced must be facilitated and
guaranteed. The needs of over 2.6 million displaced
are enormous. Humanitarian actors must be able to
respond. The expulsion of the head of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is of concern in
that regard.
Fourthly and lastly, it remains essential that the
perpetrators of the crimes be prosecuted and that
justice be done. I recall the importance of the obligation
of all United Nations Member States to cooperate,
in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the
Council, without which the prosecution of the most
serious crimes by the ICC will remain dead letter. This
obligation rests primarily with the Sudan, which must
execute the arrest warrants issued against its nationals
for offences committed on its territory and cooperate
with the Court, as required by resolution 1593 (2005).
State parties to the Rome Statute also have a key
role to play in terms of their statutory obligation to
cooperate with the ICC and execute arrest warrants
against persons within their territory. In that regard, we
regret the fact that this requirement has not been met
by some States in recent months. We are grateful to
the Office of the Prosecutor for monitoring this major

16-1650115/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

09/06/2016

issue. In that context, the Council’s responsibility is
clear and twofold.

(ICC), including its report on my country, which is the
subject of this review.

On the one hand, the Council must make
cooperation with the Court effective and ensure
that arrest warrants are carried out. As emphasized
by the Prosecutor, it is up to the Council to respond
to instances of non-cooperation with the Court. In
that regard, we are a ready to consider modalities
for action by the Council. It is also essential that the
Assembly of State Parties remain engaged on cases of
non-cooperation with the ICC, as well as international
organizations. In that connection, it is appropriate to
continue limiting contacts with persons subject to an
arrest warrant of the Court to those deemed essential
in line with the Secretary-General’s policy. France
recalls the importance of the United Nations as a whole
continuing to implement those guidelines and apply the
relevant provisions of resolution 1593 (2005).

It is important, however, to emphasize at the outset
that I am delivering this statement in my capacity as
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of the
Sudan on behalf of the President of the Republic of the
Sudan, in respect of the Court’s report, which is being
discussed solely in the Security Council. I would like
to reiterate that we have no connection whatsoever to
the Court, to which the Council makes referrals within
its purview, not pursuant to the provisions of a certain
Chapter of the Charter of the United Nations, but in
accordance with an article in the Rome Statute of the
ICC that is not applicable to the United Nations or to
any State Member unless such State wilfully elects to
be party thereto or subjects itself to the jurisdiction of
the Court. This is the principle of pacta sunt servanda,
stipulated in article 34 of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties of 1969, which has become part and
parcel of established customary international law and
of jus cogens, which cannot be set aside.

On the other hand, the Council must pursue efforts
for an end to violence against civilians, as well as the
search for an inclusive political solution. That is the only
way to achieve long-term peace and stability in Darfur.
To do that end, UNAMID has a significant role to play
and should be able to fulfil its mandate. It is essential
that free and unrestricted access be guaranteed to the
mission throughout the entire territory of Darfur. That
will be a point to which we pay particular attention
during the next renewal of the mandate of UNAMID.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you once more, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to reiterate
my thanks to Egypt, the Council’s President last month,
as well as to its Permanent Representative, for having
efficiently presided over the Council ‘s work, in May and
for ensuring that certain topics of prime importance to
Member States in general, and to the Group of African
States in particular, continued to be part of the agenda
and work of the Council, bearing in mind that issues
pertinent to the situation in Africa account for more
than 60 per cent of the Council’s work, albeit not in a
positive sense, in our opinion, as most of them relate
to sanctions and coercive measures that are based on
the feasibility concept, which guides, for instance, the
work of the so-called International Criminal Court
16/20

That leads me directly to resolution 1593 (2005),
which the Council adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter and whereby it referred the situation in Darfur
to the Court. It should be noted that article 13 (b) of
the Rome Statute does not indicate in any way, neither
expressly or implicitly, that the Statute is applicable to
States that are not party thereto. The Council might
also recall that this fact is repeatedly emphasized in
every provision throughout the Statute that relates
to non-party States, such as the provisions covering
issues of cooperation. It should also be noted that the
application of article 13 (b) has opened the door wide
for political manipulation and for the use of power
politics and influence to subjugate some victimized
countries and compromise the status of the African
continent, since only those considerations are used
as decisive factors in making referrals to the Court
by the main political organ of the United Nations,
namely, the Security Council. That is a fact that I
attest to here before the Council in my capacity as
the representative of a country with an authentic and
long-standing membership in the Organization, and
which is substantiated by international law in its letter,
interpretation and rationale.
The least one can say about the decision to make
this referral, upon which the Court has to date submitted
23 reports to the Security Council, is that it was made
on entirely unfounded grounds. In addition, paragraph
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

6 of the resolution I mentioned, which was the result
of bargaining among some permanent members of the
Council, rendered the resolution null and void. I should
like to refer to some quotations from what was said in
the Council about the resolution by the representative
of Brazil when it was adopted, on 31 March 2005. Here
is what the representataive of Brazil had to say:
“Brazil also was not in a position to support
operative paragraph 6, through which the Council
recognizes the existence of exclusive jurisdiction, a
legal exception that is inconsistent in international
law.” (S/PV.5158, p. 11)
At the same meeting, the representative of the
Philippines stated,
“[o]perative paragraph 6 of the resolution is killing
its credibility” (ibid, p. 6).
Nor was the representative of your country, France,
Mr. President, happy with adoption of the resolution.
He stated that
“the jurisdictional immunity provided for in the text
we have just adopted obviously cannot run counter
to other international obligations of States and will
be subject, where appropriate, to the interpretation
of the courts of my country.” (ibid, p. 8)
The International Criminal Court seized on that
flawed decision of the Council, and the Court’s Office
of the Prosecutor made it a point to add to its defects,
inadequacy and irrelevance by insisting on disregarding
article 53 of the Rome Statute, thereby creating a deep
rift between the principles of justice and peace, which
are intrinsically complementary. We have a shining
example in Africa, for instance, when South Africa,
a leading nation in the struggle against racism and
apartheid, succeeded in blending the two principles
and created an exemplary system of both justice and
peace, and chose to look beyond the horizon and build
a future. The same continent — Africa — is now prey
to the ruthless efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor,
which wrote its present report while seeking to exercise
the power and apply the jurisdiction of the Court
selectively over the Continent.
On the other hand, successive resolutions of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and decisions of African Summits issued since 2008,
including the latest two resolutions adopted at those
meetings, have invariably condemned the practice of
the Court to target African leaders. It is unfortunate

S/PV.7710

that countries of the Northern Hemisphere have
practically exempted themselves, thanks to Security
Council resolutions and bilateral agreements that
grant them immunity, while African countries suffer
discriminatory treatment that is worse today than
what they suffered during the colonial era and in
which they are denied the right to equal sovereignty
and their leaders are targeted. Meanwhile, the Court
seems to have no competence whatsoever over certain
nationalities, no matter how gruesome the crimes
committed by the holders of those nationalities are and
regardless of the status of the perpetrators, from the
top of the hierarchy, both political and military, to the
lowest-ranking soldier.
The report also notes that courts in South Africa
are fulfilling the country’s obligations under the Rome
Statute, to which South Africa is a party, and hastens to
anxiously take up an issue that is still being appealed
by the Court. However, I should like to include here
an excerpt from our previous report of December 2015,
depicting a moment when the Foreign Minister of
South African stood in a meeting of the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute, in November 2015,
and said:
(spoke in English)
“I wish to be absolutely clear. The perceptions of
inequality and unfairness in the practice of the ICC
do not only emanate from the Court’s relationship
with the Security Council. We ask ourselves,
as have many, why no investigations have been
open in Afghanistan, Iraq and Palestine after long
periods of preliminary analysis notwithstanding
clear evidence of violation?”
(spoke in Arabic)
African countries have received the President of the
Republic of the Sudan in fulfilment of their rights and
obligations as independent sovereign States, pursuant
to the provisions of international law, as reflected in
its well-established norms and customs, as well as in
article 98 of the Rome Statute of the ICC itself, but the
Court has chosen to misinterpret that article and apply
it selectively, as we explained earlier. Likewise, African
countries received the President of the Republic of the
Sudan pursuant to the provision of article 23.2 of the
Constitutive Act of the African Union, which continued
to be reiterated at the Union’s successive summits, with
directives to Union members to abide by, adhere to and
act upon.

16-1650117/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The African continent, which is now witnessing
such discriminatory treatment against its people, knows
for sure that it was not a culprit in the horrors of the
Second World War, which led to the establishment of the
court in 1998, and that the credibility and impartiality
of the Court — which have in fact been lacking since its
inception — are being jeopardized by those who make
its membership a cornerstone of their foreign policy,
while providing the best part of its financial resources,
monopolizing its offices, selectively nominating
candidates for the remainder of its posts on the basis
of political affiliation, and mandating that what
development assistance and humanitarian aid they give
is conditional to acceding to its membership.
How can we end any armed conflict in the world?
How has the United Nations ended armed conflicts
around the world? Has it not been via negotiated,
political and peaceful settlement? That is exactly what
the Sudan has done, in cooperation with the United
Nations in Abuja in 2006 and when the Abuja agreement
was later superceded in Qatar. Holding meetings with
those who reject peaceful settlement, the way the
Prosecutor has done, undermines international peace
and the rights of the victims. Peaceful settlement is the
practical and sole interpretation of what the Council has
called for in claiming that there is no military solution
to the conflict. The Prosecutor and her supporters can
ask those who are thwarting the peace process why they
are doing so.
When the Council reviewing the Court’s report
on Libya, the representative of the Russian Federation
pointed out that the report in fact appeared to be more
of a report from a monitoring mission. That would
typically apply, word for word, to the report on the
Sudan before us. We would also like to add that the
Prosecutor’s Office, headed by the Prosecutor of the
Court, has resorted to blatant lying when it refers,
in paragraphs 14 to 20, of the deteriorating situation
in Darfur and the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, in what looks like a pretext to justify the
perpetuation of the Court’s jurisdiction over the Sudan.
We would like to call attention the report of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2016/268) for the same period covered by
the court’s report, which was reviewed by the Council
on 6 April (see S/PV.7666), and which spoke of a
decline in cases of tribal conflict, a decline in criminal
acts, an increase in coordination between Sudanese
security agencies and the Operation with respect to
18/20

09/06/2016

the prosecution of perpetrators of attacks against
the mission’s personnel, and a decline in criminal
acts against voluntary organizations, and as regards
national efforts to protect human rights and establish
local branches of the National Commission for Human
Rights in all the states of Darfur region.
I would like also to draw attention to the recent joint
report of the joint working group of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Government of the Sudan,
issued on 22 May, which acknowledges the completion
of procedures for an administrative referendum in
Darfur as a last key step towards implementing the
2011 Doha Peace Agreement for Peace in Darfur; the
role of the Implementation Follow-Up Commission in
monitoring the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur; a higher number of cases of
human rights violations reported in Darfur, which
reflects the enhanced awareness of citizens regarding
their rights and growing confidence in relevant
Government agencies; increasing cooperation between
the African Union Mission in Sudan and Government
authorities in Darfur; the interest of state governors in
and their willingness to cooperate with humanitarian
organizations and allow them full and unhindered
access to the areas they may wish to reach; the efforts
aimed at containing any tribal conflicts; and most
importantly, the fact that environmental degradation
and climate change are among the root causes of the
conflict in Darfur. Consequently, do we not have the
right to come to the conclusion that the ICC is willing
to lie to justify its ongoing exercise of jurisdiction over
the Sudan?
Finally, the ICC is seeking to exercise its jurisdiction
based on the alleged and unfounded presumption that
the judicial system in the Sudan is unwilling and unable
to administer justice. In that respect, I would only like
to recite, calmly and objectively, the following excerpt
from the latest joint report of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Government of the Sudan on the
situation in Darfur:
(spoke in English)
“The joint working group acknowledges the
efforts of the state Governments and Prosecutor
for Darfur Special Crimes Court to address the
crimes committed during the conflict and restore
law and order through the deployment of additional
police, corrections and judicial human and material
resources across the five states of Darfur, including
16-16501

09/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

legal advisers, prosecutors, legal aid assistants and
family child protection units.”
(spoke in Arabic)
I hope I have thus made my contribution to the
Council’s work in respect of establishing the fallacious
nature of the report of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC, in the hope the Security Council will decide to set
aside such reports and play close heed to the demands
made by the Open-Ended Committee of African
Ministers on International Criminal Court, which was
set up by the African Summit held in South Africa to
end the meddling of the Court in the African continent.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Bensouda to respond to the comments
made.
Ms. Bensouda: I regret all of the allegations of
selectivity on the part of the Office that have been made.
A close look at our work should suggest otherwise. I
regret also the blatant misinformation presented by the
representative of the Sudan to cover up the situation in
Darfur. I regret this misinformation.
As has been commented on, there is a perceived
tension between articles 27, on the irrelevance of
official capacity, and 98(1), on cooperation with respect
to waiver of immunity and consent to surrender, of the
Rome statute. The question naturally arises: if a Head
of State for whom an International Criminal Court
(ICC) warrant has been issued travels through the
territory of a State party, is that State party bound to
arrest and surrender the suspects to the Court, given the
provisions of article 98(1)?
Reasonable minds, reasonable lawyers may differ
in their interpretation of the Statute. However, what
is clear and indisputable is which body determines
with authority and finality the issue of whether or not
immunity is attached to the individual in question in any
specific case, and that is the Court and only the Court.
It is an obvious fact, but it must be emphasized,
that the ICC is a Court. It is not an association, it is
not a non-governmental organization or any other type
of organization. It is a criminal Court that determines
individual criminal responsibility within the framework
of the Rome Statute. States may choose to join the
Court by acceding to the treaty or choose not to join
the Court.

S/PV.7710

However, if a State chooses to join the Court and
becomes a State party, then it is bound to accept and
follow the provisions of the Rome Statute as they
apply to States parties; this includes being bound by
the decisions of the Court. So who decides the issue
of the apparent tension between the apparent tension
between articles 27, on the irrelevance of official
capacity, and article 98(1), on cooperation with respect
to waiver of immunity and consent to surrender? The
answer is clear: it is not the States parties themselves;
it is not the Security Council; it is not academics; it is
the Court itself.
Regarding the specific case of President Al-Bashir,
the Pre-Trial Chamber made this fact absolutely clear in
its non-compliance decision regarding the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on 9 April 2014. The Court is
the only and sole authority to decide whether or not the
immunity is generally attached to Mr. Al-Bashir, as
sitting Head of State, where applicable in this particular
case. The conclusion finds support in article 119(1) of
the Statute, which provides that any dispute concerning
the judicial functions of the court shall be settled by the
decision of the Court. This is a decision of the Court;
therefore, simply put, it is binding on States parties that
have joined the Court.
Similarly, the Court has ruled on several occasions
that in the specific case of Mr. Al-Bashir, States parties
are obliged to arrest and surrender him should he travel
to their territory. That is why non-compliance findings
have been made and referred to the Council in that case.
For example, this obligation is clear from the same 2014
decision finding the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in noncompliance to which I have referred. It is also
crystal-clear from the June 2015 decision in which
the Pre-trial Chamber also wrote that there exists no
ambiguity or uncertainty with respect to the obligation
of the Republic of South Africa to immediately arrest
and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court.
What I want to stress by referring to this decision
is that the Court has made plain on several occasions
what the answer is to the apparent tensions between
article 27 and 98 in the case of Mr. Al-Bashir. If States
parties do not agree with these decisions or find them
politically inconvenient, they are nevertheless bound
to follow the decisions of the Court. If States parties
disagree with these decisions, the appropriate response
is to challenge them before the Court through the legal
process if necessary and seek to appeal decisions if
they disagree with them. That is the correct way. That

16-1650119/20

S/PV.7710

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

is the legitimate way to receive legal disputes and to
respect the rule of law.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Bensouda for the clarifications made.
The representative of the Sudan has asked for
the floor to make a further statement. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for giving me the
opportunity to take the floor once again.
In response to the comments made by the Prosecutor,
I should like to underscore that I limited myself in my
comments on Darfur and on the jurisdiction of the
Court, basing myself on accounts that come from the
United Nations and from the African Union, which is
recognized by the United Nations.
I should like to underscore a fundamental fact
concerning justice. The Prosecutor is a part of the

20/20

09/06/2016

Court, but the Prosecutor has become a party to the
dispute today. The mission of the Court is to restore
justice. However, the Prosecutor of the Court, as well
as the other Prosecutors, have chosen to be both judge
and jury. This also applies to the previous Prosecutor.
We would like to ask the Prosecutor, what crime did the
President commit by visiting South Africa?
Concerning the contradiction between articles 27
and 98, I should like to refer the Council to the comments
made by the first Prosecutor, Mr. Kirsch, on the issue
of constructive ambiguity in the interpretation of the
two articles. This contradiction and this constructive
ambiguity, as described by the President of the Court,
was exploited and continues to be exploited in order to
go after Heads of State and to attack States, in particular
States that do not have any influence in the world. That
is what the Court has based its action on to date.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

16-16501
