IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Requests the International Law Commission, in conformity with resolution 36/106, to submit a preliminary
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session
bearing, inter alia, on the scope and the structure of the
draft Code;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations to present or update their
comments and observations on the draft Code with a view
to their submission to the International Law Commission;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind''.
/07th plenary meeting
16 December 1982
37/103.

Progressive development of the principles and
norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 34/150 of 17 December 1979
and 35/166 of 15 December 1980, entitled "Consolidation
and progressive development of the principles and norms
of international economic law relating in particular to the
legal aspects of the new international economic order", and
its resolution 36/ 107 of 10 December 1981 , entitled "Progressive development of the principles and norms of international law relating to the new international economic
order",
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 10 particularly of the progress report prepared by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, 11 of the analytical papers and analysis of texts of relevant instruments
and of the views submitted by States in response to General
Assembly resolution 36/107, 12
Taking note, in particular, of the recommendation that
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research should
complete the analytical study on the progressive development of the principles and norms of international law relating
to the new international economic order, in accordance with
the fifth preambular paragraph and paragraph 2 of resolution
36/107,
Recognizing the need for a systematic and progressive
development of the principles and norms of international
law relating to the new international economic order,
l. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research to prepare the third and final phase of the
analytical study and to complete it in time for the SecretaryGeneral to submit it to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session;
10

11

A/37/400 and Add.1-3.
A/37/400, sect. II.

12 See A/37/409/Add. l-3.

265

2. Urges Member States to submit not later than 31
May 1983 relevant information with respect to the study,
including proposals concerning further action to be taken
on the final study to be submitted to the General Assembly
at its thirty-eighth session;
3. Requests the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the regional commissions, the United
Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and other
relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations active in this field, as determined by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, to submit relevant information and to co-operate fully with the Institute
in the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Invites the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research to select, on the basis of equitable geographical
representation, taking into account the different legal and
economic systems of the world, experts who will help it to
carry out the last phase of the study;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report on the
final study prepared by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research for its consideration, on a priority
basis, under the item entitled · 'Progressive development of
the principles and norms of international law relating to the
new international economic order" to be included in the
provisional agenda of that session.
107th plenary meeting
/6 December 1982

37/104.

Observer status of national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or by the League of Arab States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/167 of 15 December 1980,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 13
Bearing in mind the resolution of the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International Organizations relating to the observer status of national liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity and/or by the League
of Arab States, 14
Noting that the Vienna Convention on the Representation
of States in Their Relations with International Organizations
of a Uni versa! Character, of 14 March 1975, 15 regulates
only the representation of States in their relations with international organizations,
Taking into account the current practice of inviting the
above-mentioned national liberation movements to participate as observers in the sessions of the General Assembly,
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and in the work of the conferences held
under the auspices of such international organizations,
Convinced that the participation of the national liberation
movements referred to above in the work of international
organizations helps to strengthen international peace and
co-operation,

A/371326 and Add. I.
See Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International Organizations.
Vienna. 4 February-14 March 1975. vol. II (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.75.V. 12), document A/CONF.67/15, annex.
"Ibid .. vol. 11. p. 207.
13
14

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

266

Desirous of ensuring the effective participation of the
above-mentioned national liberation movements as observers in the work of international organizations and of regulating, to that end, their status and the facilities, privileges
and immunities necessary for the performance of their
functions,
I. Invites all States that have not done so, in particular
those that are hosts to international organizations or to conferences convened by, or held under the auspices of, international organizations of a universal character, to consider
as soon as possible the question of ratifying, or acceding
to, the Vienna Convention on the Representation of States
in Their Relations with International Organizations of a
Universal Character;
2. Calls once more upon the States concerned to accord
to the delegations of the national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or by the
League of Arab States, and accorded observer status by
international organizations, the facilities, privileges and immunities necessary for the performance of their functions
in accordance with the provisions of the Vienna Convention
on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International Organizations of a Universal Character;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
16 December /982

37/10S.

Report of the Special Committee on Enhancing
the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use
of Force in International Relations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/9 of 8 November 1976, in
which it invited Member States to examine further the draft
World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in International
Relations 16 as well as other proposals made during the consideration of this item,
Rtcalling also its resolution 3 2/ l 50 of 19 December 1977,
by which it established the Special Committee on Enhancing
the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in
International Relations,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 33/96 of 16 December 1978, 34/ l 3 of 9 November 1979, 35/50 of 4 December 1980 and 36/31 of 13 November 1981, in which it
decided that the Special Committee should continue its work,
Taking note of the statement made by the Chairman of
the Special Committee at its session in 1982, 17
Having considered the report of the Special Committee, 18
Taking into account that the Special Committee has not
completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of the principle of the non-use of force in international
relations and for assistance by the United Nations in this
endeavour,
Expressing the hope that the Special Committee will, on
the basis of the proposals before it, complete the mandate
entrusted to it as soon as possible,
16
Official Records of the General Assembl_v, Thirt_v-ji,urth Session. SupplemLnt No. 41 (A/34141 and Corr. I), annex.
17
Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 4/ (A/37/41 ), para.

l. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use
of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, a world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes or
such other recommendations as the Committee deems
appropriate;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in order to ensure
further progress in its work, to begin at its forthcoming
session, as the next step, the elaboration of the formulas of
the working paper containing the main elements of the principle of non-use of force in international relations, taking
duly into account the proposals submitted to it and, in particular, the efforts undertaken at its session in 1982;
4. Invites the Governments that have not yet done so
to communicate their comments or suggestions or to bring
them up to date, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 31 /9;
5. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of the
importance of reaching general agreement whenever it has
significance for the outcome of its work;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special
Committee with the necessary facilities and services;
7. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on
its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled •'Report of the Special
Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle
of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".
/07th plenary meeting
/6 December 1982

37/106.

Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its fifteenth session, 19
Recalling that the object of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law is the promotion of the
progressive harmonization and unification of international
trade law,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolutions 2205 (XXI) of
17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission, 3108
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973, by which it increased the
membership of the Commission, 34/142 of 17 December
1979, by which the co-ordinating function of the Commission in the field of international trade law was emphasized,
and 36/32 of 13 November 1981, by which the importance
of the participation of observers from all States and interested international organizations at sessions of the Commission and its Working Groups was affirmed, as well as
its previous resolutions concerning the reports of the Commission on the work of its annual sessions,
Recalling al.l'o its resolutions 320 l (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
and 3362 (S-Vll) of 16 September 1975,

372.

'" Ibid .. Supplement No. 41 (A/37/41).

19

Ibid .. Supplement No. 17 (N37tl7 and Corr. I and 2).
