UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
nd
MEETING:

31 OCTOBER

1978

NEW-YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2092/Rev.

Adoptionoftheagcnda,..:

1)

. . . . . . ,. . . .. . .. . . f .. . . . . .

Page
1
1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .a . . . . . . . . ..16..,.I.-.

The situation in Nlimibia:
(ff) Report
of the Secretary-General
submitted
pursuant to paragraph 7 of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) (S/12903);
I’%) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Burundi
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security CounciI
(S/12906)
.,......._.~.....,,.....,.,,,,..............

SIPV.2092

*
1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2092nd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 31 October 1978, at 11 a.m.
Pvaident: Mr. Jacques LEPKETTE (France),
Prescrzt; The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of’, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2092/Rev.l)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution
435 (1978) (S/12903);
(b) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12906)
T/E meeting was called to order at Il. 3.5 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should also like to inform members of the Council that I
have received a letter dated 30 October 1978 from the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia which
reads as follows:
“The Security Council is now considering the question
of Namibia. I wish to convey to you the desire of the
United Nations Council for Namibia to participate in this
debate, without the right to vote. For this purpose, the
Council for Namibia will be represented by a delegation
headed by myself as President of the Council and
in&ding the three Vice-Presidents of the Council:
Mr. R. Jaipal (India), Mr. F. Cuevas Cancino (Mexico) and
Mr. F. K. Bouayad-Agha (Algeria).”
3. On previous occasions the Security Council has extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice, I
propose, therefore, that the Council should extend invitations, pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure, to the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the delegation of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 435 (1978)
(S/12903);
lb) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2906)
1. The PRESIDENT (itrterpreratiun
,+om French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Burundi, Egypt
and Ghana in which they
request
to be invited to
participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in conformity with the pro.
visions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitution of the President, Mr. Sinzbananiye
(h-undi),
Mr, Abdel Meguid [Egypt) and Mr. Boatal
(CJlana) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Miss Konie (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the aeIegation took places at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretatior? from French): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received a
letter dated 31 October 1978 from the representatives of
Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria which reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that the Council shauld
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, Permanent
Observer of the South West Africa People’s Organization
to the United Nations, during the course of the Council’s
consideration of the situation in Namibia.” f S/1ZYU9./
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.
At the invitatiorl of the President, Mr. Gurirab (Permarlent Observer of the South West Africa People’s Organization) took a place at the Council table.
5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation? from French): The
Council is meeting today in accordance with the rec]uest
made by the Group of African States in a letter dated 24

of the Territory, to continue the pursuit of its brutal war
againstthe peopleof Namibiaand to continue its efforts to
eliminate SWAPO,the true and authentic representativeof
that people.

October 1978 addressed to the President of the Council by
the representative of Burundi (S/12906] .
6. Council members have before them document S/l 2903,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 435 (1978).
Council members also have before them the following
documents: S/12900, which contains the text of a letter
dated 19 October addressed to the Secretary-General by the
Charge: d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of South
Africa, and S/12902, which contains the text of a letter
dated 21 October addressed to the President of the Council
by the representatives of Canada, the Federal Republic of
Germany, France, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America.

11. The South African Government then asksthat we
should regard the so-calledelections that it will hold in
those circumstances
asmeaningful,as“an internal process”
that will elect leaders:leadersof what?
12. Then, we are told, South Africa may be able to
persuadethe new leaders of Namibia to hold further
elections under United Nations supervision.It does not
even try to provide credible reasonsfor believing that it
might do so.It merely mentionsthe matter, in the apparent
hope that someonewill persuadethe Security Council to
graspat any straw.

7. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): In order to save time, 1
propose to express my compliments to you, Mr. President,
and to your predecessor directly and in writing. I hope I
shall be forgiven for departing from Security Council
tradition. I also hope that you will forgive me for
addressing you in the English language.

13. Now, in thesecircumstances,
can the Pretoria meetings
be said to have brought about a compromise?The only
compromise,it would seem, is on the principles of the
United Nations and on its historic obligations to the
Namibianpeople.

8. We confront today a grave situation, far more grave
than many of us had anticipated, for we are witnessing the
beginning of permanent war in southern Africa. War is
being forced upon African countries, let there be no
mistake about that; it is being forced upon us by the
intransigence and aggression of the minority rt+gimes in the
region.

14. Some sections at least of the press have shown
scepticismabout the Pretoria meetings.A headline in 77?e
Guardian on 19 October was: “West’senvoysleave Namibia
talks empty-handed”. That certainly seemsa much more
accuratedescriptionof what happenedthan many accounts
that havebeenheard.

9. However, we must aIso recognize that war has come
partly because we failed to understand, to see clearly, the
threat to peace and security that was developing in the
whole of southern Africa. We failed, and the Council failed,
to appreciate the fact that South Africa and the Smith
rigime were determined to maintain apartheid and colonialism intact, whatever the cost. We thought that there was
yet time for negotiating a peaceful solution to the problems
of southern Africa, that those rCgimes might actually yield
power to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe. Today it
seems quite clear that that hope was somewhat misconceived.

15. Weshouldbe in no doubt why South Africa hastaken
this position. For a long time it apparently believedthat it
could actually get foreign support for a fraudulent election
by which it might install its clients and thus maintain
control of Namibia. It has always been frightened at the
prospect of free electionsand therefore at the prospect of
the United Nationspreventing fraud. On 9 September, the
Rand Duil~~ Mail quoted the ProgressiveFederal Party
spokesman
of foreign affairs assayingthat “the real reason
behind the Government’s threat to withdraw from the
Western plan for South West Africa was that it feared
SWAP0 would win an election”. Just a few days ago 77rc
Observerof London quoted a British official at Pretoria as
saying, “I do not believe that South Africa wants an
agreementthat would give the South West Africa People’s
Organizationa fair chancein an election”. Could anything
be moreclear? South Africa doesnot want electionsthat it
cannot control.

10. It is particularly clear in the case of South Africa’s
attitude towards a solution of the Namibian problem. We
are now told that the recent trip to Pretoria of the five
WesternForeign Ministers resulted in a compromise;that it
will be possibleto go ahead and to hold elections under
United Nations supervision and control in Namibiain the
spring of next year. However, it is admitted that nothing
will be done to prevent South Africa from holding its own
so-calledelections in Namibia before that, in Decemberof
this year. These,according to the recentjoint statementof
the South African Government and the five Western
membersof the Security Council, will be ‘&an internal
processto elect leaders” /S/12900, amex I/, para. 4f. In
other words, South Africa plans to place power in the
handsof its clients and place men in Namibia.It is carrying
out an internal settlement there, in defianceof the United
Nations and in defiance of world opinion, indeed, let me
say, of civilized opinion. It is declaring its intention to
continue to occupy Namibia illegally, to continue the
practice of apartheid there, to continue its administration

16. Thus the immediate problem we confront today is
that South Africa standsin defiance of Security Council
resolutionson Namibia. There is no need for any confusion about this. There can be no elections in Namibia
under United Nations supervision and control after an
“internal settlement”. The purposeof an “internal settlement”-and that is what I call it-is to entrench an
administrationwhich will allow the continuation of South
Africa’s occupation. It will createan interim administration
placed there by South Africa that will inevitably oppose
any new election, and particularly one under United
Nations supervisionand control. A free election would
meanthe end of South Africa’s power. To imaginethat the
new “leadership” installed by South Africa in a one-party
2

“e]ection”’ in December will invite further elections and a
United Nations presence in Namibia is to believe in dreams.
To suggest that such a possibility should be taken seriously
here is absurd.

strategicequationfor South Africa, weshouldhaveknown
that it could not have seriously contemplated ceding
control of Namibiaat any time in the pastthreeyears.I am
saying,in short, that South Africa hassimplybeenplaying
for time and that it certainly never intendedto acceptthe
termsof resolution385 (1976).

17. Tfie question we mUSt face now is what the Council
wil] do about this situation. There is no doubt that we must
take action against South Africa and that we must do so
soon. Before deciding upon precisely what to do, however,
we must consider the present situation in its wider context,
in the context of an expanding war in southernAfrica, We
mustknow the background to present eventsand seethat
the seriousness
of the presentproblemis partly the result of
our failure previously to draw the line with regardto South
Africa.
18. It would not be wrong to say that, in our patient
negotiatingand in our tolerance of what seemedlapses,we
have encouraged South Africa to become increasingly
aggressive
a.nddefiant, to the point, in fact, wherewe are
askedto accept that its ludicrous propasalsfor an “internal
settlement” still allow a solution accordingto the requirementsof resolution 385 (1976). It may be that this has
happenedprecisely becausewe have sometimeslooked
upon the ongoing negotiations with South Africa in
isolation,that is, without assessing
the importanceof the
outcomefor South Africa in the context of the intensifying
conflict in southernAfrica.
19. The fact is that South Africa hasmadea choiceabout
Namibia in a situation in which it feels increasingly
threatened.The liberation struggleshave over the pasttwo
years been intensified throughout southern Africa. The
peoplesof Namibia,Zimbabwe and South Africa itself have
fought to bring forward the end of apartheid and colonialism,and with great sacrifice and heroism. Their sue.
cesses
have been many. South Africa hashad to reinforce
its troops and police in Namibia. The Smith regime in
Zimbabwehas been hard pressedby the forces of the
Patriotic Front, which now control large areasof rural
Zimbabwe.South Africa hashad to help the Smithregimeto
hold out even as long as this. It has transferred arms to
Smith, and somewere usedin the recent raidson Zambia;
and, according to various reports, it has once again sent
severalbattalionsof troops to help the racist settler army in
Zimbabwe.At the sametime, South Africa hasfound itself
increasinglyisolated in the world community. It hasbeen
unableto contain the developing political struggleof the
liberation forces in South Africa and has been forced to
resortto savagerepressionon an extensivescale.
20. It is this situation which has causedSouth Africa to
reject the plan of the Secretary-Generalfor electionsin
Namibia under United Nations supervision and control.
Confrontedwith an intensifying offensive againstupartheid
on all sides,South Africa fears to surrendercontrol of any
territory on its borderswhich it hasthe remotestchanceof
holding.In our view, strategicconsiderationshavebeenthe
decisive factor in South African calculations about
Namibia.

22. What is the meaning,then, of the fact that South
Africa hasshowna willingnessto engagein negotiationson
Namibia during the past 18 months? Apparently it has
beenhoping that someonewould find a way to squarethe
circle, to reconcilethe irreconcilable.It hasbeen hoping
that it could retain control of Namibiawhile at the same
time creatingthe illusion of an internationally acceptable
settlement. It never contemplatedreal independencefor
Namibia.That wouldhavebeen,in the gatheringstorm,too
dangerousfor its security, as the generalssaw it. it was
acutely conscious,however, of the needto appeaseinternational opinion. Pretoria knew that seriousconsequences
might follow if it flouted the United Nations over the
questionof Namibia.SouthAfrica thereforechosethe path
of cunning.It soughtto promotea solutionwhich appeared
to satisfythe conditionsposedin resolution385 (1976) but
which in fact ensuredit a very goodchanceof maintaining
control of Namibiaafter a brief transitionperiod.
23. It mustbe saidthat South Africa receivedsubstantial
assistance
in its efforts to maintainits control of Namibia
and to use the United Nationsfor its own purposes.That
assistance
was providedby the very Powerswhoserepresentativesclaim to haveachieveda “compromisesolution”
in Pretoria earlier this month; for it was the plan of the
five Western Security Council members,the so-called
Westernproposalson Namibia,which opened the possibility of conductinga fraudulentelectionin Namibiaunder
United Nations auspices.We can see that it was that
possibility, buried in the ambiguitiesof language,which
attracted South Africa to thoseproposals.I myselfwarned
of the dangersof South Africa’s tactics in the debateon
Namibia at the thirty-second sessionof the General
Assemblylast year.
24. It will be rememberedthat resolution 385 (I976)
calledfor anend to South African control of Namibia.This
wasto be ensuredby a withdrawalof SouthAfrican troops
and police and by the dismantlingof the South African
administration. The United Nations was to provide a
transitional administration,backedup by an international
military presence,Free electionswereto be held once the
United Nationswasestablished
in Namibia.It wasexpected
that they would be free, that they would allow a true test
of popular opinion, becausethey would be held under
United Nations supervisionand control. Thosewho voted
for resolution 385 (1976)-and it was adopted unanimously-were aware that electionscould not be free if
South Africa wasin a positionto exerciseany influencein
the Territory duringthe transitionperiod.
2.5. Against that background,the Westernproposalson
Namibiacameassomethingof a surprise.They did propose
a United Nationspresencein Namibia,and they did 41 for
elections. However, the electionswere to be held before
South Africa withdrew from the Territory altogether. It
was not expected that South Africa would withdraw its

21. It should be noted, furthermore, that South Africa
knew its situation was becoming increasingly difficult. In
view of that fact and of the decisiveimportance of the
3

United Nations stamp of approval for the results of a
“fixed” election. If the United Nations presence was to be as
strong as that indicated in the report, then South Africa
had little chance of carrying its plan to a successful
conclusion. At least, that is what the South African
Government believed. Elections which it could not control
completely raised the spectre of a SWAP0 electoral victory,
and of a truly independent Namibian government. Thus, to
Pretoria, a strong United Nations presence meant that it
might lose control of Namibia.

administration at all. The South African police, for instance, were to be responsible for the maintenance of “law
and order”. South African troops, furthermore, would be
present in significant numbers during much of the period
before elections. A small residual of troops was to remain in
the Territory.
26. These proposals created a dilemma for many of us.
Clearly, it was good to move towards establishing a
significant United Nations presence in Namibia. At the
same time, it was clear that the proposals were not in
conformity with resolution 385 (1976), that they failed to
conform to the terms of that resolution both in letter and
in spirit. The combination of continuing South African
control and a weak United Nations presence opened the
way for a subversion of our efforts to ensure true
independence for the Namibian people.

32. It was without a doubt this increased risk of losing
control which caused the apartheid regime, in an apparent
reversal of policy, to reject the idea of co*operation with
the United Nations and to decide upon an “internal
settlement”.
33. We are now back where we started from in January
1976, when the demands for South Africa’s withdrawal
were formulated by the Council, We are perhaps somewhat
wiser, the people of Namibia have had to endure nearly
three more years of colonial rule, and South Africa is much
stronger.

27. I feel bound to point out that those of us who raised
questions about these matters at the time were never
accorded a proper answer. In fact, WC were condemned for
raising questions which are now the common currency of
discussion in Africa. In retrospect, I feel particularly
unhappy about this evasiveness. If the flaws in the Western
proposals had been debated openly much earlier, we should
not have been in the difficult situation we are in today.

34. There are those who now suggest that we should carry
on with the implementation of the Western proposals and
the Secretary-General’s report. They ask, “What is the
alternative? “. I will take the question not just as an
expression of lamentable and unwarranted confusion, but
as an invitation to clarify the issues.

28. At the same time, however, many African delegations
agreed to these proposals, although with trepidation, as a
basis for a Security Council decision to send a United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) to Namibia.
The Secretary-General’s
Special Representative went to
Namibia in early August to conduct a fact-finding mission.
He returned to make his report before the end of the
month. In the period of intense consultations which took
place during and after his trip, many African delegations
asked for assurances that South Africa would be prevented
from exerting a controlling influence over the electoral
process.

35. When South Africa rejected the proposals for elections
under United Nations supervision and control, the five
Western representatives in the Council indicated that they
would go to Pretoria and attempt to get the South African
Government to change its mind. They have failed, utterly.
No matter what is said, no matter how fine a picture is
painted, there can be no doubt that South Africa is intent
on an “internal settlement” and that it has made this
decision in order to perpetuate its colonial rule in Namibia.
The Western representatives have failed to deliver their
client.

29. In fact, the report of the Secretary-General issued at
the end of August /S/12827/ reflected general agreement
on the need to take precautions. The Western proposals
were strengthened, The Secretary-General insisted on an
appropriate number of months in which to prepare elections under United Nations authority. He indicated that it
would be necessary to send 7,500 troops rather than 5,000
to Namibia, including, of course, logistical support, as the
military component of UNTAG. He indicated that it would
be necessary to send United Nations police as well.

36. I am impressed by the fact that it is these reprcsentatives who now talk about being confused, about the lack
of alternatives. It would seem that their confusion about
what to do hides something much more serious. It is well
known that the Western Powers have been seeking to
arrange what they call “peaceful solutions” in Namibia and
Zimbabwe. It is no secret that it is part of their strategy to
“stabilize” the area, to ensure some kind of majority rule,
perhaps, but majority rule with “economic stability”. These
Powers have in fact shown a certain desperation about the
intensification of the liberation struggles in southern Africa.
They have felt threatened by them.

30. The Secretary-General’s
report caused considerable
alarm in South Africa. Speaking at the Free State National
Party Congress in early September, the present South
African Prime Minister, Mr. P. W. Botha, suggested that the
United Nations plan was part of a Marxist plot to establish
a hostile State on the banks of the Orange River. I quote
what he said: “One cannot come to any other conclusion if
one beholds the antics of the United Nations”.

37. In a speech made on 21 September, the British
Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, Mr. David Owen,
said:

31. There has been, in fact, a good deal of ranting in
South Africa about the report. Clearly, however, the real
problem was that the report foreclosed the possibility of
any easy manipulation of the electoral process and of a

“If the chances of peaceful negotiations do go out of
the window, this country and the West generally will face
its gravest crisis yet in Africa.”
4

That is a most important and revealing statement. A recent
analysis
in Tlze Wushingtor? Post of 2 October carried a
similar comment on developments in southern Africa. It
described the Carter Administration-I
am using the general
term here, there is no disrespect intendcci to President
Carter-as “perilously close to disaster in its carefully laid
policy
toward southern Africa”.

worsening Of the situation. We have waited so long to act
against South Africa that the struggle from here on is going
to be much harder and much more costly.
43. The answer to the question “What is the alternative? ‘*
is that the question itself misconstrues the situation.
Whatever each one of us may feel, however difficult the
situation and the decisions that we face may seem, there are
certain immutable facts that we must face.

38, What is the nature of this “disaster”?
Why is
Mr, Owen anticipating the “gravest crisis yet in Africa”?
wlat does the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary mean
by that phrase? We need to discuss the answers to these
questions now. The answers may be found in many places
and in many documents. One citation will suffice to show
what is at issue. Again, The Wushingtorz Post analysis stated
that:

44. The first is that South Africa, which is increasingly
pressed on all sides, is not going to surrender its control
over Namibia now. Nor is it going to organize reforms that
will end apartheid. Nor will it withhold support from the
Smith rBgime. South Africa and the illegal regime are
determined to maintain apartheid and colonialism in
southern Africa. They are expending lives to prove their
determination. Thus the question “What is the alternative? ” is raised in a context in which South Africa has
shown that it will use force to ensure its solution, And
South Africa has the power and the external assistance to
use force effectively for a long time to come. The
questioners today ignore the fact that it is South Africa
that has set the terms of confrontation in southern Africa.

“In both Rhodesia and Namibia, the time is fast
approaching when the Carter Administration may have to
choose between being on the ‘white’ or ‘black’ side-or
simply sit out the conflicts on the sidelines and thereby
risk default to the Soviet Union.”
39. Let us for the moment ignore the propagandistic
character of this analysis, and particularly the fact that the
notion of defaulting to the Soviet Union is rather an
irrelevant distortion. We all know that i7w Washington Post
puts its finger on the nub of the question. The situation in
southern Africa now presents the West with its “gravest
crisis” because it is no longer possible to avoid choosing
between Western interests in a “stable” southern Africa and
respect for human rights and democracy.

45. The second immutable fact that WC must consider in
our deliberations today is that South Africa cannot carry
out its policy of stabilization by force of arms by standing
still. Nor does it plan to. In order to protect the inner ring
of white supremacy in Africa, the Afrikaner State has
determined upon an aggressive forward-defence strategy.
We have already seen the war carried to Angola, Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana by the aggressive forces of
South African and Rhodesian settler militarism. We shall
see much more of that in the future, let there be no doubt
about it. South Africa will not rest in its efforts to destroy
the liberation forces of southern Africa. There will be more
Kassingas, more Nyazonias, more Mkushis.

40. The Western Powers have been trying to avoid this
choice for nearly two decades, It is no longer possible to do
so. The South African racist State threatens to carry the
whole of Africa into war, if that is what is necessary to
preserve apartheid and colonialism. There is no doubt that
it can spread war to the whole of central, and perhaps even
eastern, Africa. Something must be done. By describing the
present situation as a “disaster”, as a “grave crisis”, the
Western Powers are stating that they have great difficulty in
contemplating what they are obliged to do, which is to
support United Nations resolutions on Namibia, on
apartheid and on colonialism.

46. Western military observers are saying that the raids
against Zambia signify “the beginning of permanent war in
southern Africa”. The beginning of permanent war in
southern Africa means inevitably that war will be carried to
other parts of Africa, that no one will be safe from the
depredations of the South African racists. Can the Western
Powers say in these circumstances that United Nations
efforts to. isolate and weaken South Africa will bring
disaster? Or is it the policy of tolerating South African
aggression that does that?

41. Does this mean that in the final analysis they will opt
for the support of upurtheid? Does it mean that they will
not now support United Nations action against South
Africa because of its refusal to withdraw from Namibia?
Have they forgotten that they voted for resolution
385 (1976)? Have they forgotten that they presented their
Plan for Namibia as a way of ensuring its independence and
that South Africa has rejected that plan?

47. We are on the verge of general war in much of Africa.
That is what will take place if certain Powers succumb to
the temptation to allow South Africa to defy the Organization and the Council. We can avoid that prospect only by
taking action against the State that presents an imminent
threat to the peace and security of southern Africa. We
must do so now. If we fail we shall have to answer to
history for our lack of understanding, for our weakness and
for our betrayal.

42. It is no Ionger possible to delay action against South
Africa. We have waited long enough. Our tolerance towards
South Africa, a tolerance which has been urged upon US by
the Western Powers, has not helped to resolve anything.
The solutions which were promised have not materialized.
They have vanished. And we can be sure that our
appeasement of South Africa has done nothing but
encourage it to build up its military power and become
more aggressive. Our delays have contributed to a

48. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Burundi, W~KJ would
like to make a statement as Chairman of the African Group
for the month of October. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
5

49. Mr. SIMBANANIYE
(Burundi) (interpretation
from
French):
Mr. President, as Chairman of the Group of
African States for the month of October, allow me to
congratulate you most warmly on your accessionto the
presidency of this eminent Council. Allow me too to pay a
tribute to you fD1 the remarkable work you have already
accomplishedin the courseof this month.

56. I would indicate at the outset that, anxious to save
time and to be clear and effective, the African States
representedat the United Nations referred to the termsof
resolution 435 (1978) to demonstrate the defianceof the
United Nations by the racist South African Governmentin
its persistent refusal to implement the numerousCouncil
resolutionsand in particular the latest one, on the question
of Namibia.

50. I should also like to avail myself of this special
occasion to express on behalf of the Group of African
States my sincere gratitude to Ambassador Hulinskg of
Czechoslovakia, President of the Council last’month, for
having so competently and successfullyguided the work of
the Council,

57. In so doing, the African States have no intention of
renouncing their right to draw the attention of membersof
the Council to other casesof flagrant violation by the racist
Government of South Africa of Council resolutions,in
particular resolutions 385 (1976) and 431 (1978), which,
furthermore. are taken up in the operative part of resolution 435 (1978). The request of the Group of African
States therefore falls within a more general context,
namely, the persistent refusal of South Africa to comply
with resolutionsand decisionsof the General Assembly,the
International Court of Justice and the Security Council,in
particular, resolutions 435 (1978), 431 (1978) and
385 (1976).

51. In the opinion of the African States, the debate that
has just begun is important. It is a happy coincidence,
Mr. President, that it is guided by a personality suchasyou.
You are a person with eminent moral and intellectual
qualities and outstanding diplomatic skill and so you will,
we are sure, successfully guide these important debates.
Since you have specialreasonsfor being attached to Africa,
you will realize the anguishof the peoplesof that beautiful
and rich continent, who are now the subject of scandalous
exploitation by racist and colonialist regimesand are even
threatened in their very existenceby systemsof intolerable
and anachronistic domination.

58. Resolution 435 (1978) would not have been in the
Council’s documentation and therefore would not have
been the subjectof the presentdebateshad the racistSouth
African Government complied with General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, terminating the
Mandate of South Africa over the Territory of Namibia.
The massiverepressionto which the people of Namibia is
subjectedby the racist Government of South Africa would
have ceaseda long time agohad that Government respected
the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971,’ whereby South Africa wasplacedunder
thp obligation to withdraw its administration from the
Territory.

52. We are certain that, coming asyou do from a people
that respond positively to the appeal from London and
North Africa by one of the great statesmenof our time,
General de Gaulle, to take up the armedstruggleagainstthe
Hitler regime,you will alsorespondpositively to the cry for
help of the Namibian people, the victims of a repressionas
bloody and barbarous as that practised in the past by the
Nazi regimeand which haslastedfor more than 60 years.

59. Since 1968. the Council has already adopted more
than 15 resolutionson the questionof Namibiawhich have
never been applied becauseof South Africa’s inadmissible
scorn for decisionsof the Council and other main bodiesof
the Organization directly concernedwith the problem.

53. As the worthy representativeof a State that maintains
firm and wide-rangingties of co-operation with Stateswith
different political ideologies and socio-economicregimes,
such as the United States of America, the Soviet Union,
China and the non-aligned countries, you will realize the
soundnessof the policy of the African States and the will
of our peoples to maintain relations of co-operation and
solidarity with the North and the South, the East and the
West.

60. In order to lead Namibia democratically to independence,the Council adopteda very important resolution,
resolution 385 (1976). Under its terms, the Council condemned the illegal occupation of Namibiaby South Africa,
the repressive laws and practices, stained with racial
discrimination, the strengthening of the South African
military apparatusin Namibiaand all useof the Territory as
a base for attacks on neighbouring countries. Above all,
that resolution provided for the organization of free and
fair electionsunder United Nations control and supervision,
with the purpose of securing genuine independencefor
Namibia. While awaiting the transfer of powers to the
people of Namibia, South Africa was to comply with the
provisions of the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights, to
releaseall Namibianpolitical prisonersand unconditionally
to grant to all Namibiansnow exiled for political reasonsall
facilities to return to their country without risk of arrest,
detention, intimidation or imprisonment.

54. This meansthat the African peoplesand Governments
have the right to embark on the course of their own free
choice in the conduct of their affairs, however much it may
displeaseMr. Botha, who wishes to impose his political
system, which is a disgraceto mankind, on the African
peoples.
55. As Chairman of the African Group for the month of
October, I addressedto the President of the Security
Council a letter which readsasfollows:
“On behalf of the Group of African States at the
United Nations, I have the honour to request you to
convene an urgent meeting of the Security Council to
consider South Africa’s defiance of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978).“[S/I2906.]

I Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstandinl:
Security Council Resolution 276 (I 970), Advisory Opinion. I.C.J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.

6

61. In flagrant violation of that resolution, the South
African regime adopted the following measures: the
appointment in Namibia of an Administrator-General in
August 1977, the strengthening of the machinery of
repression against the Namibian people in general and
against SWAPO’s leaders, members and sympathizers, the
organization of so-called internal elections. In the military
field, South African intransigence exceeded all limits.
Indeed, in defiance of the Council and of the international
community, the racist South African regime set up a
military force of 60,000 heavily armed men. What is even
worse is its policy of acquiring nuclear weapons,
62. As regards acts of aggression against independent
neighbouring States, the documentation service of the
Council is well supplied. Indeed, the Council has adopted
many resolutions condemning armed attacks against neighbouring countries, particularly Angola, Zambia and Botswana. This sad fact of life was recognized by the Council
when it adopted resolution 418 (1977). That historic
decision recognized that the military build-up by South
Africa and its persistent acts of aggression against the
neighbouring States seriously disturbed the security of
those States. Furthermore, the resoIution condemned the
policies and acts of the South African Government as
fraught with danger to international peace and security,
The Council, consistent with itself and acting irr accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, decided on a
series of measures capable of responding in part to the
gravity of the situation. I am referring in particular to the
mandatory embargo on arms originating from or destined
for South Africa and the decision to refrain from any
co-operation with South Africa in the manufacture of
nuclear weapons. Regrettably, those measures had only
limited or even symbolic scope becauseprecautionshad
already been taken before the Council’s deliberationson
the problems.
63. However, the Council could have extended those
measures
to other fields. Resolution 38.5(1976), by its final
paragraph,would have enabledmembersof the Council to
decideon the necessarysanctions,Guided by its habitual
wisdom,the Council decided thereby to remainseizedof
the matter and to meet on or before 31 August 1976 for
the purposeof reviewing South Africa’s compliancewith
the terms of the resolution and, in the event of noncompliance,for the purposeof consideringthe appropriate
measuresto be taken under the Charter. That, clearly,
meant recourseto the provisions of Chapter VII. As has
beenclearly proved by what I have said, one is bound to
note that the South African Government hasnot complied
with any of the provisions of resolution 385 (1976).
Accordingly, ChapterVII of the Charter ought to havebeen
appliedagainstSouth Africa since31 August 1976.

“In the springof 1977,it becameapparentto alI of US
that the installation of the TurnhalleConstitution, asit
wascalled,wasimminent.The adoption of legislationto
bring it into effect, forecastfor Juneof 1977,would have
resultedin the unilateral establishment
of a government
basedon ethnic groupsand excludingparticipation by
any Political party, andmost importantly by one of the
major PolitiCal movementsin the Territory, SWAPO.
Such an action, it was clear, would not result in an
internationally acceptablesolutionto the Namibjm question and would, furthermore,by dividing the population
of Namibia among itself on an ethnic basisand by
ignoring the aspirationsof its people for true independenceand unity leadto increased
violence.. . . In the
face of this dismalprospect,our five countriesdecidedto
makea concertedeffort to investigatewhether,by means
of the existing relationsbetweenthemselvesand South
Africa, it might not be possibleto find a practicalway of
implementing,, . resolution 385 (1976) which was
adoptedunanimously.“:!
65. On 7 April 1977, an aide-m&moire
on the needfor a
Namibiasettlementin keepingwith resolution385 (1976)
was presentedto Mr. Vorster by the five Governmentsof
the Westerncountriesmembersof the Security Council.
After many upsanddowns,the SouthAfrican Government
finally agreedto turn the pageregardingthe Turnhalle
Conference. That agreementwas not obtained without
difficulties, asis clearfrom the following excerpt from the
statementof the CanadianSecretaryof State for External
Affairs, whomI take the liberty of quotingagain:
‘<. . . To this end a contact group, comprisingsenior
officials of our Governmentsand includingseniorrepresentativesof our New York missions,went to South
Africa during the period 27-29 April for discussions
of
mostof the issues
associated
with the Namibianquestion
and of the elementsembodiedin resolution385(1976).
At the conclusionof thosediscussions,
in an important
development, South Africa indicated its intention to
forgo the implementationof the TurnhaIleConstitution
through the proposedlegislation;to establish,instead,a
central administrativeauthority in Namibia;and to hold
territory-wide electionswith direct United Nations involvcment for a Constituent Assembly,whosetask it
would be to decideupona constitutionfor Namibia.“3
66. At the end of 18 months of intensivenegotiations
between SWAP0 and South Africa, the five Western
countriesmembersof the Security Councilwelcomedthe
agreementarrived at between the parties. They then
officially presentedtheir proposalfor a settlementof the
Namibiansituationin documentS/12636of 10 April 1978.
It wason that b&s that the Councilapprovedthe proposal
in adoptingresolution431 (1978).

64. But what has happened, then, since the Security
Council showed itself to be lenient-even magnanimous- 67. Pursuant to the provisionsof that resolution, the
towards that regime which contains the seedsof the Secretary-General
prepareda report, which he submittedto
destruction of the Organization? The reply to that clues- the membersof the Councilon 29 August 1978/S/12827/.
tion is no doubt contained in the statementmadeby the
Secretary of State for External Affairs of Canadato the
GeneralAssembly on 25 April 1978 when, speakingon
behalf of France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the
UnitedKingdom, the United Statesand Canada,he said:

The stages for the implementation of the proposal tor a
settlement were as follows:

introduced a new element, namely, internal elections.
Therefore, that was a step backwards, since this problem,
according to the statement of the Canadian Secretary of
State for External Affairs has been settled in the course of
the talks held from 27 to 29 April at Pretoria.

"(a)
Cessation of all hostile acts by all parties and the
withdrawal, restriction or demobilization of the various
armed forces;

72. However, before drawing any hasty conclusion, let us
try to reply to the question of whether South Africa
rejected resolutions 435 (1978) and 431 (1978). I propose
to analyse this in two phases, one before and one after the
date of 19 October 1978.

“(b) Conduct of free and fair elections to the Constituent Assembly, for which the pre-conditions include the
repeal of discriminatory or restrictive laws, regulations or
administrative measures, the release of political prisoners
and detainees and the voIuntary return of exiles, the
establishment of effective monitoring by the United
Nations and an adequate period for electoral campaigning;

73. Prior to 19 October 1978, before the Pretoria meeting
held from 16 to 18 October, everyone agreed in blaming
South Africa for its intransi’gence, and the authors of the
proposal for a settlement threatened to take coercive
measures against the South African Government.

“(c) The formulation and adoption of a Constitution
for Namibia by the Constituent Assembly;

74. I should like to quote what some heads of Western
diplomacy said on the subject. On 29 September 1978,
before the Council, the Canadian Secretary of State for
External Affairs declared the following in regard to South
Africa’s intentions to organize unilateral elections:

“(d) The entry into force of the Constitution and the
consequent achievement of independence of Namibia.”
/Ibid., para. 14.1
48. For all the other elements, it is useful to refer to the
Secretary-General’s report quoted above on the implementation of the proposal for a scttlcment as well as to his
explanatory statement [2087th meeting, paras. JI-22/.
This report as well as the explanatory statement were
approved by the Security Council in its resolution
435 (1978).

“South Africa also indicated that it would unilaterally
organize elections in the Territory for the aIleged purpose
of ascertaining the views of the local inhabitants. . . . to
follow such a course of action would be extremely
short-sighted, and the consequences of such disregard of
the views of the international community could be very
serious.” /2087th meeting, para. 86.J

69. SWAP0 officially indicated its acceptance of this
resolution with its implications. In a spirit of co-operation,
which does honour to its liberation movement, it proposed
a cease-fire agreement with South Africa so as to create
conditions of security for the elections to be held under
Unitecl Nations supervision and control. This agreement was
to be submitted to the United Nations Secretariat. Some
maintain that this attitude is the most appropriate response
to Mr. Botha’s witticism before the Council on 27 July
1978, when fle addressed the following to the sympathisers
and fighters of SWAPO:

After having appealed to South Africa and the Namibians
to reconsider their decision, the Secretary of State continued:
“What would be sheer folly would be to put aside the
positive results of a long negotiating process and proceed
blindly into a renewed period of confrontation.” [Ibid.,
para. 87.1
75. The same day the Secretary of State of the United
States of America, having recalled the hopes aroused by the
visit of the fact-finding mission of the Secretary-General,
indicated that those hopes were thwarted by:

“if, as you claim, you have the support of the majority in
South West Africa, then prove your claim by participating
in elections; abandon the bullet and accept the verdict of
the ballot” /2082nd meeting, pum. 2.531,

“ . . . the decision of the Government of South Africa
itself to sponsor elections in Namibia. In so deciding, it
reversed its earlier willingness to co-operate with the
international community in bringing Namibia to inclcpendence on the basis of Security Council resolution
385 (1976)” [Ibid., para. 59.1

I should like to know whether right now Mr. Botha would
dart to use the same language.
70. The question that now arises is whether South Africa
is prepared to implement the proposal of the five Western
countries in its final form laid down on 2.5 April 1978, in
accordance with Mr. Botha’s own words in the Council:
“South Africa, for its part, accepted the proposal in its final
and definitive form as far back as 25 April 1978.” /ibid.,
pnru. 263.1 Be it said in passing that in its final and
definitive form this proposal nowhere referred to the
principle of internal elections.

76. But in my opinion the most significant statement was
the one made by the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, who said
before the Council:
“There may be those who over the last 18 months have
negotiated in the belief that we would never reach
agreement, that the Western Five and the African
countries would never persuade SWAP0 to forgo the
armed struggle and submit its case to the electors of
Namibia. It is to its credit that it has accepted this. Some

71. At that stage in our thinking, the joint statement of 19
October 1978 by the South African Government and the
Ministers of the five Western countries /S/12900, annex II/
8

in South Africa may have voiced support for the principle
of free and fair elections and independence in the belief
that negotiations would break down and that they would
never have to carry out the undertakings they have
given.” [Ibid.,

pars. 80.1

tn addressing
himself to the South African Government,the
UnitedKingdomSecretary of State said:
L‘We are issuing no threats, but they should not
underestimatethe gravity of the situation that could arise
if there were no solution in sight and we met herein the
Councilagain.” [Ibid., pea. 81.J
77. Thosestatementsclearly prove that the South African
Governmenthad not honoured its commitmentsasregards
the application of the plan of the five Westerncountries.In
theseconditions, every ray of hope for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem vanished.Doubt prevailed
in all diplomatic circles. What could they do in these
circumstances?Decide on the necessary sanctions or
resumethe difficult road of negotiations?
78. The secondalternative was chosen.The Ministersfor
Foreign Affairs of the five Western countries met at
Pretoria to inquire into the true intentions of the South
African Government. From 16 to 18 October 1978, they
conferred with the head of the racist South African
Government.The result is known to all membersof the
Council. Until 19 October, the international community
nourishedthe hope that a way out of the stalematewould
be found. How great was our consternation, therefore,
when we read the joint statement of 19 October by the
SouthAfrican Government and the Foreign Ministersof the
five Westerncountries in paragraph4 of which we readthe
following:

holding electionswithout the participationof SWAPG,the
racist South African Governmentbeginsat the other end,
namely, with the internal elections. The next stage is
already clearly statedin paragraph4 of thejoint statement,
It is negotiations by newly elected leadersto achieve
mternationalrecognition.The authorsof the statementare
even so bold as to say that thoseleadersshouldseriously
considerways and meansof achievinginternationalrecognition through the good offices of the SpecialRepresentative andthe Administrator-General.
80. It is not necessaryto be a specialistor an expert on
the cynicism of the racist South African Government to
arrive at the conclusionthat this requestfor recognition
presupposes
the prior constitution of a government.Otherwise, what would be the meaningof that recognition:
recognition asdeputies,recognitionashavingbeenelected
by the people? That would be meaningless,
To arrive at
this end, the Special Representativewould consult the
Administrator-Generalon all aspectsof the SecretaryGeneral’sreport, including, as statedin paragraph4, the
fixing of a further electiondate,That paragraphisthe most
ambiguouspart of the statementfor thosewho did not
participatein the negotiations.
81. Be that asit may, the intention of the South African
Governmentis to exploit to the utmostthe presenceof the
Special Representativeof the Secretary-Generalat this
crucial stage of organizingthe so-calledelections.This is
why the Group of African States feels that, in these
conditions, the presenceof the Secretary-General’s
Special
Representativeand even that of United Nationsofficials
would be inappropriateandharmfulto the Organization.
82. We are told that the missionof the SpecialRepresentative is clearly defined in paragraph3 of that same
statement,namely, to make arrangements
with the South
African Administrator-Generalfor the proposedelections
under United Nationssupervisionand to fix the date. As
for the reasonit would not be more suitableto send
Mr. Ahtisaari after thosenotorious internal elections,we
are told that South Africa might interpret that delay asa
refusalon our part to createthe necessary
conditionsfor
the speedyimplementationof resolution435 (1978).

“The South African Government stated that the
plannedDecemberelections must bc seenasan internal
processto elect leaders.”
Further it is stated:
“The South African Government will thereafter useits
bestefforts to persuadethem seriouslyto considerways
andmeansof achievinginternational recognitionthrough
the good offices of the Special Representativeand the
Administrator-General.

83. As we seeit, the insistenceof South Africa on the
presenceof Mr. Ahtisaariat this time is intendedsolely to
give sanctionto thoseelections.The SouthAfrican Government ardently hopesthat he will be presentat that final
phaseof organizingthe electionsso that he can be an
eyewitnessof that parody. It will then be easyto say that
one of the conditionslaid down by the Security Council
hasbeenfu]fi]led, namely, supervisionand even control of
the elections by the United Nations, for in a political
systemwhere there is no room for democracy,thosewords
acquirespecialmeaning.

“In implementation of this goal, the Special Representativewould consult the Administrator-Generalon all
aspectsof the Secretary-General’sreport (including the
fixing of a further election date).”
79. It is surprisingthat that statementincludessomething
that had been the stumbling-block for months and for
whichfortunately a solution had beenfound on the basisof
which everything was built. The organization of those
elections,calledfor presentpurposesinternal, representsa
challengeto resolutions 385 (1976), 431 (1978) and
435(1978). The formula adopted by the authors of
paragraph4 of the joint statement is but a variant on the
objectivesof the Turnhalle Conference.Insteadof adopting
a Constitution, setting up a government and, finally,

84. The other condition requiredby the plan of the five
Westerncountriesand to which the South African Govemment objectedis participationby SWAP0in the elections.
This emergesclearly from the welcomingstatementto the
Ministers for ForeignAffairs of the five Western Countries
uttered by Mr. Botha, the headof the racistSouth African
9

Government. On that occasion he said the following with
respect to an internationally recognized settlement:
“We are aware of the benefits which can flow from such
solutions. . .
“But, gentlemen, it would be of little avail if an
internationally accepted settlement were to be reached in
South West Africa at the cost of internal stability.”
[S/12900, annex I./
That statement, which constitutes a true declaration of war
for African countries and all peace-loving and freedomloving peoples, enlightens us on the true intentions of the
racist South African Government.
85. After the setting up of a puppet government composed of the leaders who will have emerged from those
internal elections, the next stage will be the call for
recognition by the international community. And whatever
the position of States Members or non-members of the
Organization, the unilateral declaration of independence
promised for 31 December 1978 will, in our opinion, be
carried out under the pressure or diktat of the racist South
African Government.

90. In order to have South Africa implement General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), which terminated the
Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and in order to
preserve international peace and security, which are
seriously threatened in that region by the acts of aggression
against the Namibian people and independent neighbouring
States, the African Group considers that the time has come
for the Security Council to take appropriate measures
within the framework of Chapter VII of the Charter.
91. The South African Government cannot be allowed to
defy the international community. It cannot continue to
trample underfoot the resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly. That is why appropriate
measures must be taken under Chapter VII of the Charter
to ensure implementation of Council resolutions, and in
particular its resolutions 435 (1978).
92. No one can accuse us of a lack of flexibility or realism
in calling for the sanctions provided for in Article 41 of the
Charter which do not imply the use of armed force against
any Member of the Organization which persistently fails to
comply with the Charter, and especially Article 25, which
provides that “the Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council
in accordance with the present Charter”. No one can accuse
us of intransigence in requesting the Council to take
appropriate measures to ensure implementation of its
resolutions by a Member State which uses its armed forces
to commit acts of aggression against sovereign States
Members of the Organization and which pursues a criminal
policy against the peoples of Namibia and South Africa.

86. That being so, I would ask the representatives of the
Western countries members of the Security Council: What
measures will you take to halt that process? Will you adopt
sanctions against South Africa when it is elected Namibians who have taken the decision?
87. To illustrate my thinking, I should like to quote a
passage from the statement made by Mr. Botha to the
Security Council on 27 July 1978:

93. The African Group is aware of the gravity of the
situation. That is why we make an urgent appeal to the
international community to bring about the true decoIonization of Namibia. We address ourselves in particular to
the Western countries members of the Security Council,
which are the authors of the proposal for the settlement of
the Namibian situation contained in document S/12436.

“The leaders in the Territory told us nearly two years
ago that they were ready for independence and wanted it
by the end of 1978. It is something we cannot deny
them; it is something which cannot be delayed any
longer; we have no right to thwart the will of the people.”
[2082nd meeting, para. 256.1

94. As I said at a meeting between the African contact
group and the five Western countries, throughout our
common efforts to meet the aspirations of the Namibian
people, confidence has always prevailed. Indeed, after a
period of reflection and hesitation, SWAPO, the front-line
States, the African States and other Members of the United
Nations accepted the grave responsibility of placing their
confidence in the Council in a matter so important and
delicate as that of the genuine decolonization of Namibia.
Never would SWAPO, the only genuine Namibian liberation
movement, which is suffering the most odious repression on
the part of the illegal South African authorities in Namibia,
have accepted the compromise you proposed unless it had
had your formal assurances concerning your proposal’s
chances for success. Never would that settlement plan have
obtained the approval of the front-line States, which are
constantly subjected to unprovoked armed aggression by
the South African regime, had they not felt they could rely
on your formal assurances regarding the proper conduct of
the operation, Your settlement proposal would never have
been endorsed by all the other African States and a.lI the
members of the Security Council had they not counted on

88. If the South African Government bows to the will of
non-elected leaders, a fortiori it cannot but applaud the
decisions of elected representatives of the people. And if
you have the time to refer to the two statements of the
South African
Government
contained in document
S/l 2900, you will agree with me that we are facing a special
situation. Resolution 435 (1978) has become very weak
because of that joint statement. Because of the organization
of the so-called internal elections, that resolution runs the
risk of suffering the same fate as those that preceded it
unless the Council takes appropriate urgent measures.
89. The South African Government has once again defied
the Council by its deliberate refusal to implement resolutions 435 (1978), 43 1 (1978) and 385 (1976). In these
circumstances, the African Group requests the Council to
consider talcing appropriate measures under the Charter so
as to halt this process of internal elections, which runs
counter to resolutions of the Council. The Council also has
the power to have its resolutions 385 (1976), 431 (1978)
and 435 (1978) implemented.
10

your credibility and on your irrevocable commitment to
the process of the genuine decolonization of Namibia.
95. This credibility and confidence were not merely
sentimental; they were based, in our opinion, on your
ability to exert decisive Pressure on the South African
Government. The fact is that your respective countries
maintain intense trade relations with South Africa, as is
borne out by the United Nations reports on the subject.
you therefore have objective reasons to make your voices
heard by taking advantage of these privileged relations
which exist between South Africa and yotir respective
countries. In accepting your proposal, SWAP0 and the
African Group, just like other Member States, were not
placing their confidence in the racist South African
Government, which constantly violates Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions calling on it to withdraw
from Namibia and to put an end to the odious apartheid
system.
96. The credit which your countries enjoy was based not
only on your ability to review your economic and other
relations with that r@gime, but also on the fact that three of
your group of States are permanent members of the
Security Council and that, in the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the Charter, measures provided for
under Chapter VII, particularly under Article 41, could be
taken without fear of a veto on the part of other permanent
members of the Council in the event that South Africa did
not agree to your proposal, which has now become a
decision of the Council.
97. Furthermore, when SWAPO, the African Group and
the other Member States agreed to follow the course you
indicated, it was because we were given assurances that
South Africa had abandoned its Turnhalle internal settlement and, in particular, the internal elections that were part
of the Turnhalle plot against the Namibian nation, against
the unity and territorial integrity of Namibia.

cannot betray the Namibian people and thereby all the
Peoples of our planet that love peace and freedom.
100. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Rench): The
next speaker is the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, on whom I now call.
101. Miss KONIE @‘resident, United Nations Council for
Namibia): I would first of all express the sincere appreciation of the delegation of the United Nations Council for
Namibia of this opportunity to address the Security
Council during its deliberations on the question of Namibia.
I should like, Mr. President, to congratulate you on your
presidency on the occasion of this meeting of the Council,
the consequences of which are so directly related to the
future of’ the Namibian people. Your great experience and
skill, reflecting one of the richest diplomatic traditions in
the world, will be of assistance
in arriving at the decision
which correspondsto the deepaspirations
of the Namibian
peopleto self-determination
andgenuineindependence
in a
united Namibia.
102. The questionof Namibiahas remainedbefore the
United Nationssince1966 because
of the refusalof South
Africa to withdraw its illegaladministrationfrom Namibia
in spite of all the efforts of the United Nationsin support
of the legitimate aspirationsof the Namibianpeople to
genuineindependencein a united Namibia.South Africa
hasrefusedto withdraw from Namibiabecause
it hasbeen
plundering the resourcesof the Territory and barbarously
exploiting the Namibianpeoplefor the benefit of the racist
Afrikaners who control South Africa. South Africa has
refused to withdraw from Namibiabecauseit intends to
preservea ruthlesssystem of racial discriminationthat
servesthe illegitimate ambitionsfor power of the racist
minority rdgimeat Pretoria.
103. The Namibianpeoplehavehadto suffer for over 50
years while the international community has feebly attemptedto persuadethe ruthlessaggressor
and exploiter to
mendhisways.

98. It was on the basis of those facts and assurances that
SWAPO, the front-line States, all the African States and all
the other Members of the Organization took the risk of
committing themselves to the course set by you. Without
those prior conditions, that consensus would never have
been obtained. It would not have been possible to get
SWAP0 to co-operate on such important questions as the
maintellance of the South African military and administrative presence in Namibia during the transition period or
that of Walvis Bay. Without confidence in your Covernments, SWAP0 and its friends woulcl never have shown
such co-operation, particularly after the Kassinga massacre
perpetrated by Mr. Botha’s forces of repression. Thus you
have a special responsibility to the international community
and this Council. The fulfilment of your commitments has
been thwarted by the racist South African Government. We
must accept the consequences which are clearly bcforc us
by deciding on sanctions against that regime which has
abused your confidence. Recourse to the use of the veto
could only indicate complicity with that Government that
has been condemned by the entire international community.

104. In their struggleto achievenational integrity, the
Namiblanpeoplehavebeenled by their soleandauthentic
liberation movement,SWAPO.The armedstrugglewhich
beganin I966 was the result of the utter contempt with
which the illegitimateoccupationrCgimetreated the aspirations of Namibianpatriotsto exercisetheir inalienableright
to self-determination,freedomand nationalindependence.
The Namibianpeople have paid a heavy price in their
struggle. Many Namibian patriots have been exiled, dctained,tortured or murdered.
105. In its repressive
fury SouthAfrica hasmilitarized the
Territory and organizedtribal armiesto do the infamous
work of the racistsof Pretoria.It has alsousedNamibiaasa
baseto carry out its acts of aggression
againstpeaceful
neighbouringStates.
106. The United NationsCouncilfor Namibia,createdin
1967 by the GeneralAssemblyto administerNamibiauntil
independence,has been fully engagedfor more than a
decadein internationalpolitical mobilization to pressfor
the withdrawal of the illegal occuaption rigimc from

99. With respect to the African States, they are determined to meet the challenge of South Africa because they
11

Namibia. The details of the efforts of the Council are by
now a well-known story. Working in close co-operation
with SWAPO, the Council has endeavoured to promote the
cause of Namibia and to render assistance to Namibia in its
struggle against the illegal occupation rCgime.

111. All authentic forces of Namibia have already de,
nounced and rejected the South African manoeuvre.
Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO, has declared that
the communiqud contained in document S/12902 is a
betrayal of the struggle of the Narnibian people for genuhe
freedom and independence. The Vice-President of SWAP0
has elaborated at Windhoek on the position of SWAP0 by
stating that the December election is meant to be a
face-saving device for South Africa and is aimed at South
Africa’s withdrawal from the whole settlement plan, bg,
giving the impression that it will then be an issue between
the United Nations and the puppets put in Power throu&
rigged elections in Namibia.

107. The efforts of certain countries to achieve an
internationally negotiated settlement of the question of
Namibia gave rise to many expectations regarding a
successful solution of the problem of Namibia through
elections under the supervision and control of the United
Nations and the withdrawal of the illegal South African
administration from the Territory. The talks, which lasted
for a prolonged period of time, where based on the
implementation of resolution 385 (1976) and all other
pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. The twists and turns of international
negotiations have led the United Nations in many directions, and it is doubtful if the results that we face today
have much in common with the stand defined in resolution
385 (1976) or for that matter with the formal proposals
contained in document S/12636 of 10 April 1978.

112. The views expressed by SWAP0 have also been stated
by a conference of 30 representatives of six major churches
in Namibia. In their open letter to the Prime Minister of
South Africa they stated:
“It is clear to us that if elections arc held in Namibia
this year they will take place without the participation of
the United Nations and the majority of the political
parties. Many exiles and political prisoners will also be
excluded. We do not see how this can in any way reduce
the growing frustration and reset1tment which already
plagues human reactions inside and outside Namibia.”

108. The impressive efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative have met with the fanatical
intransigence of the Pretoria rdgime. This intransigence,
masked behind extremes of devious manoeuvring, has led to
one of the most extraordinary statements of political
mystification in our time. The South Atiican Government
announces its acceptance of the proposals of the Western
Five for an internationally acceptable settlement of the
Namibian problem and at the same time declares that it will
proceed with internal elections as planned in order to elect
its own chosen puppets as Namibian leaders. This flagrant
contradiction is one more example of the bad faith that
underlies the manoeuvring of the South African Government.

113. The Security Council in its deliberations must bear in
mind the words of the most genuine political and religious
forces in Namibia.
114. The Council for Namibia, in conformity with all
resolutions of the United Nations and in response to the
appeals of the most authentic forces of Namibia, will
continue its efforts in support of self-determination and
genuine independence for a united Namibia.
115. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, Permanent Observer
of SWAP0 to the United Nations, I invite him to make his
statement.

109. The Pretoria rdgime, on the one hand, declares that it
is willing to negotiate an internationally acceptable settlement, and, on the other hand, repeats constantly for all
those who wish to hear that it will never allow SWAP0 to
be brought into power by general elections in Namibia. The
irony of this statement is that South Africa, at the same
time that it denies SWAPO, recognizes the strength of its
representativeness of the legitimate aspirations of the
Namibian people.

116. Mr. GURIRAB:
We are most grateful to YOU,
Mr. President, and to the other members for this opportunity to address you once again on the perennial question
of Namibia. It will be recalled that Comrade Sam,Nujoma,
President of SWAPO, Commander-in-Chief of the People’s
Liberation Army of Namibia and national leader of the
Namibian masses, addressed this august Council twice this
year-on 27 July and 29 September [208212d ad 2087th
meetings] -on the same question.

110. We are now at a dangerous crossroads. Which path
will lead to peace in southern Africa, the path of firmness
of the United Nations in abiding by its own principled
stand as expressed in resolution 385 {1976) and other
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, or the path of accommodation and surrender to
the schemes imposed by the Pretoria rigime? The intransigence of Pretoria leaves no choice for the United
Nations but to maintain a firm stand now or be forced later
to meet the disastrous consequences of its own weakness.
To accept elections under the control of the illegal South
African administration is to legitimize the creation of false
leaders who will be used, under the protection of the South
African racist rCgime, to entrench the neo-colonial control
of Namibia and to create even greater danger to international peace and security in southern Africa,

117. This time, perhaps more than ever before, the
Security Council is faced with a momentous challenge
concerning the present critical situation in Namibia. At the
same time, the Council bears a collective historic respoflsibility to ensure that that challenge is confronted decisively and overcome completely. And you, Mr. President,
are called upon to carry out your heavy responsibility of
leadership with sensitivity and courage. We wish you well
and hope and trust that history will record the accofl’
plishments of this debate as a success. We believe you will
rise to the occasion, for what is at stake is nothing less than
a fundamental challenge of the authority, the credibility
12

and the viability of the United Nations itself, in particular
the competence of the Security Council as the ultimate
instrument for peace, security, and the rule of law in this
troubled world.

Organization and refusedto implementits resolutions.It
will showwhy action, not hollow promises,is warranted
now. Jn this connexion, we will merely paraphraseand
sumnn&e what the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guyana,ComradeJackson,saidon the questionof Namibia
on 18 October 1976, when he wasthe PermanentRepreSelltatiVe
of hiscountry to the UnitedNations:

118. This fundamental challenge is manifested in the
continued intransigence, persistent defiance and obdurate
refusal of the Pretoria Fascists to accept and comply with
the resolutions and demands of the United Nations on
Namibia. The bone of contention in this ever-worsening
confrontation is Namibia and its colonized people, for
whom the United Nations has assumed a direct and special
responsibility until freedom and independence are achieved.

[me speakerquoted paragraphs9-15 of the 1962nd
meeting.]

119. Needless to plead in the Council, at this stage, after
aI1 the resolutions and decisions already adopted, that the
central question involved is the total suppression of the
inalienable rights and legitimate interests of the oppressed
Namibians who have been suffering for far too long at the
hands of the successive racist regimes in our country. Today
it is the Fascist clique of the all-white Nationalist Party of
South Africa which defiantly maintainsa brutal tyranny of
illegalmilitary occupation in Namibia. It is now universally
agreed,even among a group of usually recalcitrant States,
that this regimehas absolutely no legal, political or moral
justification to be in Namibia in any form or shape
whatsoever.

124. During that period and since then changesof a
far-reachingnature have indeed taken place in southern
Africa. The revolutionary forces of national liberation
defeatedPortuguese
colonialismandheraldeda new era of
freedomin Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique,CapeVerde, Sao
Tome and Principe and Angola.The military and psychologicalbuffer protecting the racistshasthus beenremoved
once and for all. This new situationhascreatedexcellent
conditionsfavourableto the nationalliberationmovements
of Zimbabwe,NamibiaandSouth Africa.

12.5. In June 1975, when the questionof Namibiawas
debated in the Security Council, some representatives
sought to convey the true dimensionsof the Namibian
tragedy. In view of that tragedy, they endeavouredto
persuadeandurgethe Councilto take actionunderChapter
VII of the Charter.Their efforts, however,attracted a triple
120. The question of Namibia has preoccupied the
veto-that of France,of the United Kingdomand of the
imaginationand efforts of the United Nations for the
United States. The argumentsput forward then were as
greaterpart of this year. The number of meetingsheld so follows. The representativeof France,now the Minister for
far this year in the Security Council, in the General ForeignAffairs, saidhis delegationdid not agree“with the
Assemblyand in the United Nations Council for Namibia, opinion statedby someaccordingto whomthe situationin
aswell as the concerns expressedby the Organization of
NamibiacomesunderChapterVII of the Charteror under
African Unity, the non-aligned movement and other naone of its Articles” [1824th meeting]. Later, in explaining
tional and international organizationsareliving testimonies his negativevote, he saidthat his delegationdid not think
of the anger and despair felt by the international comthat the concept of international peace and
munity about South Africa’s continued intransigence, security “is now jeopardized or involved in the circumdefiance and belligerent attitude towards the United Nastancesprevailing in Namibia” [1829th meeting]. The
tions,andthe peopleof Namibia.
representativeof the United States,then Ambassador
Scab,
said:
121. Throughout the general debate at the thirty-third
“In view of the facts of the Namibiansituation, it is
session
of the General Assembly, one speakerafter another
difficult to find that a threat to internationalpeaceand
reflected the anxiety and anguish felt by the United
security exists within the meaning of the Charter.”
Nations over the gravity of the situation in Namibia.
11825thmeeting.]
Everyonewasdeeply concerned. Everyone called for some
action by the competent political organs of the OrganiHe went on the point out that “it wouldnot beappropriate
zation. Now, as the saying goes,the hour of reckoningis
to invoke mandatory sanctionswhich are specifically
here.
reservedfor threats to peace”[ibid./. AmbassadorIvor
Richard of the United Kingdom said quite categorically
122. The Security Council is now at a stagewhen, in
that his Government did not regard the situation in
dischargeof its duties under the Charter concerningthe
maintenance of peace and security, it should consider Namibia“as a threat to internationalpeaceand SeCllritY”
measuresprovided for therein to meet effectively the
[1829th meeting].
requirementsof the presentdangeroussituation in Namibia.
126. There was another meeting of the COUnCil
on
Jt is our consideredview that what is called for now is
Namibiain October 1976. That debate alsoendedwith a
action, firm and decisive action; not dilly-dallying on
triple veto by the samePowers.The argumentsremained
account of narrow selfish interestsor on accountof efforts
the sameand SWAP0 and our friends were urged to be
to evade the clear and repeated demandsof the United
patient and reasonable
because
the situationthen wasnot a
Nations.
threat to peaceandsecurity.
123. To refresh the memoriesof members,we wishto cite
127. When the Security Council met at its 2082nd
a number of the decisionsalready taken by the Council, to
meeting,
on 27 July 1978, the situation of Namibia had
show how South Africa has time and again defied the
13

been examined intensely under the diplomatic microscope
for more than 18 months. The news media dubbed the
situation earlier “a breakthrough in Namibia”. Generally,
there was euphoria and optimism. We and others cautioned
against it and pointed to South Africa’s negative and
repressive actions inside Namibia. Throughout this entire
period, South Africa consistently acted in bad faith and
with insincerity in relation both to free and fair elections
under United Nations supervision and control and to the
fundamental question of Namibia’s unfettered independence. The Foreign Ministers of the five Western
members of the Council took time out from their heavy
schedule to participate in the Council’s meeting. The
meeting ended on a hopeful, albeit not a unanimous note,
with the adoption of two resolutions. In resolution
432 (1978), the Council upheld the principles of the
territorial integrity and unity of our country by reaffirming
thal Walvis Bay was an integral part of Namibia. In
resolution 43 1 (1978), the Council, ivttev alia, requested the
Secretary-General “to submit at the earliest possible date a
report containing his recommendations” with regard to the
implementation of the independence plan for Namibia, in
accordance with resolution 385 (1976).

132. The Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany
stated:
“We cannot believe that the Government of South
Africa will now lcave a road on which it has gone a long
way with us andthus decideagainsta peacefulsettlement
under international control that is within easy reach.”
[2087th meeting,para, 32.1
Hewarned:
“No one in the Republic of South Africa should
overlook the consequences
such a step would be bound
to have.” [Ibid.]
133. Likewise,the Minister of Francestated:
“the Republic of South Africa, short of seekingshelter
behind a fallaciouspretext, canno longer turn its;back on
an internationally acceptablesolution” fibid,, para. .54/.
He continued:
“1 formally appealto the South African Government
not to imposean internal settlement that is doomed in
advance and to decide to co-operate with the United
Nationsin order to enableNamibiato take its place in the
community of independent nations. I ask it most formally to refrain from a choice that would disastrously
isolateit from the rest of the international community.”
fIbid., paru.57.1

128. Between 27 July and 29 September, efforts were
made which included a survey mission to Namibia undertaken by the United Nations Special Representative,
Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, and his colleagues. The SecretaryGeneral’s report was submitted OII 29 August (S/12827].
129. It would be a futile exerciseto try here to ctironicle
the events in any detailedway. Suffice it to say that when
the Council met on 29 September, all the unfounded
euphoria and optimismhad beendissipated.South Africa,
tme to type, had rejectedthe final and definitive report of
the Secretary-Generaland opted for unilaterally organized
and illegal electionsin Namibia;and all the preparations to
this end have beenintensified.Thus the stagehad already
been set then by South Africa for the subsequentconfrontation with the United Nationsand with the people of
Namibia under the leadershipof SWAPO, their vanguard
movement.

He then declared:

130, WC wish now to focus on what is important, in our
view, at this stage.In doingso,WCbeginwith a referenceto
the statements made in the Council by the Foreign
Ministers of the five Western membersof the Council.
Again, all those Ministerswere present when the Council
met on 29 September.The world was aware that the
so-calledleadersandspokesmen
of racist South Africa had
decidedto “go it alone”.

“It is therefore time for persistenceand vigorous effort
in persuadingSouth Africa that its best interests and the
best interestsof the Namibianpeople lie in co-operating
with the United Nations in the implementation of the
resolution we have adopted, and not in permitting a
return to the past spiral of violence and isolation. . . . We
call on South Africa to re-think its position.” [Ibid.,
paw. 71.1

131. There were commonthreadswhich ran through all
the statementsof the Ministers. On the one hand, they
sought to reaffirm the continued commitment of the five
Governments to ensuringthe early and successfulimplementation of the independenceproposal,which was essentially their creature. They reassured
all involved that they
would make available their good offices to expedite the
process. It was believed that a negotiated settlement in
Namibia could become a model of peace for southern
Africa as a whole. On the other hand, the Ministers were
emphatic in striking a note of warning, if not an implicit
threat, to South Africa’s rulers,shouldthey persiston a “go
it alone” course.

135. The statement of Mr. Owen of the United Kingdom
wasapt:

134. The United States Secretary of State, Mr. Vance,
further stated:
“Unilateral action by South Africa, such asits decision
to conduct elections in Namibia, cannot be recognized
and will not result in a political processwhich has any
internationallegitimacy.” [Ibid., paru. 68.j

14

“My Government’s approach, if the Security Council
needsto meet at the end of October, wi11be governedby
the attitude displayedby the new South African Government over the next few weeks.We are issuingno threats,
but they should not underestimatethe gravity of the
situationthat could ariseif there were no solution in sight
and we met here in the Council again.No one in South
Africa should mistake the determination that underlies
the reasonableand constructive attitude that we have
shownfor the last 18 monthsand will show over the next

few weeks. The choice is now for South Africa. The rest
of Africa and the world, in adopting this resolution, have
shown which way they wish to go.” /Ibid., pum. 81.1
136, The last of the five Ministers, Mr. Jamieson, Secretary of State for External Affairs of Canada, concluded on
a similar note:
“Therefore I renew my call upon both the Government
of South Africa and those in Namibia who are inclined to
support this mistaken course of action to reconsider their
decision. My Western colleagues and I have every intention of doing our best to sort out the difficulties which
must be overcome. What would be sheer folly would be
to put aside the positive results of a long negotiating
process and proceed blindly into a renewed period of
confrontation. I am confident that there still exists
sufficient goodwill on all sides to attain our objectives,”
[Ibid., para. 87.1
137. In summary,
following.

we have so far pointed out the

138. First, we have characterized the present impasse
arising from South Africa’s continued intransigence, de.
fiance and non-compliance as a fundamental challenge to
the authority and viability of the United Nations and
specifically to the competence of the Security Council.

involvement, on decolonization questions. When they did
become involved it was to obstruct a proposed course of
action or, worse, to cast negative votes. They remained
closely and unmistakably identified with the minority
regimes in southern Africa. Last year, for the first time,
they took an initiative-perhaps less as a gesture of goodwill
or in support of Namibia’s liberation than as a measure of
well-calculated enlightened self-interest. Be that as it may,
we all become involved in exploratory talks, proximity
talks and, finally, negotiations in New York and in Africa,
146. With the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), which
endorsed the Secretary-General’s report, that painstaking
initiative entered a new phase, that of implementation. We
understood that the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative had envisaged that that phase would commence within three weeks of the Council decision. Once
again, true to type, South Africa rejected the plan as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report and opted for an
internal settIement through bogus elections intended to
install quislings and puppets of the so-called Democratic
Turnhalle Alliance as an entity or authority in Namibia.
The Secretary-General and his Special Representative could
not proceed.

144. Seventhly, and finally, we have tried to echo the
words spoken and repeated by the officials of the Western
Powers, especially by their Foreign Ministers during the
Council’s debate of 29 September 1978,

147. The Pretoria summit meeting that followed on 16-18
October was in our view meant, inter alia, to dissuade the
racists from that course-the course of internal settlement,
the course of the unilateral declaration of the independence
of Namibia. Instead, the Ministers of the five Western
members of the Council ended by acquiescing in this, in our
view, illegal and unilateral act-although, to quote resolution 435 (1978), it would be null and void. But the fact
of the matter is that by December a political situation with
serious consequences will have been created in Namibia,
and the United Nations and the overwhelming majority of
the people of Namibia are being asked to embrace and
co-operate in such a farce and such an act of criminality as
will compromise the position of the United Nations and
undermine the struggle for liberation in Namibia. All the
spokesmen and leaders of the Namibian people, from
SWAP0 to the Church leaders, and all the patriotic forces,
even some politically redundant groups, have condemned
and rejected the go-it-alone course that South Africa has
embarked upon in regard to Namibia. Therefore SWAP0
says “No”.
148. South Africa cannot have it both ways. The Boers
have chosen a course of confrontation, by rejecting the
resolution of the Security Council and the report of the
Secretary-General, notwithstanding spurious claims that
they have not done so, on the implementation of the
United Nations plan. Supposedly, then, they would at the
same time be prepared to co-operate with the United
Nations after they had installed so-called internal leaders
from the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance. We know it will be
the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance. That group is a creature
of the illegal rCgime. It does not have separate interests
from or an existence independent of its mentors at Pretoria.
Dirk Mudge, the slick racist leader of the Democratic
Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) and indisputably the overseerto-be of the “internal leaders”, said only a week ago:

145. During the IO-year period under review here the
Western Powers have always sat on the fence, without any

“The DTA believes the people of the Territory should
be allowed to elect their own leaders without any

139. Secondly, we have noted the overwhelming and
universal condemnation of the racist usurpers and the
resolute rejection by the overwhelming majority of the
Members of the Organization of their repressive measures
and actions in Namibia through an entrenched illegal r6gime
of military occupation.
140. Thirdly, we have cited some pertinent examples
which clearly show the extent of efforts by the United
Nations to reason with and persuade South Africa to
co-operate-all in vain.
141. Fourthly, we have also lauded the encouraging and
uplifting victories and successes of the revolutionary forces
of liberation in the ex-colonies of Fascist Portugal in Africa
and the favourable conditions they created for our own
struggle in Namibia.
142. Fifthly, we have furthermore recalled the two triple
vetoes cast against the demands of the majority by the
Western permanent members of the Security Council,
which actions rendered the Council incapable of discharging
its Charter responsibilities and duties.
143. Sixthly, we have moreover conscientiously glossed
the familiar and well-publicized Western diplomatic initiative, the discontent and the conscqnences it aroused.

15

interference or intimidation from whatever quarter”-that
clearly refers to the United Nations-“and
we feel this is
not possible in terms of the Waldheim proposals.”
149. South Africa has said the same. Stcyn, the local
colonial official, has said the same. Where is the good faith
or the recommitment that we have been told about? The
chances of elections supervised and controlled by the
United Nations taking place in Namibia in these circumstances are nil. The whole strategy is to prevent SWAP0
from coming to power, even though winning free, fair, and
democratic elections.
150. It is for those reasons that we find the Pretoria joint
statement irrelevant and a deviation and a retrogression
from the agreed basis for implementation. Consequently it
is unacceptable to us and we reject it in toto. There is
nothing new in it. We are being asked to be patient and
reasonablewhile South Africa is being given the advantage
of going aheadwith its neo-colonialistschemesin Namibia.
The international community, and particularly the Security
Council, as well as the people of Namibia must face up to
the reality of the situation created by South Africa’s
defiance of the authority of the United Nations and
non-compliancewith its resolutionsconcerningNamibia.
151. Quite seriously, can anyone today really justly and
honestly defend the position that the present situation in
Namibia does not constitute a threat to international peace
and security? SWAP0 is convinced that the ~;;Ynued
illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa, the oppression and repression being conducted by that rigime, the
criminal utilization of Namibia for the commission of
repeated acts of aggressionagainstour peacefulneighbours,
the development of nuclear weapons,which would create
havoc in the area, and the latest defiance of Security
Council directives clearly constitute a threat to international peaceand security in Namibiain terms of Chapter
VII of the Charter. We urge the invocation of Chapter VII,
namely, the imposition of comprehcnsivcmandatory sanc-

tions. In this connexion we whole-heartedly supportthe
working paper submitted by the African Group and
referred to by the Chairmanof that Group, the representative of Burundi, and commendit to the Council andthe
United Nations as a whole for consideration. Only such
sanctions,coupled with the intensified armed struggle,will
eventually create the necessaryfavourable conditionsand
compel the ruling clique at Pretoria to recognizethe
collective power of the international community. Thenwe
can talk about implementation.
152. SWAP0 believesthat resolution435 (1978) andthe
Secretary-General’s report provide the only basisfor a
negotiated transfer of power to the people of Namibia.WC
shall continue to co-operatewith the Secretary-Generaland
his Special Representative,and with others concerned,to
find a basisfor speedyimplementation at the appropriate
time. In the meantimewe believethat the United Nations
Council for Namibia must continue to carry out its
responsibilities. The General Assembly must take up the
question of Namibia, and the struggle of the Narnibinn
people must continue. All the projects and programmes
of
the United Nations and the spccializedagenciesmust be
expanded and intensified in order to strengthenthe efforts
of the Namibianpeoplein their strugglefor liberation.
153. Those are our views and beliefs; those are our
commitments and our determination. Ultimately, the responsibility to act will be that of the membersof the
Security Council. The Council’s collective conscience,in
view of the present situation posed by South Africa’s
defiance and of the criesof Namibianchildren, mothersand
the aged and their demand for justice and liberation,
enjoins the Council to make the one and only correct
decision: to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter against
South Africa.
154. The strugglecontinues.
The mectitlg rose at 2.05 pm.

16
