United Nations

S/PV.6407

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6407th meeting
Thursday, 21 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-59578 (E)

*1059578*

S/PV.6407

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ibrahim
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Yusuf Hasan Ibrahim, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union Commission.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I invite him to
take the floor.

2

The Secretary-General: Thank you for the
opportunity to address the Council on this pressing
challenge.
The situation in Somalia remains fragile, but
there are glimmers of hope. Notwithstanding recent
internal divisions, the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) remains committed to peace and reconciliation.
The President has appointed a new Prime Minister, and
I urge the Parliament to endorse him, so as to allow a
new Government to come into place without delay.
The Government is also developing its security
sector institutions. It is carrying out an offensive
against the insurgents, and has taken over some main
cities previously occupied by them. Reports of
residents taking down the Al Shabaab flags that had
been flying in the town of Belet Hawo, and hoisting the
Somali national flag instead, are a sign of the Somali
people’s yearning for peace and security.
These actions — some concrete, others more
symbolic, including the resumption of broadcasting by
Radio Mogadishu and the rehabilitation of some key
buildings — demonstrate the Government’s resolve to
meet those aspirations, in partnership with the
international community.
At the same time, the obstacles are well known.
Two million people, including 1.4 million who have
been displaced internally since 2007, need emergency
aid. Continuing insecurity and conflict in parts of the
country are attracting foreign extremist elements. This
poses a threat not only to Somalia, but to the region,
the continent and beyond. We have all seen what can
happen when terrorists and others take advantage of a
country’s fragility to establish a haven.
Support to the TFG, its reconciliation efforts and
its fight against extremism will go a long way, but the
international community must act now if it is to make a
difference. The United Nations will continue to work
towards achieving the political objectives of the
Djibouti peace process in the following four key areas.
First, it must support the outreach and
reconciliation efforts of the TFG with those outside the
peace process. To sustain these efforts, my Special
Representative, Augustine Mahiga, has been making
regular visits to Mogadishu and States in the region.
Under his leadership, the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS) is encouraging dialogue

10-59578

S/PV.6407

with entities that renounce violence and are still out of
the Djibouti political process.
Secondly, it must support the TFG in completing
the priority tasks outlined in the Transitional Federal
Charter, in particular consultations on the constitutions.
As recommended at the International Contact Group
meeting in Madrid on 27 September, the TFG has
agreed to prepare a road map with a prioritized
comprehensive strategy, political objectives and
timelines for the remainder of the transition. UNPOS
will facilitate this process.
Thirdly, it must advance the implementation of
agreements between the TFG and other regional
authorities. In order to be effective in ensuring that this
process happens, we are beefing up our political
presence in Puntland and Somaliland.
Fourthly, it must develop functioning State
institutions. In addition to holding more meetings of
the High-Level Committee and the Joint Security
Committee inside Somalia, UNPOS and the country
team will focus on strengthening the capacities of the
various ministries.
In each of these areas, the United Nations will
continue its light footprint approach in order to be
closer to the Somali people and authorities. We will
also ensure that United Nations efforts are well
coordinated, in line with my policy of integrating
United Nations operations. As I indicated in my most
recent report to the Security Council (S/2010/447), in
the coming months I intend to submit for the Council’s
consideration proposals for an integrated United
Nations presence.
I commend the African Union (AU) and its
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for their efforts in
assisting the TFG in its security and military efforts.
The United Nations Support Office for AMISOM has
been providing critical logistics support to AMISOM,
making it a better-equipped military force. As we will
hear shortly from Commissioner Lamamra, AMISOM’s
military strategy aims at assisting the TFG in
establishing professional security sector institutions,
implementing its agreements with other groups and
authorities, creating humanitarian space and delivering
basic services to the people. This strategy fully
supports and complements the overall political strategy
for Somalia.

10-59578

However, if AMISOM is to be enabled to be an
ever more effective partner, further international help
will be needed. In my most recent report to the
Council, I expressed concern about the substantial
resource gaps that continue to have an adverse impact
on the Mission. Extensive consultations have taken
place — notably last month’s informal meeting of
members of the Security Council, major donors and
other partners, jointly convened by the UnderSecretaries-General for Political Affairs and Field
Support — aimed at resolving the lack of predictable
and sufficient funding. The issue of funding for
AMISOM also featured prominently in statements
delivered at the mini-summit I convened during the
general debate of the General Assembly, and again
during the recent Council mission to Africa.
Following these consultations, the report of the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union is
now before the Council. The report calls for significant
additional support for AMISOM to be funded through
the assessed contributions of States Member of the
United Nations.
I encourage the Council to take the bold and
courageous decisions necessary to enhance the capacity
of AMISOM to deliver more effectively on its
mandate. The Security Council may wish to consider
phasing the additional support in line with the phases
outlined in Chairperson Ping’s report. This approach
would allow for periodic review of the impact of the
additional United Nations support. My Special
Representative is working closely with the AU and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to ensure
coherence between their military strategy and the
international community’s political objectives, as
outlined in the Djibouti Agreement.
In return, I urge the Somali authorities to
consolidate their efforts and unite against the threat of
extremism. The TFG must also start to deliver
improved services to the Somali people, pay salaries to
the security forces, and build up its security sector
institutions. The support of the international
community is critical in this regard.
In a country that has been in conflict for two
decades, peace requires sustained efforts and a longterm strategy. I pay tribute to all those contributing to
that goal: the African Union Mission in Somalia,
countries that have contributed troops, Somalia’s
neighbours, and Member States that have shown great

3

S/PV.6407

commitment in supporting Somalia and the peace
process.

and Security Council meeting took place and to
highlight political, security and humanitarian aspects.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

First, over the past few months, the political
situation has been challenged by the inability of the
Transitional Federal Institutions to effectively
implement their obligations under the Transitional
Federal Charter and the Djibouti peace process. That
was mainly due to the intermittent and recurrent
wrangling within the leadership of the Transitional
Federal Institutions and the resultant lack of cohesion,
which led to the resignation of Prime Minister Omar
Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, on 21 September. The
African Union notes that President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed has now appointed a new Prime
Minister. We look forward to the early formation of a
representative Cabinet and the speedy completion of
the parliamentary confirmation process.

I now give the floor to Mr. Lamamra.
Mr. Lamamra: On behalf of the African Union
(AU) Commission and its Chairperson, Mr. Jean Ping,
as well as on behalf of the members of my
delegation — including Ambassador Boubacar Diarra,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
Commission and head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and Major General Nathan
Mugisha, AMISOM Force Commander — I would like
to most warmly commend you, Sir, for organizing this
meeting. Coming as it does on the heels of the minisummit convened here in New York on 23 September
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, this meeting bears
further testimony to the determination of the United
Nations to sustain the current momentum in the search
for a durable solution to the crisis in Somalia.
We commend the Secretary-General for the
attention and efforts he continues to devote to the
situation in Somalia, and for his rich and forwardlooking statement to the Council this morning. That
statement indeed translated his renewed and
unflinching commitment to bringing a durable end to
the two decades of suffering endured by the Somali
people. Indeed, such a strong determination, which is
required from the international community as a whole,
hardly needs to be emphasized. The protracted
suffering inflicted on the Somali people and the
increasing threat posed by the situation to regional
stability and to international peace and security cannot
be allowed to continue any longer.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council is taking
place a week after the 245th meeting of the AU Peace
and Security Council, which convened at the
ministerial level in Addis Ababa on 15 October. The
meeting provided an opportunity to review in-depth the
situation in Somalia and to take far-reaching decisions,
whose timely implementation, we are convinced, will
help turn around the situation on the ground and assist
the Somali people in opening a new and more peaceful
chapter in the history of their war-torn country.
The current developments in Somalia are well
known. I would like, however, to provide a brief
overview of the background against which the Peace

4

Secondly, the security situation in Mogadishu and
in the rest of Somalia — the south-central area —
remains unacceptable, as demonstrated by the
persistent violence in the country and other heinous
acts, such as the mortar attacks, assassinations and
suicide bombings that continue to be perpetrated
against the Somali people, the Transitional Federal
Institutions and AMISOM by the insurgents and
terrorist groups of the Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam
with the active support of foreign elements. The
African Union is very concerned that the insecurity in
Somalia is spilling over into the region, as attested by
the despicable Kampala bombings of 11 July 2010.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation is of the
utmost concern. It is characterized by persistent attacks
against humanitarian workers and agencies by
Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam, by limited access, as
well as by inadequate funding.
In reviewing the situation in Somalia, the African
Union Peace and Security Council was guided by the
urgency of effective and coordinated action by the
Somalis and the international community. In particular,
the Peace and Security Council was convinced that the
situation required three layers of action.
The first layer concerns the Somalis themselves.
Indeed, the Somalis, and their leaders in particular,
have the primary responsibility for the restoration of
peace, security and stability in their country. That is
why the Peace and Security Council strongly urged the
leadership of the Transitional Federal Institutions and
all other stakeholders to show selfless leadership,

10-59578

S/PV.6407

resolve and unity of purpose. Without such
dispositions, no amount of external assistance will
make it possible to effectively turn around the situation
in Somalia.
More specifically, bearing in mind that 20 August
2011 will mark the end of the transitional period, the
Peace and Security Council requested the Transitional
Federal Institutions of Somalia, first, to ensure the
confirmation of the new Prime Minister by the
Transitional Federal Parliament and the formation of a
new Government; secondly, to develop a road map
with regard to the management of the remaining
transition period, with clear political, security and
reconstruction priorities, in line with the Djibouti
process; thirdly, to expeditiously complete the
outstanding transitional tasks, including in particular
the constitutional process; fourthly, to continue to
reach out to all peace-embracing Somalis, in a spirit of
inclusiveness, bearing in mind that the Djibouti peace
process remains the sole basis for peace and
reconciliation in Somalia; and, fifthly, to urgently
endorse the draft national security and stabilization
plan and the security-sector assessment report.
The second layer relates to the African Union.
The Somalis will not succeed in their efforts without
the full support of the continent and that of the
international community as a whole. While the
situation in Somalia calls for the mobilization of
resources and assets that are beyond the means of the
African Union, our continental organization cannot
abdicate its responsibilities to Somalia and fail its
people. Building on the achievements made so far, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) will continue to do their utmost
to support the Somalis as they strive to bring to a
definite end the conflict and violence that have plagued
their country for two decades. In particular, the African
Union’s action over the coming months will centre on
the following efforts.
First, we will focus on supporting the political
process, including the management of the remaining
transitional period and efforts to reach out to all peaceembracing Somalis.
Secondly, we will concentrate on strengthening
AMISOM in order to bring its military component to
20,000 troops and its police component to 1,680. That
increase in strength will be accompanied by the
enhancement of the Mission’s equipment. In addition,

10-59578

AMISOM’s civilian component will be enhanced
substantially.
Thirdly, we will focus on mobilizing the
international community so that it can fully play its
role. The appointment of former Ghanaian President
Jerry John Rawlings as African Union High
Representative for Somalia will no doubt inject new
momentum in that respect.
The third layer pertains to the international
community, and in particular the United Nations.
Clearly, while duly acknowledging the support
rendered so far, we at the African Union strongly
believe that more efforts are required for the
international community to rise to the challenge posed
by the current situation in Somalia. More specifically,
the Peace and Security Council ministerial meeting has
urged the United Nations Security Council to take the
following actions.
The Council has been urged, first, to endorse the
newly authorized strength of AMISOM.
Secondly, the Council has been urged to authorize
an enhanced support package for AMISOM, funded
through United Nations assessed contributions on the
basis of the newly authorized strength and catering for
reimbursements for contingent-owned equipment,
including minor and major equipment, and the payment
of troop allowances at United Nations rates, in order to
ensure adequate, predictable and sustainable support to
the Mission. In addition, such support should be
provided to the Mission, both within and outside
Somalia, as required.
Thirdly, in response to the request by the African
Union and IGAD, the Council has been urged to
impose a naval blockade and a no-flight zone over
Somalia to prevent the entry of foreign fighters into the
country and the operation of flights carrying shipments
of weapons and ammunition to armed groups inside
Somalia — the very groups responsible for attacks
against the Transitional Federal Government,
AMISOM and the Somali population. In that respect,
the Security Council might like to consider requesting
the Governments and organizations involved in the
naval operations undertaken off the coast of Somalia to
provide, with the Council’s authorization, more direct
and tangible operational support to AMISOM.
Fourthly, the Council has been urged to ensure
the effective implementation of sanctions against all

5

S/PV.6407

those impeding the peace and reconciliation process in
Somalia.
Fifthly, the Council has been urged to approach
the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia in a holistic
manner, with a view to effectively addressing the
underlying causes and other equally serious threats that
affect the livelihoods and well-being of the Somali
people, in particular illegal fishing and the dumping of
toxic substances and waste off the coast of Somalia.
Lastly, the Council has been urged to reaffirm the
commitment to deploy, in due course, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia through the
re-hatting of AMISOM, and to establish a timeline for
such a deployment.
Somalia is today at a crossroads. While the
situation on the ground remains very difficult and the
transitional federal institutions of Somalia are
confronted with a myriad of challenges, not least those
relating to their internal cohesion and effectiveness, we
should not lose sight of the opportunities that exist to
make peace happen in Somalia. After two decades of
conflicts and chaos, the Somalis are yearning for
peace. In addition, there is today greater awareness
than ever before of the serious threat that the current
situation in Somalia poses to international peace and
security, as illustrated by the phenomenon of piracy
and, even more dramatically, the Kampala terrorist
bombings of July 2010.
The international community can decide to
pursue its current policy of limited engagement and
half-hearted measures in the false hope that the
situation can be contained, and continue to make the
existence of peace a precondition for the deployment of
a United Nations operation and a greater contribution
to the stabilization of the situation in Somalia.
But the international community can also decide
that it should step up its efforts, bearing in mind its
duties and responsibilities to Somalia and its people
and the need to give concrete meaning to the muchheralded notion of the responsibility to protect, as well
as the urgent need to confront the threat that the
prevailing situation poses to international peace and
security. We at the African Union are convinced that
this is the right course of action and that the time for
action is now, in the expectation that 2010, the Year of
Peace and Security in Africa, will indeed bring the
blessings of a normal life to the people of Somalia.

6

We therefore call on the Security Council to stand
alongside the African Union in rising to the challenge
and responding decisively to the desperate call for
assistance from the Somali people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Yusuf
Hasan Ibrahim.
Mr. Ibrahim (Somalia): I take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on Somalia and enabling us to participate in the
discussion. I also want to thank you for the excellent
way you have been facilitating the work of the Security
Council. At the same time, I want to thank the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat, and the bilateral,
multilateral and non-governmental organizations that
have assisted Somalia, in one way or another, during
the very difficult past two decades. We are especially
grateful to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the African Union and the brotherly
countries of Uganda and Burundi for their heroic stand
with us and their sacrifices.
My address to the Council today will be in three
parts. The first will attempt to put the position of
Somalia and the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in the proper perspective. The second will be on
our full support to the position of the African Union,
and the third will be on a few suggestions I have for
the Security Council on the way forward in Somalia.
In view of the prevailing negative media
coverage of Somalia and in the interest of enhancing
understanding of the plight of the Somali people and
their TFG, I would like to spend a few minutes, without
going into unnecessary detail, on the background to our
discussion. It goes without saying that, when things are
not going as well as we would like, it is tempting to
engage in the blame game. I guess that is part of
human nature.
In our opinion, what happened to Somalia in
1990 and 1991 was a catastrophe without precedent in
modern times. In Somali, we call it the burbur, which
literally means “disintegration” or “breakdown”. After
20 years of military rule, the regime came to an abrupt
end without any transfer of power. The ruler — or
dictator — simply walked away when his adversaries
started to close in on him. He moved to a remote
border area, which was his ancestral home. The rest is
history. With the breakdown of law and order, what

10-59578

S/PV.6407

happened afterwards was terrible but could have been
even worse. For the sake of argument, let us imagine,
for a moment that one’s own country, God forbid,
found itself in a similar situation. I am sure that the
consequences would be too ghastly to contemplate.

forward. This can be interpreted as an exercise in
democracy and governance. Now we have a new Prime
Minister, who is expected to be confirmed by
Parliament momentarily and to form a new
Government shortly.

I submit that the history of Somalia during the
past two decades has not been just doom and gloom.
The focus of the reporting on Somalia has been on the
capital, Mogadishu, which admittedly did not do well
for most of that time. But Somalia is bigger than
Mogadishu. Some regions have experienced a
relatively peaceful existence. The few reporters who
ventured to these areas found booming towns where
local businessmen, together with their relatives in the
diaspora, managed to set up clinics, electricity, schools,
telephones and running water despite the lack of a
central Government. It was not surprising to find that
the private sector moved into many areas where the
Government was traditionally involved. Even in
Mogadishu, private radio stations, television stations,
new hotels and internet cafes could be found.

I would like to reiterate that the people of
Somalia and the Transitional Federal Government fully
realize that the primary responsibility for stabilizing
the country lies with them. Others can only help. We
value our sovereignty, political independence, unity
and territorial integrity. The Transitional Federal
Government will do whatever it takes to stabilize the
country and implement the road map provided by the
Transitional Federated Charter during the remaining
period of office. In that connection, we hope that the
United Nations Secretary-General will be able to
revisit the time needed — six months, as noted in his
report — to prepare his vision of United Nations
cooperation with regional groups such as the African
Union.

I believe that this testifies to the resilience of the
Somali people. Furthermore, when the banking system
collapsed with the central Government, a parallel
internal banking system sprung up and is still
functioning. A Somali in the diaspora can send, say,
$50 to a relative in the remotest areas of Somalia, even
where there is fighting at the time, within 48 hours.
This is done by money-wiring services operated by
Somalis for Somalis. To the surprise of many, the
Somali shilling is still resilient because the informal
banking sector still has faith in it.
I would like to touch briefly on the nature of the
adversaries of the TFG. Every effort was made during
and after the Djibouti peace process to advance
reconciliation, but these extremists, with foreign
ideology and support, had no interest in dialogue or the
peaceful resolution of conflicts. They used force to
take over the town of Baidoa, which was the seat of the
TFG at the time. As soon as the TFG was installed in
Mogadishu, they decided to topple it by coup. Since
then, they have used relentless violence to reach their
objective of destroying life, property, the TFG and
AMISOM.
It can be argued that the very existence of the
TFG, under the circumstances, is a clear plus. Recently,
the former Prime Minister saw fit to resign in order to
allow the Transitional Federal Government to go

10-59578

I now would like to refer to the two important
documents guiding our discussion of the situation in
Somalia. The African Union communiqué and the
report of the United Nations Secretary-General
(S/2010/447) have both given an account of the
situation in Somalia. Indeed, we remain in a dire
situation, given the following aspects: first, the overall
security situation and what that means for the people of
Somalia, the neighbouring countries and the rest of the
world; secondly, the glaring tragic humanitarian
situation; thirdly, the growth and menace of piracy in
the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean; fourthly, the
phenomenon of virulent terrorism and extremism
fuelled by Al-Qaida, foreign fighters, extremists,
spoilers, saboteurs and profiteers; and fifthly, the
obvious threats to international peace and security.
I now would like to go on record as completely
endorsing the African Union communiqué issued on
15 October, 2010 by the African Union Peace and
Security Council and made available to all Security
Council members. In particular, the Transitional
Federal Government welcomes the African Union
calling on the Security Council to take the decisions
now required of it in line with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace by first, endorsing the African Union proposal on
a new force strength of 20,000, with the requisite air
and maritime capabilities, and an enhanced police
component of 1,680, comprising 560 police experts on

7

S/PV.6407

mission, eight formed police units of 140 each and an
enhanced civilian component and secondly, authorizing
an enhanced support package for AMISOM, funded
through United Nations assessed contributions based
on the newly-authorized force strength and guaranteed
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment costs,
including minor and major equipment and payment of
troop allowances at United Nations rates, in order to
ensure adequate, predictable and sustainable support to
the Mission. In addition, the Peace and Security
Council requests that such support be made available
to the Mission, both within and outside Somalia, as
required.
Let me now address the role of the Security
Council in relation to the urgent situation in Somalia.
As we all know, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and it is incumbent upon the
Security Council to cooperate with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. Such cooperation can improve collective
security. We believe that the African Union is calling
for such cooperation to be effective.
Furthermore, we hope that the Security Council
will respond to the various Governments, peoples,
institutions and organizations that do not comprehend
why the Security Council has not already taken
appropriate measures commensurate with the urgent
situation in Somalia, by: first, taking decisions aligned
with those endorsed by the African Union on numerous
occasions including the African Union Peace and
Security Council endorsement of 15 October 2010;
secondly, demonstrating that the Council fully realizes
the urgency of the situation and that it is indeed a
threat to international peace and security; thirdly,
reaffirming the Council’s commitment and political
will prioritize peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding; fourthly, committing itself to uniform
standards and consistency in relation to the deployment
of United Nations peacekeepers, and fifthly,
convincing the international community that the
Council is prepared to take decisive and urgent action
whenever that is warranted.

8

Finally, I would like to summarize the solution,
as I see it, to the Somali crisis as follows: first, the
Transitional Federal Government will obviously try to
organize itself and upgrade its performance in earnest
despite the daunting obstacles and roadblocks;
secondly, the Somali security sector, including its army
and police, must be strengthened significantly to
enable the establishment of law and order throughout
Somalia; thirdly, AMISOM must be strengthened by
resolving the urgent problems of reimbursement to the
troop-contributing countries, soldier allowance parity
and funding and by enabling the immediate
implementation of phase I of AMISOM’s mandate. The
Security Council must also endorse the African Union
proposal on the new force strength and revised concept
of cooperation.
I believe that, if we embark on the course I have
outlined above, we will achieve something worthwhile
and the world will be a better place for all.
I would like to conclude by informing all Council
members and the Secretary-General that the new Prime
Minister was recently appointed by the President and
now awaits the Parliament’s confirmation. We look
forward to the early formation of his cabinet. The
Government has promised to fulfil the obligations of
the Transitional Federal Government to, first, maintain
cohesion and unity of purpose, and secondly, address
the security issue in Somalia and mobilize the Somali
people and its forces to reverse the security situation in
Mogadishu by defeating the extremists with the
confirmed support of AMISOM and the international
community. We all know that there are no better people
to defend their country than the country’s own people.
We request, therefore, that the Council provide us with
the means and support us in forming our police and
army to be in a situation to effectively confront the
extremism, both terrorism and piracy, in our own
country.
The President: I thank Foreign Minister Ibrahim
for his statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, I should
now like to invite Council members to continue our
discussion on the subject in a private meeting.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

10-59578
