UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/22
14 July 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3906th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 July 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Afghanistan of 19 June 1998 (A/52/957S/1998/532).
"The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and respect for its cultural and historical heritage. It
reiterates its concern at the increasingly ethnic nature of the conflict,
and at the continuing threat this poses to the unity of the Afghan State.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the continued
Afghan conflict, which is a serious threat to regional and international
security, and causes extensive human suffering, further destruction,
refugee flows and other forcible displacement of large numbers of people.
"The Security Council deplores the fact that military support,
including the supplies of arms and other related matériel, from outside
Afghanistan to the warring factions continues unabated, despite repeated
pleas to halt it made by the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General. It reiterates its call to all States, in particular
those in the region, to cease such interference immediately.
"The Security Council considers it necessary that more active efforts
be undertaken under the aegis of the United Nations and with the
participation of interested countries aimed at a peaceful settlement of the
Afghan conflict, taking into account the interests of all ethnic and
religious groups and political forces involved therein.
"The Security Council deplores the breakdown of the intra-Afghan talks
in Islamabad and calls upon the parties to respect the wishes of the
overwhelming majority of Afghans, to stop the fighting, to return without
delay and preconditions to the negotiating table and to engage in a
98-20584 (E)

140798

/...

S/PRST/1998/22
English
Page 2

political dialogue aimed at achieving national reconciliation, a lasting
political settlement of the conflict, which has no military solution, and
the formation of a broad-based fully representative government. As an
initial step towards that goal, the Council calls upon the parties to agree
immediately on a ceasefire, an exchange of prisoners, and the lifting of
all restrictions on the shipments of humanitarian supplies throughout the
country.
"The Security Council reiterates its position that the United Nations,
as a universally recognized intermediary, must continue to play its central
and impartial role in international efforts towards a peaceful resolution
of the Afghan conflict, and extends its full support for the activities of
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan.
"The Security Council takes note of the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral that ’Loya Jirgah’ as an informal, time-honoured Afghan method of
settling disputes, advocated by some leaders of non-warring Afghan
factions, continues to deserve attention, and encourages the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan to continue to maintain useful contacts with
them.
"The Security Council commends the work of the ’six plus two’ group
and calls upon all countries involved in the group to continue to
participate in good faith with the aim of elaborating, on the basis of the
agreed talking points, a coherent approach to the peacemaking efforts in
Afghanistan, including the problem of curbing the flow of arms and other
related matériel into Afghanistan in an effective and even handed manner.
It welcomes and encourages the additional support of other Member States
for this process.
"The Security Council urges all Afghan factions to cooperate fully
with the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and international
humanitarian organizations and calls upon them, in particular the Taliban,
to take all necessary steps to assure the safety and freedom of movement of
such personnel.
"The Security Council acknowledges the signing of the Memorandum of
Understanding between the United Nations and the Taliban on humanitarian
issues and stresses the importance of its full implementation, including
full respect for immunities of United Nations staff, and for the assistance
of the United Nations in health and education. Noting that some of the
obstacles to the provision of assistance to Hazarajat have been overcome,
it nevertheless remains concerned at the continuing use by the Taliban of
United Nations humanitarian aid as a weapon against the Hazara and demands
that this practice cease immediately. The Council also remains concerned
at the lack of supplies coming from the northern route due to insecurity
and looting. It calls upon all Afghan factions to lift unconditionally any
blockade of humanitarian relief supplies.
"The Security Council is concerned at recent reports of harassment of
humanitarian organizations and at the unilateral decision by the Taliban to
/...

S/PRST/1998/22
English
Page 3

relocate humanitarian organizations’ offices in Kabul. It calls upon all
factions to facilitate the work of humanitarian agencies to the greatest
extent possible.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continuing
discrimination against girls and women and other violations of human rights
as well as violations of international humanitarian law in Afghanistan.
"The Security Council supports the steps of the Secretary-General to
launch investigations into alleged mass killings of prisoners of war and
civilians in Afghanistan, the outcome of which will be submitted to the
General Assembly and the Security Council as soon as it becomes available.
"The Security Council reiterates that the continuation of the conflict
in Afghanistan provides a fertile ground for terrorism and illegal drug
production and trafficking which destabilize the region and beyond, and
calls upon the leaders of the Afghan parties to halt such activities.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter and requests
the Secretary-General to continue to keep it regularly informed of the
situation in Afghanistan."

-----
