S/2019/827

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 October 2019
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to the Republic of
Colombia, 11–14 July 2019
I. Introduction
1.
In response to an invitation from the Government of Colombia, the Security
Council sent a mission to Colombia from 11 to 14 July 2019 whose terms of reference
can be found in the letter dated 10 July 2019 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/557, annex). The mission was
co-led by Peru, represented by Gustavo Meza-Cuadra (Permanent Representative)
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by
Jonathan Guy Allen (Deputy Permanent Representative), and comprised the following
additional members: Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Permanent Representative),
Belgium; Dianbin Zhang, China; Gbolié Désiré Wulfran Ipo (Deputy Permanent
Representative), Côte d’Ivoire; José Singer Weisinger (Permanent Representative),
Dominican Republic; Anatolio Ndong Mba (Permanent Representative), Equatorial
Guinea; Antoine Michon, France; Christoph Heusgen (Permanent Representative),
Germany; Dian Triansyah Djani (Permanent Representative), Indonesia; Mansour
Alotaibi (Permanent Representative), Kuwait; Joanna Wronecka (Permanent
Representative), Poland; Vassily A. Nebenzia (Permanent Representative), Russian
Federation; Xolisa Mfundiso Mabhongo (Deputy Permanent Representative), South
Africa; and Rodney Hunter, United States of America. The mission was the Council ’s
second to Colombia, the first having been conducted in May 2017. The programme
of the visit, annexed to the present report, included meetings in Bogotá (with the
Government, the political party People’s Alternative Revolutionary Force (FARC),
Congress, civil society, transitional justice institutions and the United Nations country
team) and a visit to the department of Cauca in south-western Colombia.

II. Meetings in Bogotá (12 July 2019)
A.

Meeting with President Iván Duque
2.
The Council’s first meeting was a breakfast at the Foreign Ministry with
President Iván Duque. The President welcomed the visit and the engagement of the
Security Council with Colombia. He explained his approach to the peace process and
reviewed the Government’s achievements in the implementation to date, as well as
ongoing concerns. The President stressed that those, including himself, who had taken
part in the “no” campaign in the 2016 plebiscite had not been opposed to peace, but
rather saw the need for changes to the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and

19-18195 (E)

291019

*1918195*

S/2019/827

Building a Stable and Lasting Peace negotiated between the previous Government and
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army (FARC-EP) to allow for
a lasting peace. In 2018, as presidential candidate, he had promised that he would work
for a successful peace in which justice has its place, and that he would not destroy or
disrupt the essence of the Final Agreement. Soon after taking office, he had
demonstrated his commitment by requesting the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Progress on peace implementation
during the first 11 months of his Government had exceeded that achieved over the
previous 20 months. The President cited examples such as the increased approval of
productive projects (24 had been approved, resulting in the employment of some 1,300
ex-combatants), the completion of all 16 development programmes with a territorial
focus, and updating of the landregister. He assured the mission that financing for peace
implementation was ensured in the national development plan. The President stressed
his commitment to the reintegration of former combatants, as illustrated by his visits
to three of the territorial areas for training and reintegration, and noted that a
successful reintegration process was critical for consolidating peace. With respect to
transitional justice, the President recalled his reasons for having objected to several
provisions in the Law on the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, although he had signed it
into law, thereby respecting the decision of the country’s institutions. He pledged to
support and work closely with the transitional justice system in the expectation that it
will make possible a peace accompanied by truth, justice, reparations and guarantees
of non-repetition, and that persons who do not honour their obligations under the
system receive exemplary punishment.
3.
President Duque also noted that there were reasons for concern, in particular the
killing of community leaders, human rights defenders and former FARC-EP members
in rural areas. He expressed his Government’s commitment to enhancing security and
the presence of the State in the former conflict areas and noted that it was a major
challenge to protect social leaders owing to the large number of persons who could
be categorized as such. He referred to efforts by the Office of the Attorney General to
investigate cases and bring the perpetrators to justice, to his Government ’s action plan
for the protection of social and community leaders, human rights defenders and
journalists, which was aimed at preventing attacks and responding better to early
warnings, and to some 7,000 individual protection schemes. The Government was
developing a national policy for addressing this problem, which was concentrated in
50 municipalities heavily influenced by drug trafficking and illegal mining. The
number of killings had been reduced since he had taken office, but it still remained
unacceptably high. In response to the killing of former FARC-EP members the
President had, during the previous week, announced a package of additional measures
to prevent killings and bring perpetrators to justice.
4.
In conclusion, the President reaffirmed his commitment to continuing to wo rk
with the Security Council and welcomed the Council’s unanimous support to
Colombia and the Government’s good working relationship with the Verification
Mission. He presented a letter to the President of the Council, addressed to him and to
the Secretary-General, in which he requested, on behalf of the Government and FARC,
the renewal of the Mission’s mandate for another year starting on 26 September 2019.
In addition, the President welcomed a greater international focus on ensuring that
FARC, in addition to the Government, comply with its obligations under the Final
Agreement, in particular in areas such as the reporting of assets, knowledge of drug
trafficking routes and cooperation with the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
5.
In response to the President’s remarks, the co-leaders and members of the
Security Council delegation expressed their appreciation for the Government ’s
invitation to visit Colombia and welcomed its request to renew the mandate of the
Verification Mission. They emphasized the unanimo us support of the Council for the
2/14

19-18195

S/2019/827

implementation of the Final Agreement and the importance of the success of the peace
process in Colombia as an inspiration for peacemaking efforts around the world.
While acknowledging the difficulties inherent in overcomi ng more than five decades
of conflict, they expressed the hope that polarization around the Final Agreement
could be reduced so as to make more unified efforts to consolidate peace. They
commended the commitment of the President to implementation, welcomed advances
in areas such as the reintegration of former combatants and stressed their concerns
about the killings of social leaders and former FARC-EP members. They stressed the
importance of extending the comprehensive presence of the State into the former
conflict areas in order to spread the peace dividends of security and development.
Several Council members voiced their support for voluntary crop substitution coupled
with alternative development programmes as a key element of a successful strategy
to combat illicit drugs. They stressed the importance of the Final Agreement as a
package to be implemented in an integrated fashion. Responding to the comments and
questions of the Security Council members, the President elaborated on his
Government’s approach to the eradication of illicit crops (using a range of
instruments, including the intended resumption of aerial fumigation); the issuance of
military directives, which had been criticized for the human rights risks that they
entailed (the President noted that he had appointed a panel tasked with looking into
the situation); and the National Liberation Army (ELN), regarding which the
President restated that it had not met the Government’s conditions for restarting the
dialogue. Finally, the President called for continued international solidarity in the
light of the mixed migration flows from the country’s neighbour, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. By hosting more than 1.3 million Venezuelans who had left
their country, Colombia had taken on a major burden in addition to the responsibilities
relating to the implementation of the Final Agreement.

B.

Meeting with senior government officials involved in
peace implementation
6.
Following their meeting with President Duque, the Members of the Council
exchanged views with a group of senior officials involved in various aspects of peace
implementation and the stabilization of former conflict areas, led by Emilio Archila,
Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and Consolidation. The Council members noted
the importance of coordination across State entities and enquired about the difficulties
in establishing an effective State presence in former conflict areas, protecting social
leaders and implementing voluntary coca crop substitution programmes, as well as
about the role of women in the peace process. Mr. Archila stressed the Government ’s
political will to implement the Final Agreement and noted its complexity compared
with other peace agreements and the need for long-term planning. In addition to the
areas of progress noted by President Duque, he referred to the participation of FARC
in Congress and the effectiveness of security in the territorial areas for training and
reintegration, in which there had been no killings of ex-combatants. He mentioned the
Government’s commitment to the continuation of monthly stipends, food and services
for ex-combatants and to a smooth transition in the territorial areas for training and
reintegration once their legal status expired in August. He cautioned that changing
development conditions in the former conflict areas would take a considerable amount
of time and pointed out that the national development plan had established a 10 - to 15year road map for stabilization. He called for sustained political and financial support
from the international community and understanding for the time frames involved. He
noted that the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops
had been established without ensuring the requisite financial resources, but that the
Government would nonetheless honour the commitments to the families that had
agreed to voluntarily eradicate coca under the programme. The Presidential Adviser

19-18195

3/14

S/2019/827

for National Security explained that the Government’s new defence and security
policy was aimed at filling the vacuum left by the disappearance of FARC as an
insurgency through the establishment of “strategic zones of comprehensive
intervention”, and that it was envisaged as a multidimensional approach to
stabilization that involved security and civilian institutions and basic services for the
population. The Presidential Adviser for Human Rights and International Affairs
pointed out that killings of social leaders had begun prior to the current administration
(221 had occurred between the signing of the Final Agreement and the inauguration of
President Duque) and that their number had declined since the adoption of the action
plan. With respect to gender equality and gender aspects of the Final Agreement,
officials noted the leadership role assigned to Vice-President Marta Lucía Ramírez,
the establishment of a cabinet with equal numbers of women and men, and the role of
the High-level Forum on Gender in following up on gender indicators within the Final
Agreement. The head of the Government’s Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization noted the incorporation of a gender focus in productive reintegration
projects and mentioned that emphasis was being put on delivering benefits for the
surrounding communities. Council members were also briefed on efforts to facilit ate
the registration of FARC candidates and to ensure transparency in upcoming local
elections, as well as efforts to provide reparations to conflict victims and to expand
land, credit and technical assistance available to rural populations.

C.

Meeting with peace commissions of Congress
7.
The mission of the Security Council met with members of the peace
commissions of the Senate and the Chamber of Representatives for parties
representing both the Government coalition (Centro Democrático) and a range of
independent and opposition parties (Alianza Verde, Cambio Radical, Partido Liberal,
Partido Social de la Unidad Nacional, Polo Democrático, FARC, Lista Decencia).
Council members emphasized the importance of ensuring that the peace process
would succeed. They noted the continuing political div isions surrounding the Final
Agreement and encouraged cross-party dialogue for the purpose of broadening
political consensus to foster progress in implementation and national reconciliation.
8.
In their statements, representatives of the independent and op position parties
acknowledged progress in the implementation of the Final Agreement, including the
laying down of arms and political participation of FARC, as well as the commitment
of the current administration to the productive reintegration of former co mbatants.
The presence at the meeting, and in Congress, of parties at opposite ends of the
ideological and political spectrum was in itself a powerful symbol that showed how
far Colombia had come. However, members of the opposition considered that the
commitment to implementation had been selective, that chapters on rural reform were
not seriously being implemented and that the killing of community leaders indicated
that efforts to extend the presence of the State and offer security in the former conflict
zones had failed. Members of the opposition disagreed with the view expressed by
the Government that the killings could be linked mainly to illicit economies because
that explanation obscured deeper structural factors, the persistence of paramilitary
groups and the impact of a discourse stigmatizing social leaders and former
combatants. They expressed concern that the peace process still faced legal challenges
and that it had already been subjected to lengthy discussions and review in Congress
as well as in the country’s high courts. They insisted that any further reform proposals
should result from a fully inclusive political process involving all parties. They urged
respect for the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and underscored the
continued commitment of the majority of former FARC-EP members to the peace
process, notwithstanding the position of some who had distanced themselves from the
process.

4/14

19-18195

S/2019/827

9.
Independent and opposition parties expressed appreciation for the Verification
Mission and strongly welcomed the request to extend its mandate. Several expressed
the view that the Mission should remain in Colombia until the peace process was fully
consolidated. The Council was urged, as envisioned in the Final Agreement, to include
in the Mission’s mandated tasks the monitoring of compliance with the sentences to
be handed down by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The Council was also urged to
invite members of civil society and FARC to future briefings in New York.
10. Legislators of the governing Centro Democrático party argued that the views of
the majority of Colombians who had voted “no” in the 2016 plebiscite on the Final
Agreement had still not been taken into account, and that those who continued to
voice criticism of the Final Agreement and to propose modifications were unfairly
being stigmatized as enemies of peace. They considered that the transitional justice
process favoured perpetrators over victims and noted that Jesús Santrich and several
other FARC leaders were not complying with their obligations to the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. They held the peace process responsible for the expansion of
illicit coca crops, which was fuelling the ongoing violence -related problems in the
former conflict areas, including the growth in the number of FARC dissiden ts. They
rejected the paramilitary label attached to groups responsible for some of the current
violence as wrongly implying military responsibility. While they agreed that the
killings of social leaders posed a serious problem, they stressed that the reas on for
their continued occurrence was not a lack of political will to address them, but the
difficulty of extending an effective State presence to former conflict areas. The party
representatives expressed appreciation for the Verification Mission and obse rved that
not only the Government’s compliance with its obligations should be monitored, but
also that of FARC.

D.

Meeting with party leaders of People’s Alternative
Revolutionary Force
11. The Council delegation met with the president of the political party FARC,
Rodrigo Londoño, and with FARC representatives to the Commission for the
Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement,
the National Reintegration Council and two of its representatives in Congress, both
women. Council members commended FARC for its commitment to the peace process
and encouraged it to continue on the same track. They reiterated the Council ’s support
for the full implementation of the Final Agreement. Members enquired about the views
of FARC on current challenges to implementation, including the phenomenon of
dissidents. They encouraged full contributions by FARC to victims, and accountability
through the established transitional justice process. Several Council members shared
thoughts about their own national experiences with peace and reconciliation.
12. FARC leaders welcomed the visit of the Security Council mission and stressed
the importance of its involvement and of that of the international community in
preserving the Final Agreement, including by extending the presence of the
Verification Mission. They reiterated their commitment to the Final Agreement and
their conviction that they had made the right decision in signing it. T hey nevertheless
expressed the view that its implementation had been insufficient and that the political
will of the current administration to comply with its obligations had been limited.
FARC saw a difference between the Government’s international discourse and its
domestic actions, including in Congress, where the governing party was being
perceived as seeking to undermine the Final Agreement. FARC leaders expressed
particular concern about the killings and stigmatization of former combatants and
social leaders, the insufficient implementation of rural and political reforms, the illicit
crops substitution programme and actions affecting the independence of the Special

19-18195

5/14

S/2019/827

Jurisdiction for Peace. Despite relative progress with respect to reintegration,
approved projects had benefited only 1,655 out of the 13,415 accredited former
combatants. They argued that, to ensure the sustainability of the reintegration process,
territorial and community-based approaches should be fully implemented, given that
former combatants were living in 24 territorial areas for training and reintegration
and 80 new collective settlements, both in urban and rural settings. Female
representatives in Congress emphasized, among other points, the importance of
supporting the participation of women and young people in political processes and of
mainstreaming and advancing the gender provisions in the implementation.
13. FARC leaders underscored that they did not endorse the position taken by Jesús
Santrich and a number of other former FARC-EP leaders who had distanced
themselves from the peace process either before the signing of the Final Agreement or
during its implementation. They stressed that the leadership of the party had persisted
in complying with the Final Agreement and considered that the ongoing struggle for
changes in Colombia should be carried out within its institutional framework. FARC
delegates restated their commitment to truth, justice, reparation and non -repetition and
explained that they had been cooperating with the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and
the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition. Responding to questions
about their compliance with provisions regarding the former guerrilla movement ’s
assets and the fight against drug trafficking, one leader stated that the group had
declared its assets as required under the Final Agreement, that it had not been a drug
trafficking group and that it had no knowledge to share about routes and organizations.
FARC leaders also mentioned that they are working in Congress to pass a law
establishing the special transitional electoral districts for peace that were envisioned
under the Final Agreement to guarantee the political participation of victims.

E.

Meetings with members of civil society
14. The Security Council met with a group of representatives of civil society from
various sectors including peace platforms, human rights organizations, the Catholic
Church, women’s organizations, ethnic groups, think tanks and organizations focused
on children and young people in armed conflict. Council members confirmed their
strong commitment to the peace process and underscored the important role played
by civil society in peacebuilding. They welcomed the close collaboration in Colombia
between the United Nations and civil society organizations.
15. Participating organizations stressed the strong commitment of civil society to the
peace process. They acknowledged that the peace process had resulted in significant
gains, including the laying down of arms by the former FARC-EP, its transformation
into a political party and the progress made in reintegrating former combatants. They
expressed concern, however, that the Final Agreement was not being implemented
across the board as a comprehensive package, given that areas such as rural reform and
political participation, the dismantling of criminal groups, and voluntary crop
substitution were not, in their view, proceeding apace. The failure to establish special
transitional electoral districts for peace was considered a shortcoming in the
implementation of the political participation aspects of the Final Agreement. Concerns
were also expressed about inadequate funding for peace priorities and insufficient use
of implementation mechanisms established in the Final Agreement.
16. The killing of social leaders and former combatants was presented as a matter
of grave concern. The National Commission on Security Guarantees, a body joining
government and civil society representatives under the Final Agreement, had not been
adequately utilized and Government responses had so far been ineffective. The
ongoing violence in the former conflict areas, which also included the forced
displacement and recruitment of children by illegal armed groups, meant that the hope

6/14

19-18195

S/2019/827

felt in the aftermath of the signing of the Final Agreement had given way to fear. The
integrated extension of the presence of the State through a non-militarized approach
was considered essential. Ethnic representatives noted the disproportionate impact of
the current killings of social leaders on ethnic populations, many of whom were from
ethnic communities. This pattern had also been felt throughout the armed conflict.
They stressed the importance of implementing the ethnic chapter of the Final
Agreement and strengthening self-protection schemes. They noted that indigenous
and Afro-Colombian communities were open to reconciliation with former
combatants, accepting them in their communities and working together on collective
projects. Efforts within the reintegration process to treat children diff erentially, with
an emphasis on protection and prevention measures, were applauded. The Council
was also encouraged to call upon the State to carry out its obligations under the Final
Agreement with respect to children.
17. Civil society organizations criticized attempts to modify the Final Agreement.
They expressed strong support for the role played by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and urged that the transitional justice system be provided with the financial
resources and political support it required to operate with independence and
autonomy. Civil society organizations also called for the renewal of peace talks with
ELN in order to end the cycle of violence in Colombia. Women ’s representatives
stressed the importance of strengthening the implementati on of the gender provisions
in the Final Agreement, which, while considered a best practice, were
underimplemented in practice. The Verification Mission was invited to increase the
focus on gender in its work.
18. Civil society organizations welcomed the request to extend the mandate of the
Verification Mission; several urged that its tasks be extended in the future to include
the verification of compliance with the sentences handed down by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. They also stressed the importa nce of the continuation of the
work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Colombia and noted its complementarity with the Verification Mission.

F.

Meeting with leaders of transitional justice institutions under
the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition
19. The Security Council delegation met with the leaders of the three institutions of
the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition that
comprise the transitional justice framework established in the Final Agreement: the
Commission on Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition, the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed missing in the context of and
due to the armed conflict. Council members reiterated the support they had repeatedly
expressed for the vital work of these institutions, enquired about progress and
challenges they were encountering in implementing their mandates and invited
suggestions about how the Council and its members could be of additional support.
The heads of all three bodies expressed their appreciation for the support received
from the Security Council and underscored the importance of its continued
engagement in order to ensure the success of the peace process.
20. With respect to progress and challenges facing their institutions, Patricia
Linares, President of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, expressed satisfaction that
the enactment of the Law on the Special Jurisdiction for Peace had created the
normative framework the Special Jurisdiction had been lacking and had given
guarantees about the new framework for justice. Nonetheless, the framework was not
sufficiently understood by the public, despite having already achieved results since

19-18195

7/14

S/2019/827

the start of its operations more than a year earlier. She noted that all the chambers of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace were functioning. More than 11,000 FARC
members, 2,000 members of the public security forces and 53 third -party civilians
had voluntarily submitted to its jurisdiction, civil society organizations had presented
191 reports, and 7 major cases had been opened involving serious crimes that had
affected 830,000 victims of the armed conflict.
21. Father Francisco De Roux, President of the Commission on Truth, Coexistence
and Non-Repetition, explained that, during the first year of its three -year mandate,
the Commission had focused on social dialogues involving, among others, victims
and victims’ organizations, ex-combatants, members of the private sector, academics,
Afro-Colombian and indigenous communities, women, and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons. These dialogues dealt with sensitive issues that
Colombia had not yet examined, in particular responsibility for and motives behind
crimes committed during the armed conflict. More of such dialogues were to be held.
The challenge facing the Commission was to extract from the complexity of the armed
conflict an approximation of the truth based on the information provided by the
victims and a range of institutions. He stressed the importance that victims attached
to overcoming polarization and conflict between Colombians, the strengthening of a
more inclusive and participatory democracy and the potential of the transitional
justice process to contribute to reconciliation.
22. Luz Marina Monzón, Director of the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed
missing in the context of and due to the armed conflict, described the Unit as a
humanitarian agreement within the Final Agreement. Its task was to determine the
whereabouts and identity of an estimated 100,000 missing persons. In less than a year
since the start of its operations it had received more than 900 individual and collective
search requests, developed 10 search plans in relation to those requests and
established a presence in 10 regions. Technological support was required to advance
in the identification of and search for those who had disappeared, and the sharing of
experiences with other countries was welcome. Special appreciation was expressed
to the Security Council for the recent adoption of its resolution 2474 (2019), in which
the Council had urged States to search for missing persons and to include search
mechanisms in peace processes. The resolution was an incentive for the work of the
Unit and an obligation for the State.
23. The leaders of the institutions conveyed a shared concern that announced
government budget cuts could be applied to the transitional justice institutions, which
would severely hamper them in their work. It was strongly felt that such measures
should not be applied to the transitional justice institutions, given their special role
and transitory nature.

G.

Meeting with the United Nations country team
24. The Council members met with representatives of the United Nations country
team, who shared their assessments of the challenges facing n ational peacebuilding
efforts and described how the United Nations system was supporting those efforts.
Council members, for their part, stressed the importance they attached to the
successful implementation of the Final Agreement and welcomed the strong f ocus of
the country team in that regard, as well as the exemplary cooperation with the
Verification Mission.
25. The Council delegation was informed that about two thirds of the 2018 budget
of the country team had been allocated to peacebuilding efforts. T his support was
closely aligned with provisions of the Final Agreement, including the accords on rural
reform, illicit crops, victims, security guarantees and the reintegration of former

8/14

19-18195

S/2019/827

combatants. Reintegration is an area of particularly close cooperatio n with the
Verification Mission. The activities of the country team in support of peacebuilding
were increasingly aimed at reaching regions affected by the armed conflict; nearly
60 per cent of the work was focused on the 170 municipalities affected by con flict
where the Government was implementing development programmes with a territorial
focus. Between 2017 and 2019, United Nations agencies extended their presence to
all 25 territorial areas for training and reintegration. Furthermore, the peacebuilding
fund was supporting a joint effort between several agencies and the Verification
Mission to promote community-based reintegration actions with a strong focus on
women’s economic empowerment and children in 15 territorial areas for training and
reintegration.
26. Extending an effective State presence to historically marginalized former conflict
regions was highlighted as a matter of paramount importance, especially in view of
troubling trends occurring in regions formerly occupied by FARC-EP. Those trends
included killings of community leaders, increasing internal displacement and the
expansion of illicit crops. Country team members stressed the importance of voluntary
coca crop substitution, of actions to protect community leaders and human rights
defenders, and of assuring a strong focus on gender aspects of the Final Agreement. In
addition, Council members were informed that the United Nations system was
supporting the authorities in Colombia, at their request, in responding to the challenges
resulting from the mixed migration flows from the neighbouring Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, estimated at 1.3 million persons over the preceding two years.

III. Visit to Cauca Department (13 July 2019)
27. On the second day of its mission, the Security Council travelled to the department
of Cauca, in south-western Colombia, in order to visit a territorial area for training and
reintegration and to meet with social leaders at the municipal seat of Caldono. Ca uca
is the department registering the highest numbers of killings of community leaders,
human rights defenders and former FARC-EP combatants since the signing of the Final
Agreement. The municipality of Caldono, located in the northern part of Cauca, is
home to a large indigenous population: 71 per cent of all inhabitants.

A.

Meeting in Caldono with community leaders and representatives
of non-governmental organizations
28. In Caldono, the Council members met with a diverse group of community
leaders and with representatives of social organizations and ethnic and women ’s
groups from Cauca Department. They reaffirmed the commitment of the Security
Council to the implementation of the Final Agreement and noted their deep concern
about the killings of social and community leaders in Colombia. They regretted being
told that one well-known leader who had been scheduled to attend the meeting had
been forced to cancel her participation after receiving a threat from an illegal armed
group. Council members enquired about the reasons behind the killings and the
efficacy of public policies being developed to address the problem. They expressed
admiration for the work of the leaders on behalf of their communities and made a
commitment to seek the strengthening of their security guarantees.
29. The community leaders welcomed the visit of the Security Council and
expressed appreciation for the work of the Verification Mission. They voiced serious
concern about the killings of leaders in both Cauca and the country as a whole. They
attributed the violence to a range of factors, including the expansion of illegal armed
groups competing for illicit economies and resistance to efforts by indigenous and

19-18195

9/14

S/2019/827

Afro-Colombian communities to defend territories and natural resources. L eaders
who had supported the voluntary substitution of illicit crops and who had advocated
the implementation of the Final Agreement were among the victims. One
Afro-Colombian leader in attendance had survived a recent armed attack on a meeting
of leaders in Cauca in which two bodyguards had been wounded. The organizations
faulted public policies that, in their words, undermined the right to social protest and
stigmatized community leaders and contributed to their insecurity. Indigenous
representatives invited support for the strengthening of the Indigenous Guard, a self protection mechanism. A weak State presence, the failure to provide public services
to the population or to support the licit agricultural economy of the peasants
contributed to a context in which illegal economies were thriving and illegal armed
groups gained strength in Cauca and other regions, among them ELN, FARC
dissidents and paramilitaries. The organizations called for the full implementation of
the rural development provisions in the Final Agreement, including the development
programmes with a territorial focus and the National Comprehensive Programme for
the Substitution of Illicit Crops, as well as for renewed efforts at dialogue with ELN
in order to achieve a comprehensive peace.

B.

Visit to the Santa Rosa territorial area for training and
reintegration and productive project
30. During a visit to the Santa Rosa territorial area for training and reintegration in
the village of Los Monos, municipality of Caldono, the Security Cou ncil mission,
joined for the occasion by high-level delegates of the national Government and of the
FARC political party, held an open dialogue with residents of the territorial area,
members of nearby communities and local and regional officials. The terr itorial area,
in which approximately 237 former FARC combatants of mostly indigenous
extraction resided, had been established on lands of the Nasa indigenous group under
an agreement with traditional authorities. At the time of the visit, the continuation of
the territorial area beyond the expiry of its legal status in August had recently been
confirmed as a result of a dialogue between the Government and FARC.
31. In addressing the residents and their leaders, the Security Council members
reiterated the support of the international community for the peace process and
highlighted the importance of hearing first-hand accounts from former combatants and
communities about their hopes and concerns with respect to the implementation of the
Final Agreement. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Carlos Holmes Trujillo, and the
Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and Consolidation, Emilio Archila, reiterated on
behalf of President Duque the Government’s commitment to the reintegration process
and the implementation of the “peace with legality” policy. The Governor of Cauca
and the Mayor of Caldono expressed their support for the peace process, acknowledged
the efforts and the commitment of the parties, highlighted the importance of working
alongside indigenous communities and underlined the benefits derived from the Final
Agreement. The Governor of the indigenous reserve of San Lorenzo, in Caldono,
underscored the importance of the visit of the Security Council to an indigenous
territory. He highlighted the role of the Indigenous Guard and requested that the
Government took concrete actions to stop attacks against community leaders and to
implement key aspects of the Final Agreement, such as the ethnic chapter,
comprehensive rural reform and the development programmes with a territorial focus.
Senator Pablo Catatumbo of the FARC party stressed that despite the difficulties they
were facing, former combatants maintained their commitment to reintegration into
civilian life; the decision made by FARC to commit to peace was irreversible.
32. Former combatants and community members welcomed the visit by the Security
Council and shared a range of opinions and concerns. Clarity was sought with respect

10/14

19-18195

S/2019/827

to the policy on reintegration into urban areas and to the Government ’s commitment
to voluntary coca crop substitution. There were also calls for measures to stop the
killing of former combatants, and questions were asked about why the State had not
moved quickly into the areas that had been vacated by FARC. Female indigenous
leaders highlighted the need for meaningful political participation by women in
decision-making arenas and the eradication of gender-based violence.
33. Council members were briefed in detail about the state of reintegration efforts
in Santa Rosa and, more broadly, in Cauca, by the head of the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization and the President of the FARC cooperative in the
territorial area for training and reintegration. All in all, Cauca had 1,225 former
combatants, the third-largest such population following the departments of Meta and
Antioquia, of whom 60 per cent identified as being of ethnic origin. Four territorial
reintegration councils and a departmental reintegration board were active in Cauca,
connecting various actors in the reintegration process. Council members were
informed that two of the three collective reintegration projects approved for Cauca by
the National Reintegration Council, were in the Santa Rosa territorial area for training
and reintegration: an avocado farm and a fish farm. Other projects had been financed
with former combatants’ funds received through the reintegration programme, as well
as with international donations. In the latter category, Council members viewed a
display of traditional handicrafts produced by the “Weaving peace” project led by
female ex-combatants. They toured the area in which ex-combatants were being
housed and travelled by road outside the territorial area to tour a tree tomato farming
project employing some 30 ex-combatants and 10 community members. The project,
which had initially been intended for the consumption of the participants only, was
expanding and the aim was to produce some 40 tons of fruit per month for sale to
national supermarket chains.

IV. Media
34. The Security Council mission visit was prominently covered in the national
media. Media interactions included a joint press conference by President Duque and
the mission’s co-leaders (12 July), a press encounter by the co-leaders at the airport
of Popayán in the department of Cauca following the visits to Caldono and the Santa
Rosa territorial area for training and reintegration (13 July) and interviews given by
several Council members with national and international media in Bogotá (13 July).
The visit was also publicized and documented by means of photographs and video
posted to the digital platforms of the Verification Mission. The Security Council
subsequently referred to the mission in a press statement of 23 July 2019 (available
from https://www.un.org/press/en/2019/sc13896.doc.htm).

19-18195

11/14

S/2019/827

Annex
Programme of work
Friday, 12 July 2019 –meetings in Bogotá
• Breakfast with President Iván Duque
President Iván Duque Márquez; Carlos Holmes Trujillo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs; Adriana Mejía, Vice-Minister for Multilateral Affairs; Guillermo
Fernández De Soto, Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United
Nations; Emilio Archila, Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and Consolidation
• Press stakeout
President Iván Duque Márquez; Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations; Jonathan Guy Allen, Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations
• Technical meeting with Government entities in charge of the implementation
process
Carlos Holmes Trujillo, Minister for Foreign Affairs; Adriana Mejía, Vice-Minister
for Multilateral Affairs; Emilio Archila, Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and
Consolidation; Francisco Barbosa, Presidential Adviser for Human Rights and
International Affairs; Rafael Guarín, Presidential Adviser for National Security;
Andrés Stapper, Director of the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization; Juan
Carlos Soler, Vice-Minister of Interior; Marcela Urueña, Vice-Minister for
Agriculture; Ramón Rodríguez, Director of the Victims Unit; María Mercedes
Liévano, Deputy Director of Colombian Institute of Family Welfare
• Meeting with the peace commissions of Congress (representatives of political
parties)
– Senate: Antonio Sanguino, Alianza Verde; Temístocles Ortega, Cambio
Radical; Paloma Valencia, Centro Democrático; Victoria Sandino, FARC;
Luis Fernando Velasco, Partido Liberal; Roy Barreras, Partido Social de la
Unidad Nacional; Roosvelt Rodríguez, Partido Social de la Unidad
Nacional; Iván Cepeda, Polo Democrático; Guillermo García Realpe,
Partido Liberal; Harold Suárez, Centro Democrático; Pablo Catatumbo,
FARC; Armando Benedetti, Partido Social de la Unidad Nacional; Richard
Aguilar, Partido Cambio Radical; Alejandro Corrales, Partido Centro
Democrático; Ruby Helena Chagui, Partido Centro Democrático; Carlos
Manuel Meisel Vergara, Partido Centro Democrático; Carlos Lozada, FARC
– House of Representatives: Carlos Eduardo Acosta, Colombia Justa
Libres; Marco Calarcá, FARC; María José Pizarro, Lista de la Decencia
• Lunch with United Nations country team
• Meeting with FARC leadership
Rodrigo Londoño, President of FARC; Jairo Estrada, Representative to the
Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement; Pastor Alape, Representative to the
National Reintegration Council; Pablo Catatumbo, Senator; S andra Ramírez,
Senator; Carlos Antonio Lozada, Senator; Rodrigo Granda, Representative to
the Commission; Victoria Sandino, Senator

12/14

19-18195

S/2019/827

• Meeting with civil society
– Peacebuilding organizations:
Rosa Emilia Salamanca, Corporación de Investigación y. Acción Social y
Económica; Daniel García Peña, Planeta Paz; Atahualpa Hernández, Diálogo
Intereclesial por la Paz de Colombia; Guillermo Rivera, Defendamos la Paz
– Human rights organizations:
Jahel Quiroga, Corporación Reiniciar; Gustavo Gallón, Comisión
Colombiana de Juristas; Franklin Castañeda, Coordinación Colombia,
Europa, Estados Unidos; Claudia Mejía, Sisma Mujer
– Catholic Church:
Monsignor Héctor Fabio Henao, Pastoral Social
– Women’s organizations:
Olga Amparo Sánchez, Cumbre Nacional de Mujeres; Martha Sánchez,
Alta Instancia de Género; María Eugenia Cruz, Red Nacional de Mujeres
Defensoras
–

Ethnic organizations:
Ariel Palacio, Instancia Especial de Alto Nivel de los Pueblos Étnicos; Héctor
Marino Carabalí, Instancia Especial de Alto Nivel de los Pueblos Étnicos
– Child protection and youth issues:
Hilda Beatriz Molano, Coalición Contra la Vinculación de Niños, Niñas y
Jóvenes al Conflicto Armado en Colombia
– Think tanks:
Jorge Restrepo, Centro de Recursos para Análisis de Conflictos

• Meeting with the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition
– Patricia Linares, President of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
– Francisco De Roux, President of the Commission on Truth, Coexistence
and Non-Repetition
– Luz Marina Monzón, Director of the Unit for the Search for Persons
deemed missing in the context of and due to the armed conflic t
Saturday, 13 July 2019 – Visit to Cauca Department
• Meeting in the municipality of Caldono with community leaders from Cauca
• Visit to the Santa Rosa territorial area for training and reintegration
– Dialogue with residents, community leaders and authorities
Carlos Holmes Trujillo, Minister for Foreign Affairs; Emilio Archila,
Presidential Adviser for Stabilization and Conso lidation; Andrés Stapper,
Director of the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization; Óscar
Rodrigo Ocampo, Governor of Cauca; Paulo Andrés Piso, Mayor of
Caldono; Alfonso Díaz, Governor of the Local Indigenous Council San
Lorenzo de Caldono; Jhon Carlos Moreno, Legal Representative of Board
of Directors of Santa Rosa Cooperative;

19-18195

13/14

S/2019/827

– Tour of the territorial area for training and reintegration
– Visit to tree tomato productive project
• Press Encounter at the regional airport of Popayán

14/14

19-18195
