VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

pation in the development process as agents and beneficiaries of development,
I. Notes with appreciation the organization of the
Interregional Seminar on National Experience Relating to
the Improvement of the Situation of Women in Rural
Areas, held at Vienna from 17 to 28 September 1984;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to compile the
observations and comments made on the report of the
above-mentioned Seminar at the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, to be held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session the report of the
Seminar, together with the observations and comments
compiled in accordance with paragraph 2 above.
101 st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/127. Senior women's programme officers posts at
the regional commissions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/188 of 29 January 1979, 35/
I 37 of 11 December 1980 and 37 /62 of 3 December 1982
and, in particular, its view that the appointment of senior
women's programme officers at the regional commissions
represents a valuable contribution to the implementation
of the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling also its resolution 38/106 of 16 December
1983, in particular the reference to the question of senior
women's programme officers posts at the regional commissions contained in paragraphs 2 and 3 of that resolution,
Reaffirming that questions concerning women should be
approached and dealt with as an integral part of overall
policies and programmes in the field of social and economic development,
Convinced that further efforts are needed to ensure the
maintena~ce and continuation, at the appropriate level, of
posts assigned to women's programmes at the regional
commissions,
Recognizing that these posts are integral to the successful outcome of national and regional programmes for
women,
I. Takes due note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation of senior women's programme
officers posts at the regional commissions; 151
2. Takes note of the decision of the Secretary-General
to continue posts through temporary arrangements during
1985; 152
3. Expresses deep concern that there has been a lack of
progress in regularizing senior women's programme officers posts at the regional commissions and that work with
respect to women's programmes is thereby seriously
impeded;
4. Stresses that the appointment of senior women's
programme officers at the regional commissions represents
a valuable contribution to the implementation of the goals
of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, and beyond;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the executive secretaries of the five regional commissions,
I 51 A/39/569/ Add. I.
152 Ibid., para. 13.

219

to reassess all individual work programmes, with a view to
incorporating women's concerns at all levels in the overall
programme of work of each Commission;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the executive secretaries of the five regional commissions, to allocate sufficient budgetary resources to staff,
including, where possible, by redeployment, within the
context of the I 986-198 7 programme budget, in order to
regularize all temporary and permanent senior women's
programme officers posts at the regional commissions
before the end of the Decade, so as to allow the integration
of policies and programmes concerning women;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on measures
taken in implementation of paragraph 5 above.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/128. Integration of women in all aspects of
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3 7/5 7 of 3 December I 982, as
well as Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/ I 2
of 24 May 1984,
Recalling paragraphs 190 to 196 of the World Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the
International Women's Year, 153 in which the relevant
agencies of the United Nations and intergovernmental,
interregional and regional bodies were called upon to scrutinize all existing plans and projects with a view to
extending their sphere of activities to include women and
to develop new and innovative projects to include women,
Bearing in mind that development is one of the themes
of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling paragraph 51 of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 154 which stated that appropriate measures should
be taken for profound social and economic changes and for
the elimination of the structural imbalances which compound and perpetuate women's disadvantages,
Looking ahead to the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, to be held
at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985, and foreseeing the
need to continue such achievements beyond the end of the
Decade,
Convinced of the importance of integrating women fully
into development in its political, economic, social, cultural
and other dimensions, both as agents and as beneficiaries,
Reaffirming the central policy and advisory role of the
Commission on the Status of Women within the United
Nations in considering matters relating to women, including the achievement of the objectives of the Decade,
Recognizing the efforts made by the specialized agencies
to integrate women into their ongoing programmes,
especially into the establishment of cross-sectoral
mechanisms,
Welcoming Economic· and Social Council decision
1984/ IOI of 10 February I 984, in paragraph 7 of which
the Council decided to select the question of women in
153 Re~ort of the World Confi•rence ,>f the lnlernalion~I Women's Year.
Mex,co C /IV. /9 June-2 July 19' I (United Nations pubhcat1on, Sales No.
E. 76.IV. I). chap. II, sect. A.
15 4 R~solution 35/56. annex

220

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

development for review on a cross-organizational basis at
its first regular session of 1985,
Aware that greater co-ordination and knowledge of
activities in this area within the specialized agencies and
the regional commissions and by Member States and nongovernmental organizations would facilitate an exchange
of experience and concepts and be beneficial to all,
Reaffirming that within the United Nations system the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs
of the Department of International Economic and Social
Affairs of the Secretariat remains the focal point for coordination, consultation, promotion and advice on questions concerning women,
Deeply concerned that international efforts on behalf of
women should keep pace with the increasing efforts
towards establishing effective national machineries and
mobilizing resources to ensure the integration of women
into all stages of planning, monitoring and development
activities,
Noting that the progress report of the Secretary-General 155 requested by the General Assembly in its resolution
37/57 was submitted to the Commission on the Status of
Women at its thirtieth session,
l. Urges the specialized agencies, regional commissions and other organs, bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system which have not yet done so to
develop and implement comprehensive policies regarding
the concerns of women, both as agents and as beneficiaries, in technical co-operation and development activities and to establish effective review measures to ensure
that women are an integral part of these policies and
activities;
2. Requests the specialized age11cies, regional commissions and other organs, bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system to ensure continued co-operation
and co-ordination with the Commission on the Status of
Women beyond the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women, in order fully to achieve the goals of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
3. Endorses the request of the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 1984/12 that the SecretaryGeneral should report to the Commission on the Status of
Women at each session on all significant developments
pertaining to the advancement of women within the
United Nations system that have occurred since the preceding session;
4. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women 'to
give greater attention at its future sessions to the reports of
the Secretary-General pertaining to the integration of
women in development, by continuing to include in its
qcnda a specific item for that purpose, and to submit its
co,asnents on his reports to the Economic and Social
~ I and, as appropriate, through the Council to the
Glilltal Assembly;
S. Reaffirms its resolution 36/127 of 14 December
1981, which provides for the consideration of issues
relating to the integration of women in development in all
the relevant organs of the General Assembly.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
155 E/CN.6/1984/4.
IS65ee also sect. X.B.I, decision 391459.
157 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

39/129. Preparations for the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of
the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace 156
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, in which it endorsed, inter alia, the action proposals

contained in the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's
Year, 153
Recalling also its resolution 3490 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, in which it expressed its conviction that a comprehensive and thorough review and appraisal of progress
made in meeting the goals of the World Plan of Action was
of crucial importance for the success of the Plan and recognized that the results of the implementation of the Plan
would contribute to the consideration of the review and
appraisal of the International Development Stratep for
the Second United Nations Development Decade' 7 and
would consequently promote the role of women in the
development process,
Recalling further that the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade 154 stressed that the important set of measures to
improve the status of women contained in the World Plan
of Action adopted at Mexico City in 1975, and the important agreed measures relating to the International Development Strategy in the Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 158
should be implemented,
Recalling its resolution 35/ l 36 of 11 December I 980, in
which it decided to convene in 1985, at the conclusion of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, a World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, with
the subtheme "Employment, Health and Education",
Recalling also its resolution 37/60 of 3 December 1982,
in which it welcomed the decision of the Economic and
Social Council that the Commission on the Status of
Women should act as the preparatory body for the
Conference,
Recalling further its resolution 38/108 of 16 December
1983,
Having considered the report of the Commission on the
Status of Women acting as the preparatory body for the
World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace on its second session, 159
Taking into consideration Economic and Social Council
decision 1984/125 of 24 May 1984,
Bearing in mind the request of the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 1983/28 of 26 May 1983 that the
Secretary-General should invite interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Council to submit information to the preparatory body for the
Conference, including their views on the progress made
and the obstacles still to be overcome towards the attainment of the goals of the Decade, as well as their views on
priorities and strategies looking to the year 2000,
l58 Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality. Development and Peace. Copenhagen. 14-30 July /980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I,

sect. A.
159 A/CON F.116/Pl •1 I 9 and Corr. I.
