S/PV.9236

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9236th meeting

Thursday, 5 January 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-00706 (E)
*2300706*

S/PV.9236

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Israel and Jordan to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to address the Security Council on recent
developments in occupied East Jerusalem.

05/01/2023

as particularly inflammatory given Mr. Ben-Gvir’s
past advocacy for changes to the status quo. The visit
was sharply condemned by the Palestinian Authority,
many others across the region and the international
community as a provocation that risked sparking further
bloodshed. Many also warned against any changes to
the status quo at the holy sites. Following the visit, the
Israeli Prime Minister’s Office and other senior Israeli
officials emphasized that the Government is committed
to upholding the status quo and that the visit did not
represent a deviation from it.
As we have seen numerous times in the past, the
situation at Jerusalem’s holy sites is deeply fragile, and
any incident or tension there can spill over and cause
violence throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
in Israel and elsewhere in the region. With that reality
in mind, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for all
parties to refrain from steps that could escalate tensions
in and around the holy sites and for all to uphold the
status quo, in line with the special role of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan.
Over the past several days, the United Nations
has remained in close contact with relevant parties
to de-escalate the situation, and those engagements
will continue in the coming days and weeks. At this
sensitive moment, all efforts to lower tensions should
be encouraged, while provocations, inflammatory
steps, unilateral actions and threats of violence must
be categorically rejected. Leaders on all sides have
a responsibility to lower the flames and create the
conditions for calm. The United Nations remains ready
to assist and support those efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.

At the outset, please allow me to take this opportunity
to welcome Ecuador, Japan, Malta, Mozambique and
Switzerland as the new elected members of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

I would like to note that Special Coordinator
Wennesland will provide his regular, full briefing on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, on 18 January. However, we are concerned
about the events of this past week in Jerusalem and
about the broader ongoing tensions and violence in the
occupied West Bank.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
presidency of the Security Council for its prompt
response to the request to hold this meeting to discuss
the serious provocations that threaten the status quo at
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We also thank Mr. Khaled Khiari
for his briefing on the latest developments.

On 3 January, Israel’s new Minister of National
Security, Itamar Ben-Gvir, conducted a visit,
accompanied by a heavy security detail, to the holy
sites in Jerusalem. The visit was the first to the site
by an Israeli minister since 2017. While the visit was
not accompanied or followed by violence, it is seen

The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns
the storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque courtyard by an
Israeli minister, under the protection of Israeli forces.
Such provocative actions reflect a lack of commitment
to the existing historical and legal status of the holy
sites in Jerusalem, and they further destabilize the

2/16

23-00706

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

fragile situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.
They also constitute a serious development that moves
the region further away from the desired path of peace
and contribute to perpetuating the negative trends
associated with the conflict. Moreover, those actions
threaten to escalate the tensions and confrontations
that we are currently witnessing and fuel extremism
and hatred in the region. In that context, we condemn
the vandalization of the Christian cemetery on Mount
Zion. Those responsible for trampling on the graves
and desecrating that important historic and religious
landmark must be held accountable. Such heinous acts
are part of a trend of attacks on religious sacred sites that,
if left undeterred, will encourage further violations.
We stress our firm position on the need to provide
full protection for the Al-Aqsa Mosque and halt all
violations taking place there, which provoke millions
of believers around the world, given the sanctity of
that holy site. We also emphasize the need to respect
the custodial role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
over the holy sites and endowments in accordance with
international law and the current historic status quo and
not to compromise the authority of the Administration
Department of Awqaf and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs
and its mandate to manage all the affairs of Haram
al-Sharif, including its entry procedures.
The events of the past year and the conflict’s long
history reveal that the cost of unilateral measures is very
high, as they are a major cause of the rising levels of
violence and instability. They also undermine efforts to
find a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict based on the two-State solution and in line with
the relevant international resolutions. Therefore, we
in the Security Council must adopt a unified position
against all actions that could exacerbate tensions and
instability in the region, and against attempts such as
those we witnessed on Tuesday at the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
In particular, we also remind the parties of their
responsibilities to refrain from all measures that might
contribute to fuelling hatred and exclusion.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of reviving
regional and international efforts to advance the Middle
East peace process in order to achieve the two-State
solution and establish an independent Palestinian State,
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace, security
and mutual recognition.

S/PV.9236

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.
At the Security Council’s regular open meeting on
this item two weeks ago (see S/PV.9224), I said that I
hoped that the new year would bring new hope to the
Palestinian people. However, what we are currently
witnessing is obviously not the right way to start the
new year. A few days ago, Israeli Government officials
entered the compound of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which
aggravated tensions on the ground. China is deeply
worried about that.
In recent years, unilateral actions at the holy sites in
East Jerusalem have repeatedly exacerbated problems
and incited confrontations, triggering numerous bloody
conflicts, which truly reflects the sensitivity of the
character and status of religious sites. The recent acts
by Israeli officials have resulted in the fragile and grave
situation on the ground. China calls for the restoration
and maintenance of peace and calm at the religious sites
and calls on the parties concerned to exercise calm and
restraint to prevent any further escalation of tensions.
Israel in particular should stop all forms of incitement
and provocation and should refrain from any unilateral
action that may lead to the deterioration of the situation.
China stands for upholding the international rule of
law and abiding by the international consensus on the
question of Jerusalem. The relevant Security Council
resolutions unequivocally condemn all measures aimed
at altering the demographic composition, character
and status of the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem. The parties concerned
should faithfully maintain the status quo of the holy
sites in Jerusalem and respect Jordan’s custodianship
of the holy sites in accordance with the provisions of
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. We have noted the commitment expressed
by Israel’s leaders to maintain the status quo of the holy
sites. We hope that the relevant commitments can be
translated into constructive policies and actions.
Underlying the repeated cycles of tensions
between Palestine and Israel is the repeatedly delayed
implementation of the two-State solution. Facts have
once again demonstrated that piecemeal measures
to control the crisis can hardly play an effective role,
much less replace a comprehensive and just solution.
The international community should increase its sense
of urgency, push Palestine and Israel towards resuming
peace talks, on the basis of the two-State solution,

23-007063/16

S/PV.9236

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolve the issue of Jerusalem and other final-status
issues and realize peaceful coexistence between
Palestine and Israel, as soon as possible. Countries
with significant influence in that regard should assume
their responsibility and effectively play a constructive
role. I would like to reiterate that China supports the
establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We will continue to
work with the international community to practice
true multilateralism and contribute constructively to
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian issue and reaching a lasting peace and
common security in the Middle East.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.
Let me start by saying that the United States remains
committed to a two-State solution in which Israel lives
in peace and security alongside a Palestinian State and
that we are concerned about any unilateral acts that
exacerbate tensions or undermine the viability of a
two-State solution. As underscored by both President
Biden and Secretary Blinken, the United States firmly
supports the preservation of the historic status quo
with respect to the holy sites in Jerusalem, especially
at the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. We also deeply
appreciate the special role of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, as custodian of Jerusalem’s holy sites.
Secretary Blinken has said very clearly that it is
absolutely critical for all sides to exercise restraint and
refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric at the
Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount and other holy sites in
Jerusalem both in word and practice. In that spirit, we
oppose any and all unilateral actions that depart from
the historic status quo, which are unacceptable. We note
that Prime Minister Netanyahu’s governing platform
calls for the preservation of the status quo with relation
to the holy places. We expect the Government of Israel
to follow through on that commitment.
The United States is also concerned about the rise
in deaths and injuries amid heightened tensions in
recent months. We urge both Israelis and Palestinians
to take the necessary steps to restore calm, prevent the
further loss of life and preserve the possibility of a
two-State solution. We must preserve that possibility.
And we must ensure that all Israelis and Palestinians
enjoy equal measures of freedom, justice, security
and prosperity.
4/16

05/01/2023

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We have left behind a year
that has marked a notorious record. It goes down as
one with the highest cost of life for Palestinians and
the second for Israelis in the past several years. That
is a terrible mark, which only shows how desperate
the situation is and how much it needs an immediate
remedy. Unfortunately, we see only increased tensions
and growing distrust between the parties.
Every time we have spoken here on the developments
in the Middle East, among other key aspects, we have
highlighted one core issue: the need to avoid unilateral
actions and steps that undermine efforts to create an
atmosphere conducive to bringing the parties together
and promote a political horizon towards peace. Without
such prospects, as we have witnessed so many times,
the process becomes derailed, paralysed and blinded,
and the situation becomes deadly. Oslo and its high
hopes are two decades away now but, in reality, the
prospects for peace and the solution it created seem
even more distant. This is not viable.
There is another important issue that we have
continuously highlighted as key to maintaining
peace — the need to preserve the status quo of the
holy sites. The current situation, with inflammatory
rhetoric, leads in the wrong direction. We join the
Secretary-General in his call to the parties to “refrain
from steps that could escalate tensions in and around
the holy sites”. Albania reiterates its firm position on
the crucial importance of preserving the status quo of
the holy sites. There are rules and binding agreements
agreed by the parties, and they must be respected.
The status quo of the holy sites and the custodianship
by the Kingdom of Jordan, as internationally agreed,
are crucial for peace and stability in the region and
for calm on the ground. In that respect, we take note
of the reassurances by the Israeli Government of
its strict commitment to preserving the status quo,
without changes.
Peaceful coexistence has always proven a valuable
investment in peace and social cohesion, just as its
contrary has proven disastrous. The current situation
speaks volumes for the need of the political horizon
to be restored as soon as possible. It can only be done
jointly, through genuine efforts by both sides and a
firm commitment to a two-State solution within the
1967 borders.
Peace, for us, means a safe Israel; it means a safe,
viable, independent and democratic Palestine; it means
23-00706

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

equal rights and freedoms for all, in two States, for
two people, living side by side in peace and security
with mutual recognition and with Jerusalem as the
future shared capital. Any other path is dangerous,
unsustainable and only jeopardizes the prospect of
lasting peace.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We support the convening by the delegations
of China and the United Arab Emirates of today’s
Security Council meeting on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We are
grateful to Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
briefing on the alarming developments in the Old City
of Jerusalem and on the Temple Mount.
The escalation of tensions, against the backdrop of
the visit to the Al-Aqsa Mosque complex, on 3 January,
of Itamar Ben-Gvir, Minister of National Security of
Israel, accompanied by Israeli security forces, is of
great concern. That incident is difficult to perceive
differently in the light of the events of 2000, when the
visit of Ariel Sharon — surrounded by hundreds of
policemen — to the Temple Mount served as a trigger
for the start of the second intifada, which claimed the
lives of several thousand people on both sides.
We once again recall the unacceptability of
violating the historical and legal status quo of
Jerusalem, the cradle of the three monotheistic
religions, as well as the holy sites located in the city.
At the same time, we note the stabilizing role of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, historically custodian
of the Muslim holy sites of Jerusalem and ensuring free
access to them. Disagreements on this city remain one
of the main sources of instability — not only regarding
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but also throughout
the entire Middle East. Such steps threaten to totally
destabilize the situation and lead to full-scale armed
clashes, which we have already witnessed more
than once.
In that connection, we urge both parties to
exercise restraint and refrain from provocative steps or
unilateral actions. In particular, we hope that the new
Israeli Cabinet will not take the path of escalation, but
will instead show political will and renounce radical
steps to create irreversible realities on the ground,
including the destruction of Palestinian homes and the
confiscation of their property, with a view to restarting
the peace process.

S/PV.9236

The developments in Jerusalem, which are
explosive for the entire Middle Eastern region,
demonstrate once again the urgency of resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In order to prevent a return
to military confrontation, it is necessary to combine
international and regional efforts to create conditions
for relaunching direct negotiations between the
Palestinians and Israelis in the framework of the agreed
two-State solution — Palestine and Israel, coexisting in
peace and security within the 1967 borders.
We are disappointed that our American colleagues
in the Quartet time and again refuse to cooperate on the
resumption of the peace process — even though their
attempts to monopolize the peace process and impose
peace on the Palestinians, instead of promoting their
aspirations to create their own State, as has become
obvious to everyone, do not lead to concrete results.
For our part, we will continue efforts to consolidate
international consensus and coordinate efforts among
the Palestinians and Israelis and interested international
and regional players in the interest of a just solution to
the Palestinian problem. We are convinced that direct
dialogue between the parties can take place through
the mediation of the Middle East Quartet, the only
internationally recognized mechanism for mediation in
the Middle East approved by the Security Council. At
the same time, we would like to note the importance of
combining the efforts of the Quartet with those of key
regional players.
That is precisely what prompted Russia’s initiative
to hold a broader ministerial meeting of the Quartet
with representatives of Arab countries. On 3 January,
Foreign Minister Lavrov had a telephone conversation
with Eli Cohen, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel, during which we stressed our coherent and
consistent position on the Palestinian question, which
implies resolving differences between the parties on
the basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, in accordance with
the two-State solution. We urge our colleagues to take
a serious approach to reanimating peace negotiations
on this well-established international legal basis for the
Middle East settlement process.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his
briefing, and I welcome the participation in this
meeting of the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representatives of Israel and Jordan.

23-007065/16

S/PV.9236

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

05/01/2023

Respect for the historical and legal status quo of the
holy sites in Jerusalem is fundamental to the peaceful
coexistence of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
It is an essential consensus that neither side should
challenge, at the risk of jeopardizing the prospects of
dialogue in the Middle East peace process.

restore calm. We urge those in a position of influence
and power, especially political and religious leaders,
to use their influence in a positive and constructive
manner and refrain from provocative unilateral actions
that serve only to make an already volatile situation
even more unstable.

In that connection, the 3 January visit of an Israeli
official to the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound is a real
cause for concern, especially as it follows the assault
on the same mosque on 22 December 2022 by more
than 200 Israeli settlers, under police protection. Those
intrusions are unilateral steps that rekindle tensions
and diminish the prospects for appeasement between
Palestinians and Israelis in a particularly volatile
security context, and they are unacceptable.

The integrity of the holy sites and the legal and
historic status quo must be upheld and fully respected at
all times. Any act that violates this is unacceptable. In
this context, we acknowledge the important role of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as the Custodian of the
Holy Sites, which we fully respect. We also take note
of the statement issued by the office of Prime Minister
Netanyahu that his Administration is committed to
strictly maintaining the status quo of the Holy Sites.
Malta hopes that this will be fully implemented and
adhered to by all.

In the same vein, we condemn the recent desecration
of tombs in the historical Christian cemetery in
Jerusalem, which are part of this dangerous dynamic
of violations of the sites and religious identity of
various communities. The parties must refrain from all
unilateral steps and provocations that could trigger an
escalation of violence. It is essential that the international
community ensure that the Israeli-Palestinian crisis
does not carry the seeds of antagonism between the
three monotheistic religions.
My country calls for restraint and respect for
international law by all parties, in order to avoid a new
escalation of violence and a conflagration with even
more destabilizing consequences for the entire region,
and undoubtedly well beyond. The year 2022 was
particularly deadly in the occupied territories, and we
must prevent this tragic scenario — a scenario where
women and children are often the first victims — from
being repeated in 2023.
We reaffirm the need for dialogue, and we call on
all parties to resume negotiations in good faith, with a
view to restoring confidence. In this regard, the role of
the countries of the region and those with influence on
the parties is crucial to helping the resumption of the
peace talks and to removing the obstacles that stand in
the way of the two-State solution.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his timely briefing at this
delicate juncture. We express our concern about the
political climate in the region and the potential for the
recent actions in and around the holy sites to further
exacerbate tensions. Our first and foremost priority
must be to avoid any form of new escalation and help
6/16

Furthermore, we are also deeply concerned
about attempts to take over the property of Christian
churches. Such actions pose a serious threat to the
peaceful coexistence of all three monotheistic religions
in Jerusalem, and they must be halted. More broadly,
while addressing the immediate challenges, we should
not lose sight of the root causes of tension and conflict.
This week’s developments underlined once again the
need to further expand dialogue and pursue paths to
peace and long-term solutions.
Malta reaffirms its commitment to a just and
comprehensive resolution of the Middle East conflict
based on a two-State solution along the pre-1967 borders,
addressing the legitimate aspirations of both sides, with
Jerusalem as the future capital of two States living side
by side in peace and security, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed
parameters. We stand convinced that this remains the
only viable path to peace.
Finally, we condemn any targeting of civilians,
particularly children, in the strongest possible terms,
and we reiterate that the killing of children is deplorable
and reprehensible. Children must never be the target of
violence or put in harm’s way, and those responsible for
such acts must be held accountable.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): At the outset, we
would like to thank Japan for scheduling this timely
meeting upon the request of the United Arab Emirates
and China. We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Khiari for his briefing.
23-00706

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With great concern, Brazil followed the recent
incursion by Israel’s Minister of National Security into
Haram Al-Sharif in Jerusalem last Tuesday. This is a
deeply alarming development, for it risks exacerbating
tensions and escalating violence in an area already
affected by a great deal of volatility. Brazil considers
it to be of the utmost importance to respect the
arrangements established under the Hashemite custody
of the holy sites with regard to the administration of the
Muslim holy places in Jerusalem, as provided for in the
1994 peace agreements between Israel and Jordan.
In the same vein, Brazil remains deeply committed
to a just and sustainable solution to the question
of Palestine. We have traditionally sought to act
constructively to assist the parties in engaging in
meaningful dialogue, with a view to building trust and
achieving a fair and lasting peace. We must therefore
oppose all actions that may lead to altering the historical
status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem, for such actions
inevitably prevent the necessary culture of peace and
violate a shared duty not only by the Security Council
but also by the international community as a whole to
foster stability, tolerance and mutual understanding in
the Middle East.
As we closely continue to monitor the situation on
the ground, we urge both parties to exercise maximum
restraint and avoid unilateral actions. This includes
avoiding heated rhetoric that could further aggravate
tensions and undermine the mutual trust necessary
for the urgent resumption of dialogue with a view to a
negotiated solution to the conflict.
In conclusion, Brazil reaffirms its long-standing
commitment to the two-State solution, with Palestine
and Israel fully viable and living together in peace and
security within mutually agreed and internationally
recognized borders. Striving for stability in the Middle
East is nothing short of an imperative for the Security
Council. Let us therefore do our utmost to help the
parties translate such a noble objective into a viable
negotiating process, so as to achieve the future of peace
that the region rightly deserves.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
the delegations of China and the United Arab Emirates
for requesting today’s meeting and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for his briefing to the Council.
We also welcome the participation at this meeting of
the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine and
the Permanent Representatives of Israel and Jordan.

S/PV.9236

Undoubtedly, the situation in the Middle East,
which has been on the agenda of the Security Council
for more than seven decades, is a difficult dispute by
any measure. Unlike many other conflicts, the passage
of time has not made it any easier for the international
community to resolve the dispute. Rather, day by
day, we seem to be drifting further away from our
envisaged goal.
Nonetheless, the creation of the State of Israel by
mandate of the Security Council and the anticipated
establishment of the State of Palestine are sacred trusts
that must be carried through. It is in this regard that
we deem it important that the Council always act as
an enabler for the Middle East peace process, by
bringing the parties back on track when they veer off
and encouraging their efforts when it serves the cause
of peace.
Ghana has closely followed the recent events
in Jerusalem that provoked today’s meeting. The
unscheduled visit by the Minister of National Security
of Israel to the holy site of Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount on 3 January has regrettably created renewed
tensions in the Middle East. Jerusalem is supposed to
be a place of peace, and, indeed, its holy sites are of
significance to Christians, Jews, and Muslims alike.
While urging religious tolerance and peaceful
coexistence, we note with concern the confrontations
and violent clashes that preceded and took place after
the Israeli Minister’s visit. We therefore welcome the
fact that both the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
of Israel have clarified their Government’s position
that there has not been any policy change in relation
to the holy sites of Jerusalem. We believe this is an
important act by the new Israeli Government, and we
urge consistency in maintaining the status quo ante.
However, the renewed tensions in the Middle East are
more than manifestations of the recent incidents. They
reflect decades of actions that have created mistrust on
both sides. We therefore urge the parties to carefully
constrain the flourishes of unilateral action that can
deepen suspicion and create conditions that encourage
those on both sides who do not seek peace to destroy
the confidence that is required for dialogue and genuine
engagement. In this new year of hope, we urge Israel
and Palestine to engage constructively to address the
security concerns of Israel and the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people. That is important if the
collective aspiration of the Council, the neighbouring

23-007067/16

S/PV.9236

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

countries in the region and the international community
is to be realized.
For its part, Ghana will continue to encourage the
parties to seek the narrow and difficult path of peace
through a renewed and constructive dialogue on a
political horizon. We will continue to urge the parties
to resume direct negotiations for a comprehensive and
lasting peace in a spirit of cooperation and good faith.
Finally, Ghana reaffirms its belief that lasting peace
and stability in the Middle East is possible through a
two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side
by side, within secure and recognized borders on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of a Palestinian State.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this emergency
meeting. I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his briefing and assessment of the situation.
During its term as an elected member, Switzerland
will work to promote peace in the region, based on a twoState solution negotiated by both sides in accordance
with international law and the internationally agreed
parameters, including Security Council resolutions. In
line with that position, Switzerland stresses the need
to preserve the historical status quo on the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, including respecting the role
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as Custodian of the
Holy Sites. We welcomed Prime Minister Netanyahu’s
affirmation of that commitment on 3 January, and
Switzerland calls on all the parties to demonstrate their
commitment in that regard in practice.

05/01/2023

law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We also encourage the parties to
address the root causes of the conflict and restore a
political horizon for a negotiated two-State solution.
Switzerland is at their disposal to facilitate a resumption
of a credible dialogue in that regard.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): As this is the first
time that my delegation is taking the floor before the
Security Council, Mr. President, I would like to extend
Mozambique’s warm congratulations to Japan on its
election as a non-permanent member of the Council,
as well as on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of January. We pledge our full
support to your presidency. I also want to congratulate
our fellow newly elected members, Ecuador, Japan,
Malta and Switzerland, on their assumption of their
seats as non-permanent members. We pay tribute to
the five departing elected members and commend the
important and positive role they have played in this
Chamber. We thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Khaled Khiari, for his update, and recognize the
participation of the representatives of the Observer
State of Palestine, Israel and Jordan in this meeting.

In an already tense context, particularly due to the
record number of Palestinian civilian deaths last year
and the deadly attacks in Israel, the visit of the new
Israeli Minister of National Security to the Esplanade
of Mosques on Tuesday is cause for concern. Such
unilateral actions threaten to disrupt the status quo on
the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif and thereby
destabilize the entire region. We call on the leaders
of all parties to avoid inflammatory and provocative
language that could exacerbate the conflict and provoke
further violence.

Mozambique is deeply concerned about the recent
incidents in the region, in particular those that have
taken place lately. We think they have the potential to
exacerbate and inflame an already fragile situation.
We call on all the parties to act in a responsible and
restrained manner. In that connection, we would like
to point to the Secretary-General’s most recent report
on resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2022/945), issued in
December, which indicated that 2022 was the deadliest
year yet in the conflict. We regret the cycle of violence
that has claimed many lives, causing the destruction
of property and inflicting a heavy humanitarian toll in
the wake of the hostilities. We call on all the parties
to the conflict to adhere strictly to the principles of
international humanitarian law. We strongly condemn
gestures that embolden extreme attitudes that can
further erode hope in the viability of a political and
negotiated settlement of the conflict based on Security
Council and Assembly General resolutions in support
of a two-State solution.

We are aware of the risk of escalation and the
negative consequences that would have for peace
and security in the region and beyond. We hope that
this meeting will reaffirm the need to preserve the
historic status quo and help to prevent further tensions.
Switzerland calls on all parties to respect international

Mozambique reiterates its long-standing and
principled position in support of the right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people and the right
of the State of Israel to exist, the only viable basis for
their two peoples to live side by side in two independent
and sovereign States, in line with Security Council and

8/16

23-00706

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

General Assembly resolutions. We call on all parties to
refrain from any unilateral action or decision that could
potentially undermine international law or change the
status quo. We urge the parties to uphold internationally
agreed commitments to achieve a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the region. We believe that the
primacy of a legitimate and negotiated political process
for addressing the core issues driving this protracted
conflict is still the only way forward. We therefore call
on the Council and all stakeholders to further enhance
our common and collective efforts towards a lasting
peace in the Middle East region.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for his informative briefing
this afternoon.
Ecuador is serving as a member on the Security
Council for the fourth time in its history. The first time
my country held such a seat was in 1950, and the topic
we are discussing here today was already part of the
Council’s agenda. It was also on the agenda in 1960–
1961, during our second term, and then again in 1991–
1992, during our third. It is indeed regrettable that in
2023 the issue remains on the Council’s agenda and,
worse still, that we are beginning the new year in an
atmosphere of tension and mistrust.
Ecuador calls for an end to the spiral of violence
and reiterates its belief that both sides have the right
to live in peace and dignity. Remembering the history
of this issue is essential to preventing the reoccurrence
of acts that have already caused violence, destruction
and death in the region in the past. The incitement,
provocation and inflammatory language must stop.
Peace needs to begin in people’s minds, move to their
words and then, finally, be evident in their actions.
Ecuador therefore reiterates the call for the parties
to exercise calm and restraint and to refrain from taking
any actions, decisions or unilateral measures that could
exacerbate the conflict. We call in particular for respect
for the status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem and
Jordan’s role as their custodian. The parties must refrain
from acts of provocation at those sites at all costs.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Ecuador’s support for
the search for a political, peaceful, definitive and
just solution for the parties within the framework of
international law, with the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel, on the basis of the 1967 borders.
We believe that, in order to ensure a return to effective

S/PV.9236

negotiations, it is essential for the leaders of the parties
to exhibit political will, courage and long-term vision.
We hope that will be the case and that in the nottoo-distant future, this issue will no longer be on the
Council’s agenda.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I also join others in thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
First, the United Kingdom recognizes that
Jerusalem’s holy sites, including Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount, hold particular significance for many
around the globe, especially within the three Abrahamic
faiths of Christianity, Islam and Judaism. In that
context, the visit made by Israel’s Minister of National
Security has the potential to increase tensions. The
United Kingdom strongly supports the historic status
quo governing Jerusalem’s holy sites, which protects
the sites and those who worship there and preserves
peace. The United Kingdom also recognizes and values
Jordan’s important role as custodian of the holy sites
and highlights the importance of cooperation with
the Jordanian authorities in that regard. The United
Kingdom is committed to working with all parties to
uphold that status quo in Jerusalem. All parties must
refrain from taking actions that inflame tensions,
undermine the cause of peace or unilaterally seek to
alter the status quo.
Secondly, our position on the status of Jerusalem
is clear and long-standing: it should be determined in
a negotiated settlement between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, ensuring that Jerusalem is the shared
capital of the Israeli and Palestinian States, with the
access and religious rights of all peoples fully respected.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom reaffirms its support
for a two-State solution, based on the 1967 lines and
with Jerusalem as the shared capital, as the only way
to ensure a lasting peace between the parties. We are
concerned about the levels of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories and Israel. I urge all the parties
to refrain from taking actions that undermine the
prospects of peace.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
France expresses its deep concern following the
recent visit by Israel’s Minister of National Security to
the mosques’ plaza on 3 January. We must do everything
possible to prevent an escalation, which would have
grave consequences on the ground.

23-007069/16

S/PV.9236

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

05/01/2023

France, which has a historic role in protecting
several religious communities in Jerusalem, calls for
respect for the historic status quo of the city’s holy sites.
We recall the importance of Jordan’s specific role in
that regard and will denounce any attempts to call that
into question. France takes note of the commitment of
the Prime Minister of Israel to ensuring that the status
quo of the holy sites is respected. It is important for that
to translate into results on the ground.

Lastly, as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for the next two years, Japan is determined to
continue to contribute to furthering peace and stability
in the Middle East.

This type of action only reinforces the mistrust
between the parties and does not serve peace. France
reiterates the urgency of ending Israel’s settlement
policy, which endangers the implementation of a twoState solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security, each with Jerusalem as its
capital. We reaffirm our commitment to that solution.
We also reaffirm our commitment to ensuring Israel’s
security. Israelis and Palestinians deserve to live in
peace and security.

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this emergency meeting in response to
our appeals and those of several Security Council
members. I also congratulate Japan on its presidency of
the Council this month and express our confidence in
your wise leadership.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
Less than one month after the previous meeting
on the subject (see S/PV.9224), a Security Council
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, had to be convened.
Japan expresses its grave concern about the visit
to a holy site in Jerusalem by the Israeli Minister of
National Security, Itamar Ben-Gvir, on 3 January.
Given the already tense situation, it is crucial that all
the parties concerned exercise maximum restraint
and refrain from any inflammatory action or rhetoric
that could further escalate tensions, including any
attempt to alter the historic status quo at the holy sites
in Jerusalem. Japan also expresses its serious concern
about the fact that the new Israeli Government has
announced policy guidelines “to advance and develop
settlement in all parts of the land of Israel”, which is
understood to include occupied territory. The expansion
of settlements is a clear violation of international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and Japan
urges Israel to immediately cease such unilateral actions
that undermine the realization of a two-State solution.
A peaceful resolution can only be achieved through
dialogue based on mutual trust between the parties.
Japan urges the parties to return to a path of dialogue
and seriously commit to the realization of a twoState solution based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.
10/16

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.

What red line does Israel need to cross for the
Security Council to finally say that enough is enough
and act accordingly? When will it act? Israel has
displayed utter disregard for the sanctity of Palestinian
life, of international law and of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. It
has done it with absolute contempt for us, the Council
and the entire international community, and it vows
to continue doing so. Yet the Council remains on the
sidelines. Council members say nice things, but they
are still on the sidelines. Our people are running out of
patience. And the moderation and sense of responsibility
that we display should never be construed as weakness.
The record shows that Israel’s persistence on this kind
of path leads not to surrender but to uprising. Those
who are committed to international law and peace must
act now, not merely lament once the fire spreads out
of control.
The Israeli extremist Ben-Gvir, who now holds
the rank of Minister, was convicted of incitement
and support for a terror group and is known for his
racist views, did not come to Al-Haram Al-Sharif to
visit. He is pursuing the same extremist agenda that
he has pursued all his life — ending the historic and
legal status quo. That is his objective, regardless of
the consequences. It is the agenda he was elected on
and joined the Israeli Government to advance. Did
the Israeli Government condemn his actions? I ask
this of those who expressed happiness about some
statement made by the Prime Minister of Israel. No, it
endorsed those actions, even in the wake of worldwide
outrage and condemnation. It explained to us all that
we had misunderstood what we had seen in plain
sight with our own eyes — an extremist Minister of
an extremist Government accompanied by occupation
23-00706

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

forces storming Al-Haram Al-Sharif in violation of
international law, the historic status quo, the Hashemite
custodianship and Palestinian sovereignty.
The Israeli argument is that this has happened
before, and it is no big deal. Gilad Erdan also stormed
Al-Haram Al-Sharif as Minister of Public Security. It is
as if a criminal standing trial finds that his best defence
is the fact that he committed the same crime before
and got away with it. Gilad Erdan stormed Al-Haram
Al-Sharif a few years ago for the same reasons that
Ben-Gvir did a few days ago. They are pursuing the
same agenda that they have confessed to, which is
altering the historic status quo. I quote:
“I think there is in an injustice in the status quo that
has existed since ’67... We need to work to change it
so that in the future Jews, with the help of God, can
pray at the Temple Mount.”
Those are the words of Erdan the Minister that Erdan
the Ambassador will now try to walk back. Those are
the facts.
Al-Haram Al-Sharif will not fall. I repeat:
Al-Haram Al-Sharif will never fall. It will stand for
generations to come. It has outlasted Begin, Shamir
and Sharon and will outlast Netanyahu, Ben-Gvir and
Erdan. Those who pursue the temporal and spatial
division of Al-Haram or plan to take it over do not
comprehend what it represents for all Palestinians and
for Arabs and Muslims around the world. They do not
comprehend the sensitivity of that holy site for billions
of people in every corner of the world, and they should
listen carefully to me. They — the members of the
Council — should stop Israel. It is their responsibility,
the responsibility of the Council and all States, to
uphold international law and the historic status quo.
They should stop Israel. But make no mistake. If they
do not, our Palestinian people will.
We should not lose sight of another critical fact.
Al-Haram Al-Sharif is in occupied East Jerusalem, an
integral part of the occupied Palestinian territory — a
fact repeatedly affirmed by the Council and the General
Assembly. Those are the facts as asserted by the
Council. Furthermore, Israel has no claim or right to
sovereignty over the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and therefore no rightful
claim over Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Israel’s actions have
nothing to do with religious freedom and everything
to do with its unlawful attempt to alter the character,
status and identity of the city. There can be no peace

S/PV.9236

without Jerusalem. I repeat — there can be no peace
without Jerusalem. Israel wants to take it off the table
by entrenching its unlawful annexation of the city.
But then there is nothing left to discuss. The future of
conflict and peace in our region will be determined in
Jerusalem, not in any other capital around the world.
Anybody who says otherwise is either delusional
or lying.
Palestinian Christians and Christian holy sites are
also under attack — as many today mentioned — from
severe restrictions to religious processions, to attacks
on clergy, to the desecration of graves. Palestinian
Christians suffer from the same colonial and
discriminatory policies as their Muslim brothers and
sisters. The historic and legal status quo, the rights of
the Palestinian people and the sovereignty of the State
of Palestine must be upheld.
Israel is expecting everyone to pretend they cannot
see, cannot read and cannot hear and to keep quiet about
its unlawful actions. Israel has been waiting for us and
for the international community to surrender, which we
will never do. Israel has been waiting for us to accept
that colonial rule, human rights abuses and war crimes
should prevail over the rule of international law, which
we will never accept — and should the international
community. Now an unhinged unrestrained Government
has openly adopted a colonial and racist platform. What
future is there for Palestine and for the entire region if
there is no reaction to such a development, if there is no
stand for the rule of law and justice?
I quote the head of this extremist Government:
“These are the basic lines of the national
Government headed by me. The Jewish people have
an exclusive and unquestionable right to all areas
of the land of Israel. The Government will promote
and develop settlement in all parts of the land of
Israel — in the Galilee, the Negev, the Golan, Judea
and Samaria”.
That is a public confession to annexation and apartheid.
What is the international community going to do
about it?
We heard today a unanimous Council opposed to
illegal actions, provocations and unilateral measures,
notably those aimed at jeopardizing the historic status
quo. I heard everyone say that. I will once more tell
the Council that what it says is important, critical even.
But what matters most is what it does next. A proverb
affirms that we must not trust what a person says, but

23-0070611/16

S/PV.9236

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

what that person does. We must trust the hands. We
appreciate what Council members said, but what is the
Council going to do about implementing its own rules.
The Council understands that Israel will keep pushing.
It might adapt its rhythm, but this Israeli Government
will not change course — not until it has to.
We trust the following — that eventually no State
in its right mind would sacrifice its credibility, interests
and values to shield such an Israeli Government or its
behaviour. Some may still be reluctant to say out loud
what is becoming impossible to deny: this is apartheid.
How many Governments today brag about the relations
they had with apartheid South Africa? None can — not
even Israel, its closest ally at the time. Who here can
justify standing for supremacists instead of standing up
to them?
Jerusalem is by nature, like all of the Holy
Land — because of history, geography and its
significance for all monotheistic religions — a city of
pluralism and diversity, and therefore a city of peace.
The historic status quo has underpinned all efforts to
promote peaceful religious coexistence in the city for
centuries. Some of the countries around this table have
helped forge and consolidate it — as we heard from our
friend, France — with an understanding of how vital
it is that the holiest of cities not become the epicentre
of a religious conflict. Without it, every holy site is up
for grabs. Differences, allayed by the status quo, would
turn into clashes. Underlying tensions would implode
into conflicts. Disrupting that delicate balance will
lead to foreseen and predictable consequences that are
grave for us all. The historic status quo is not a legacy
of the past, it is a safe passage to a peaceful, just and
stable future.
Allow me now to deliver a statement in my capacity
as Chair of the Group of Arab States for this month.
(spoke in Arabic)
My delegation has the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States. At the
outset, we would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on behalf of the Group, on your membership of the
Security Council and for presiding over its work for
this month. We wish you every success in your tasks.
We also thank Mr. Khaled Khiari, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, for
his briefing.
The Arab Group condemns the illegal Israeli
practices and violations at the Al-Aqsa Mosque/
12/16

05/01/2023

Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as manifested recently in the
storming of the compound by extremist Israeli Minister
of National Security, accompanied by Israeli occupation
forces. The Group warns against such aggression,
which constitutes a flagrant provocation of the feelings
of Palestinians, Arabs and nearly 2 billion Muslims
around the world. It also constitutes a blatant violation
of international law and the legal and historical status
quo. That aggression is also a rejected embodiment
of a plan that aims to temporally and spatially divide
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and a grave escalation that requires
international action to put an end to it.
In that regard, the Arab Group reaffirms the need
for Israel, the occupying Power, to respect the legal
and historical status quo at the Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including the status of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, within its full area of 144 acres, as a place
of worship exclusively for Muslims. The Arab Group
also reaffirms the right of the State of Palestine to enjoy
sovereignty over the occupied city of East Jerusalem,
the capital of the State of Palestine, and maintains that
Israel, the occupying Power, has no right or sovereignty
over the occupied city of Jerusalem and its Islamic and
Christian holy sites.
The Arab Group appreciates the positions taken by
countries that rejected and condemned the provocative
and belligerent Israeli storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Those countries also reiterated their rejection of any
alteration of the legal and historical status quo.
The Arab Group reaffirms the need for continued
efforts and endeavours aimed at protecting and
defending the occupied city of Jerusalem and its holy
sites against the rejected and condemned occupation
attempts to change the city’s demography, its Arab,
Muslim and Christian identity as well as the legal
and historical status quo in the city. The Arab Group
supports the Hashemite custodianship to protect Muslim
and Christian holy sites, the Jordanian Administration
of the Endowments of Jerusalem and the affairs of the
blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque as the exclusive authority,
the Al-Quds Committee and the Beit Mal Al-Quds
Agency in their efforts to defend the city of Al-Quds
and support the resilience of its people.
The Arab Group calls upon the Security Council to
uphold its responsibilities and implement its resolutions
to halt all illegitimate, provocative, unilateral and
escalatory measures and violations that Israel continues
to commit unabated, including in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in
particular the blatant violation by the Israeli occupation
23-00706

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

army and extremist settler groups of the sanctity of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
The Arab Group reaffirms the centrality of the
question of Palestine for the Arab nation as a whole and
its insistence on international legitimacy, including the
Arab Peace Initiative, which was announced in 2002 as
a strategic path towards ending the Israeli occupation,
resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict and achieving a just
and comprehensive peace on the basis of international
law, relevant United Nations resolutions and the twoState solution, which guarantees the establishment
of an independent State of Palestine along the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, while
ceasing all illegitimate Israeli measures that undermine
that solution. That was reaffirmed by the Algiers
Declaration issued at the thirty-first Arab summit.
The Arab Group calls on the Security Council
and partners in the international community to act
immediately and pressure Israel to stop its aggression
against the Palestinian people, end its occupation and
realize a just and comprehensive peace in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy. That is
the only way to end the conflict and achieve regional
and international security and stability.
In conclusion, the Arab Group reaffirms its full
support for the Palestinian people in their steadfast
defence of their legitimate rights and the city of Al-Quds
and its holy sites. It further reaffirms its support for
defending the Arab, Muslim, and Christian identity
of occupied East Jerusalem, the capital of the State of
Palestine, and for the right of the State of Palestine to
absolute sovereignty over all its occupied territory since
1967, including East Jerusalem, its air and sea space, its
territorial waters, natural resources and borders with
neighbouring countries. The Arab Group demands
that the international community urgently exert every
effort to guarantee respect for and the fulfilment of the
national rights of the Palestinian people, foremost of
which is their right to self-determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you and Japan, Mr. President, as well as
Ecuador, Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland, as you
begin your terms on the Security Council.
When I heard the news that the Security Council,
the body committed to promoting and protecting world
peace, was holding an emergency meeting over the

S/PV.9236

quiet, orderly and uneventful visit of an Israeli minister
to the Temple Mount, I was overjoyed. I figured that
if this important body is meeting to discuss such a
trivial matter, then we had clearly achieved world
peace overnight. There would be no more war and no
more violence. After all, why else would the Security
Council dedicate its time to such a minor occurrence?
Imagine my dismay when I found out that I was
wrong. A war still rages in Europe, the Ayatollah
regime in Iran is still murdering innocent protesters,
as it hurtles towards a nuclear arsenal. Terrorism is still
rampant, and totalitarian regimes are still committing
atrocities. Yet we are in the Security Council Chamber
discussing the peaceful 13-minute visit of a Jewish
minister to the holiest Jewish site under the sovereignty
of the liberal democracy of Israel.
I am sure that at least some Council members see
the absurdity of this situation. Sadly, this meeting,
which creates a sense of emergency over a non-event,
reminds me of the words of the famous comedian Jerry
Seinfeld, who described his show as a show about
nothing. Nevertheless, if the Security Council decided
to convene on this matter, we may as well utilize this
meeting for the best. This is the ideal opportunity to
share the truth and facts about the Temple Mount.
I would ask my colleagues if they have heard of
the Western Wall. I am sure that they have. Do they
know what this wall was west of and why is it the most
focal point of Jewish prayer? I will tell them why. The
Western Wall is the only surviving structure from the
compound of the second Jewish temple. Our temple,
which was located on the Temple Mount, was the
holiest place to the Jewish people, but it was destroyed
by others, and we were left with only its western wall.
Many do not know this, and I am not surprised. After
all, for years now, the Palestinians have orchestrated
and advanced a poisonous campaign to obliterate any
trace or connection between the Jewish people and the
Temple Mount. They exploit every means — both in
words and actions — to promote these lies.
At the United Nations, they advance libellous
resolutions just like the one adopted in the General
Assembly last week (General Assembly resolution
77/247), deliberately erasing the Jewish name of the
compound by referring to it only by its Muslim name,
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. And, tragically, many Member
States submit to these lies despite the indisputable
proof and archaeological evidence proving the Temple
Mount’s true history.

23-0070613/16

S/PV.9236

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

But it goes much deeper than that. This insidious plot
comes directly from the top of Palestinian leadership.
Council members have heard it in this Chamber. The
personal threats of the Palestinian representative speak
volumes. These were personal threats that should not be
acceptable in the Security Council, but, again, I am not
surprised: it demonstrates the Palestinians’ violence.
And I am not surprised, because those were the same
words of President Abbas:
“The Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre are ours. They are all ours, and the Jews
have no right to defile them with their filthy feet”.
Is that the way to uphold the status quo? This is blatant
incitement and the rewriting of history. Was there an
emergency Security Council meeting when those toxic
words were uttered?
Long before Jesus overturned the money changers’
tables in Jerusalem, or Abdul-Malik built Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, the Jewish people have seen the Temple
Mount as the centre of our universe. It was there that
God tested Abraham’s faith by commanding him to
sacrifice his son Isaac; where King David built an altar
to God; where King Solomon constructed the first holy
temple 3,000 years ago; where the second temple was
rebuilt 2,500 years ago; and it is the exact point to which
every Jew is commanded to pray towards three times a
day. This is the holiest spot to my people.
We have all heard much about the status quo, but
do we thoroughly know what it actually means? From
1948, after Jordan occupied East Jerusalem during
Israel’s war of independence, the Jordanians decimated
Jewish life in Jerusalem. And despite their commitment,
they forbade Jews from accessing our holy sites. Sadly,
they also destroyed synagogues and desecrated Jewish
cemeteries. In 1967, when Israel liberated Jerusalem,
we made an enormous concession. Israeli mistakenly
thought that, if we gave Jordan administrative and
religious authority over the compound, it would ensure
that the Israeli-Arab conflict would remain within its
political and territorial dimensions, rather than being
a religious conflict. In addition, we gave up our right
to pray there. Yes, we gave our right because some
rabbis — until today — say that, owing to the fact that
we do not know exactly where the Holy of Holies in
our temple were located — a place where only the high
priest was allowed to enter — Jews should refrain from
ascending upon the Temple Mount and praying there, to
avoid any chance that they would walk upon that sacred
spot. That is the reason. That is how the status quo was
14/16

05/01/2023

born. Only Muslims can pray at the site, while Jews and
Christians may only visit.
Just listen to what is really happening on the Temple
Mount each and every year. On average, only 30,000
to 40,000 Jews visit the Temple Mount throughout
the year. They are permitted to do so from only one
specific entrance, on specific days and at very limited
hours, in small groups and under heavy security detail.
Think about why they need that security, when they are
only visiting the site. Meanwhile, every year millions
upon millions of Muslims go freely to visit and pray
at the site while Israel ensures — and we are proud
of it — their safety and security. Do members know
that, over the past 55 years, since 1967, three additional
mosques were opened on the Temple Mount. Does that
sound like an attempt to change the status quo by Israel,
or by the other side? What this is is only one example
of Israel’s commitment to protecting the freedom of
worship for all faiths.
Minister Ben-Gvir’s recent visit to the Temple
Mount was not an incursion into Al-Aqsa, or any other
fabrication that the Palestinians branded his visit as.
Minister Ben-Gvir’s visit was in line with the status
quo — and whoever claims otherwise is only inflaming
the situation. Jews are allowed to visit the Temple
Mount — every Jew, including the minister tasked with
the security and safety of the Temple Mount. And as
the Palestinian observer mentioned, I know that myself
because, as Minister of Public Security, I too visited the
compound. By the way, I visited after two Israeli Arabs
attacked and killed two Druze police officers.
The very fact that this meeting is being held is an
insult to our intelligence.
Who is therefore truly changing the status quo?
Rather than protecting the sanctity of the site, the
Palestinians have turned the Temple Mount into a
battleground. Time and again, the mosques are used as
arsenals where terrorists keep rocks and explosives to
attack Jewish visitors and security forces. The hallowed
ground is used as a platform for Palestinian incitement,
poisoning the minds of youth and stoking the flames
of violence.
There are some countries that believe in religious
tolerance and are right now building interfaith complexes
where Jews, Christians and Muslims can pray side by
side — just imagine. Tragically, the Palestinian terror
authority prefers violence over tolerance. They are so
intolerant that they not only want to ban Jewish prayer
23-00706

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9236

on the Temple Mount, but also Jewish visitors. Pure
anti-semitism.

the Temple Mount will one day be a place of peace and
coexistence. As Isaiah prophesized in the name of God,

Just as the Palestinians weaponize international
institutions in their jihad war against the Jewish State,
they also weaponize the status quo. They break it at
will, while falsely blaming Israel for fabricated changes.
They have turned the libellous slogan “Al-Aqsa is in
danger” into a battle cry to justify terror against Jews.
Yes, some members also mentioned it. The bloodthirsty
Arafat used that false claim to legitimize the murder of
1,000 Israelis throughout the second intifada, after the
visit of Ariel Sharon. Does it justify that? And now the
Palestinian Authority is using the same tactic. Do not
give that incitement and violence a free pass.

“Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt
offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted
upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called a
house of prayer for all people.” (The Holy Bible,
Isaiah 56:7)

For the Palestinians, the title of the person who visits
the Temple Mount does not matter, be they a civilian, a
minister or the Prime Minister. All that matters is their
religion. If they are a Jew, then that is the core of the
issue. It is a matter of Jew-hatred and anti-semitism.
For them, a Jew setting foot on the Temple Mount is
not only illegitimate, but it also deserves to be met
with violence.
There are countless security situations that, unlike
Minister Ben-Gvir’s Temple Mount visit, are truly
severe acts of escalation. But for them, the Council
did not convene. Why was there no immediate debate
following the Iranian attack on the merchant tanker
MT Mercer Street, in which Romanian and British
nationals were killed? Or after a Palestinian terrorist
murdered three Israelis in Tel Aviv last April, an attack
that was glorified by Palestinian leadership? Or when
Israel exposed proof of Hamas rocket launch pads next
to schools in Gaza? Or only last month after the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East itself reported that a Hamas terror
tunnel was discovered underneath a school? Why do
such acts not warrant the Council’s immediate attention,
while a Jew’s peaceful visit to the Temple Mount does?
When the Council dedicates its valuable time to shows
about nothing, it legitimizes the poisonous lies of the
Palestinians and, as a result, empowers terrorists to
continue in their murderous ways.
The Temple Mount holds an unmatched place in my
people’s ancient heritage. It is the spot upon which the
Ark of the Covenant held Moses’s Ten Commandments
and where God resided. The status quo maintains that
Jews may visit the site, and it is the right of every Jew
to do so. According to Jewish tradition, we believe that

While, sadly, the Temple Mount is not yet a house
of prayer for all nations, it is still the right of every
Jew, no matter what title they hold, to at least visit that
holiest of holy spots. Jews will continue visiting the
Temple Mount, and whoever believes in tolerance and
co-existence should support that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the friendly State
of Japan on its membership of the Security Council and
its assumption of its presidency for the current month,
while wishing it success in its membership of the Council
during the next two years and in facilitating its work
for this month. I would also like to thank the sisterly
United Arab Emirates, China, France and Malta for
supporting the request to hold this emergency meeting.
We also thank the Assistant Secretary-General for the
Middle East, Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of
Political Affairs, Peacebuilding and Peace Operations,
Mr. Khaled Khiari, for his briefing to the Council.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan condemns
in the strongest terms the storming of the blessed
Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif by the Minister
of Internal Security on the morning of 3 January under
the protection of the Israeli occupation forces. We
emphasize that the storming of the blessed Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the violation of its sanctity constitute
a provocative, rejected and condemned step that
represents a flagrant violation of international law and
the legal and historical status quo in the city of Jerusalem
and its holy sites. They threaten further escalation and
represent a dangerous trend that the Security Council
and the international community must work to stop.
In that context, we stress the position of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan that rejects any measures
aimed at changing the legal and historical status quo in
Jerusalem, and the need to returning to the status quo
that existed before the year 2000, in order to ensure that
the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, with

23-0070615/16

S/PV.9236

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

05/01/2023

its entire area of 144 acres, is a pure place of worship for
Muslims. The Jordanian Department of Endowments
of Jerusalem and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs is the legal
authority with exclusive jurisdiction to manage all the
affairs of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and regulate access to
it. We also emphasize that Israel, the occupying Power,
must comply with its commitments under international
law, in particular international humanitarian law
regarding the occupied city of Jerusalem and the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. We also emphasize the Hashemite
custodianship over the Islamic and Christian holy sites
in Jerusalem and the Kingdom’s efforts, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II, to protect
the holy sites and preserve their Arab, Islamic and
Christian identity.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan stresses the
need to find a political horizon to relaunch serious
and effective negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides to achieve a peace that ensures rights and is
accepted by the people. We also stress that the question
of Palestine was, and will remain, the primary, central
Arab cause and that the two-State solution — which
embodies the creation of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State with occupied Jerusalem as its capital,
along the 4 June 1967 borders, and in accordance with
international law, the agreed terms of reference and the
Arab Peace Initiative — is the strategic option agreed
upon by the international community as the only way to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace.

Israel claims that the storming by Minister of
Internal Security Ben-Gvir is only a visit to the
compound and that the visit does not contradict the
historical status quo. That claim is far from true,
given Ben-Gvir’s past raids, history and statements
about Al-Haram Al-Sharif. In any case, the BenGvir storming took place without the approval of the
Jerusalem Awqaf Administration, the body legally
responsible for administering Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
regulating access to it. That in itself is a violation of
the role undertaken by the Awqaf Administration and
the special role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
which is recognized by Israel. Consequently, that
constitutes a violation of the historical status quo of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

I must respond to what the Israeli Permanent
Representative just said about Jordan’s “occupation” of
the West Bank. Jordan has never occupied the West Bank
or East Jerusalem. Jordan was unified in 1950, between
the east and west banks of the River Jordan. That
unification enabled the Palestinians’ exercise of their
right to self-determination by putting half of the West
Bank under the Jordanian Government. It effectively
enabled the Palestinians’ exercise of their right to selfdetermination — until, and in accordance with the
declaration of unity, an independent Palestinian State
can be established. The Israeli representative expressed
a falsehood here, which unfortunately is being repeated
by some members of the international community
without being challenged in any way. At the heart of
it is the fact that it was intended to enable the exercise
of Palestinians’ right to self-determination. In the light
of that, it was the context of the occupation of the West
Bank in 1967 that gave rise to all of Israel’s obligations
under international humanitarian law, including
regarding how the holy sites are to be treated. It is not
a matter of Israel “granting” something with regard to
the historic holy sites. The historical status quo is part
of international law and part of Israel’s obligations as
an occupying Power. It is not something that can be
granted. The 1954 Convention makes it mandatory for
Israel to allow the Department of the Jerusalem Awqaf
to regulate access into and outside Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

The storming of Al-Haram Al-Sharif by one of the
ministers of the Israeli Government is a violation of the
legal commitments of Israel pursuant to international
law, including the provisions of The Hague Conventions
of 1907 and The Hague Convention on the Protection
of Cultural Property during the Armed Conflict of
1954, in addition to violating the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 672 (1990)
and resolution 1322 (2000), which was adopted by the
Council in response to storming Al-Haram Al-Sharif
by former Prime Minister Ariel Sharon in 2000.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan also warns of
the dangerous consequences of any unilateral Israeli
measures aimed at imposing new facts on the ground,
such as the annexation of territory, the expansion of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories, the
violation of holy sites in Jerusalem and the demolition
of homes, which would push the entire region towards
further tension and escalation.
16/16

(spoke in English)

It is therefore not a matter of Israel granting
something, as its representative said; it is a right
under international law for the Palestinians and for
Jordan’s Awqaf Department to administer, which Israel
continues to violate.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.
23-00706
