General Assembly-Eleventh Ses111ion

48

mies may be possible without, however, lowering the
present standard of reprod11dio11 of the Treaty Series.

66/nd plenary meeting,
27 Felm.ary 1957.

1093 (XI). Appointment to fil] a vacancy in the
membership of the Board of Auditors
The Ceneral Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-General of Colornbia as a member of the Board of Auditurs fur a three-vear tenu to
commence on 1 July 1957.
·
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

1094 (XI). Administrative and hudgetary co-ordination hetween the United Nations and the
specialized agenciPs
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Aclvisory Committee on Administrative and Bu<lgetarv Questiom on
the administrative budgets of the specializecl agencies
for 1957 31 and its special rt'ports relatim~ to the International Labour Organi,atiu11:i 2 and the l l nited Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organi1.ation, 3 :i

I
l. Invites the attention of the specialized agencies
to the observations and rernmmendati()ns contained in
the report of the Advisorv Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Oil th(' admi11istrative
budgets of the specialized agencies fur 1957;
2. Requests the Economie and Social c·ouncil to
study the matters raised in paragraph, I> and 7 of that
report concerning an appraisal of the uver-all programmes to be undntakl'.ll by the Unit1·d Nations and
the specialized agencies in the ecorwrnic and social tields
over the next five or six _\'ear,, ;rnd to report thereon
to the General Assemblv at ih thirternth session;
.3. Requests the specialized agencies to co-operate
w1th the Economie and S(\cial Council in its consideration of this question;
Il

1. Notes that the special reports of the Advisorv
Com?1ittee on Administrative and Budgetary Question\
relatmg to the International Labour Organisation and
the United Nations Eclucational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization are of a preliminary character and that
the Advisory Committee intends, on completion of
S!~ila~ stu_dies in respect of other organizations partlc1patmg m the Expanded J 'rogramme of Technical
Assistance, to submit a final report to the General
Assembly embodying its conclusions and recommendations;
2. Invites the attention of the International Labour
0gani~ation to the observations and suggestions contamed m the Advisory ( ·ommittee's special report on
ithat organization, and in particular in paragraphs 36.
43, 46, 52, 59, 66 and 80 of that report;
3. Invites the attention of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the
.,_ Ibid., agenda item 49. <lucumc11t :\,i.î489
• A/3142.
11
A/3166.

observations and suggestions contained in the Advisory
Committee's special report on that organization, and in
particular in paragraµhs 16, 32 to 35, 43, 45, 47, 60,
7S, SO and 98 of that report.

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

1095 (XI). United Nations salary, allowance and
henefits system
A
The Ccneral Assembly,
I !aving considcrcd the report of the Salary Review
Committee 34 established by General Assembly resolutiun <)75 (X) of 15 Decernber 1955, the comments
t!ten·on by the Secretary-General and by the executive
heads of the International Labour Organisation, the
L nited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the International Civil
Aviation Organization, 35 and the observations of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions/16
l. Expresses its great appreciation to the Salary
l{eyiew Committee for its valuable work;
., R eque sts thl' Secretary-General :
(a) To apply the provisions of base pay, post adjustments and dependency allowances, as set forth in
paragraph 7 helow, to staff serving at Headquarters or
at the Euroµean l)lfice of the United Nations with
effect from 1 January 1957, and to apply these provisions as soon as practicable to other members of the
staff of the l;nited Nations, with effect from dates
c.,tablished by him for each office;
( b) To carry out, ai ter consultation with the executive heads of the specialized agencies, the reconciliation
of conditions of service under different programmes
referred to in chapter XIII of the report of the Salary
Review ( 'ommittee, by application of the basic measures
proposed by that Committee, including provision for
an assig11rne11t allowànce for staff members on Ct'rtain
temporary assignments, subject to such modification
of the detailecl proposais as the Secretary-General deems
necessary and desirable;
( c) To be gmded by the conclusions of the Fifth
Committee, as recorded in its report to the General
Assembly,:n in respect of matters therein not covered
b_v the present resolution;
3. Requcsts the Secretary-General, in conjunction
with the executi\T heads of the specialized agencies
concerne<l and iu co-operation with the Joint Staff
Pension Board :
(a) To review the question of the pensionable remuneration of the staff with a view to making recommendations for action by the General Assembly;
( b) To provicle for death and disability protection
for members of the staff on temporary appointments
for a fixed terrn, if practicable by eventual amendment
of the Regulations of the Joint Staff Pension Fund;
4. Resolves to amend the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 359 (IV) of 10 December 1949,
"'A/3209.
""Official Records of the Gener-al Assembly, Eleventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 51, document A/C.5/691.
.. Ibid., document A/3505.
"'Ibid., documen' A/3558.
