54

General Assembly-Eighth Session

Considering that the number of governments making
contributions to UNICEF has increased constantly
since 1950,
1. Affirms that the regulations which govern the
activity of the United Nations International Children's
Emergency Fund have enabled it to achieve satisfactory techniques, to acquire valuable experience and
to accomplish its task successfully;
2. Reaffirms the pertinent provisions of General Assembly resolutions 57 (I) and 417 (V), with the exception of any reference to time-limits contained in
these resolutions;
3. Decides to change the name of the organization
to the United Nations Children's Fund, retaining the
symbol UNICEF;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to review periodically the work of UNICEF
and to make recommendations to the General Assembly
as appropriate;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To ensure that the programmes carried on by
UNICEF continue to be co-ordinated effectively with
the regular and technical assistanc~ programmes of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies;
( b) To report thereon to the Economic and Social
Council in 1954 and subsequently as appropriate;
6. Commends UNICEF, the United Nations Secretariat and the specialized agencies concerned for the
close working relations which have developed progressively and requests them to strengthen those relations in giving full effect to the desires of the Assembly as expressed m resolution 417 (V) and the
present resolution.
452nd plenary meeting,
6 October 1953.

803 (VIII).

Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report 3 of the Security Council
to the General Assembly covering the period from
16 July 1952 to 15 July 1953.
455th plenary meeting,
3 November 1953.

804 (VIII). Question of atrocities committed by
the North Korean and Chinese Communist
forces against United Nations prisoners of
war in Korea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item "Question of atrocities
committed by the North Korean and Chinese Communist forces against United Nations prisoners of war
in Korea" proposed by the United States of America
in documents A/2531 and A/2531/ Add. 1 of 30 and
31 October 1953,
Recalling that basic legal requirements for humane
treatment of prisoners of war and civilians in connexion
with the conduct of hostilities are established by general
international law and find authoritative reaffirmation
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 2.

in the Geneva Conventions of 1929 4 and 1949 3 relative to the treatment of prisoners of war and in the
Geneva Convention of 1949 6 relative to the protection
of civilian persons in time of war,
Recalling that these Conventions also embody precise and detailed provisions for giving effect to the basic
legal requirements referred to above, and that these
provisions, to the extent that they have not become
binding as treaty law, have been accorded most general support by the international community,
Desiring to secure general and full observance of
the requirements of international law and of universal
standards of human decency,
1. Expresses its grave concern at reports and information that North Korean and Chinese Communist
forces have, in a large number of instances, employed
inhuman practices against the heroic soldiers of forces
under the United Nations Command in Korea and
against the civilian population of Korea;
2. Condemns the commission by any governments
or authorities of murder, mutilation, torture, and other
atrocious acts against captured military personnel or
civilian populations, as a violation of rules of international law and basi:.: standards of conduct and morality and as affronting human rights and the dignity
and worth of the human person.
467th plenary meeting,
3 December 1953.

805 (VIII). Application of Japan to become a
party to the Statute of the International Court
of Justice
Whereas the Government of Japan, by a communication 7 dated 24 October 1953 addressed to the Secretary-General, has expressed the desire to learn the
conditions under which Japan could become a party
to the Statute of the International Court of Justice,
Whereas Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter
provides that a State which is not a Member of the
United Nations may become a party to the Statute of
the Court on conditions to be determined in each case
by the Ge,eral Assembly upon the recommendation of
the Security Council,
Whereas the Security Council has adopted a recommendation 8 on this matter,
The General Assembly
Determines, in pursuance of Article 93, paragraph 2,
of the Charter and upon the recommendation of the
Security Council, the conditions on which Japan may
become a party to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, as follows :
"Japan will become a party to the Statute on the
date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations of an instrument, signed on behalf of the Government of Ja pan and ratified as may
be required by the constitutional law of Ja pan, containing:
4
See League of Nations Treaty Series, Publication of Treaties
and International Engagements Registered with the Secretariat
of the League of Nations, Volume CXVIII, 1931-1932, No. 2734,
page 343.
5
See Treaty Series, Treaties and international agreements
registered or filed and recorded with the Secretariat of the
United Nations, Volume 75, 1950, No. 972, page 135.
6 Ibid., No. 973, page 287.
7 See document S/3126.
8 See document A/2600.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee
" (a) Acceptance of the provisions of the Statute
of the International Court of Justice;
" ( b) Acceptance of all the obligations of a Member of the United Nations under Article 94 of the
Charter;
" ( c) An undertaking to contribute to the expenses
of the Court such equitable amount as the General
Assembly shall assess from time to time after consultation with the Government of Ja pan."
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

806 (VIII). Application of San Marino to become a party to the Statute of the lnterna•
tional Court of Justice

Whereas the Government of the Republic of San
Marino, by a communication 9 dated 6 November 1953
addressed to the Secretary-General, has expressed the
desire to learn the conditions under which San Marino
could become a party to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice,
Whereas Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter
provides that a State which is not a Member of the
United Nations may become a party to the Statute of
the Court on conditions to be determined in each case
u See

document S/3137.

55

by the General Assembly upon the recommendation
of the Security Council,
Whereas the Security Council has adopted a recommendation 10 on this matter,
The General Assembly
Determines, in pursuance of Article 93, paragraph
2, of the Charter and upon the recommendation of the
Security Council, the conditions on which San Marino
may become a party to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, as follows:
"San Marino will become a party to the Statute
on the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations of an instrument, signed
on behalf of the Government of the Republic of San
Marino and ratified as may be required by the constitutional law of San Marino, containing:
"(a) Acceptance of the provisions of the Statute
of the International Court of Justice;
" ( b) Acceptance of all the obligations of a Member of the United Nations under Article 94 of the
Charter;
" ( c) An undertaking to contribute to the expenses
of the Court such equitable amount as the General
Assembly shall assess from time to time after consultation with the Government of San Marino."
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
10

See document A/2601.
