S/PV.8476

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8476th meeting

Thursday, 28 February 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lindner
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Abrams

Agenda
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05862 (E)
*1905862*

S/PV.8476

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2019/186 and S/2019/190, which contain
the texts of two draft resolutions. The Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolutions.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have before us draft resolution S/2019/186,
submitted by the United States of America. We have
finally reached the culmination of the spectacle of the
United States’ double standards in Venezuela. During
the Security Council meetings a month ago and then the
day before yesterday (see S/PV.8452 and S/PV.8472),
it has become totally obvious that regardless of their
political preferences, a majority of the countries in the
western hemisphere support a resolution of Venezuela’s
problems through dialogue among Venezuelans
themselves. An inclusive, nationwide dialogue is now
needed above all else, but unfortunately Washington
is stubbornly marching towards its goal of escalating
the tensions and achieving its own scenario through an
unconstitutional change of Government.
Let us take a look at the text of the draft resolution
to see exactly what the United States is proposing that
the Security Council vote on, which is that we should
recognize the Venezuelan National Assembly’s, and I
quote, “constitutional authority”, and the presidential
elections held in May of last year as “neither free nor
fair” — and this almost a year after they took place.
That is why the United States has prepared this draft
resolution. Its hypocritical concern for the humanitarian
situation in the country is merely a smokescreen. But
perhaps the United States has another goal — making
history. If this draft resolution were to be adopted,
2/12

28/02/2019

it would be the first time in history that the Security
Council had removed one President of a sovereign
country from office and installed another. Is that
world democracy in action? I am not even talking here
about the politics at issue or the question of Maduro
versus Guaidó. Do the members of the Council really
not understand that this is legally illiterate, null and
void? What is this thinly veiled trolling and mocking
of Council members? Do those planning to support the
Americans’ draft resolution understand that they will
be participating in a legal theatre of the absurd?
The United States delegation cannot possibly
be unaware that its draft resolution has no chance of
being adopted and yet has deliberately submitted it to
the Council so that afterwards it can point fingers at
those who it claims are obstructing the “restoration
of democracy” in Venezuela. It is now deliberately
undermining the Council’s unity. But does it need
it? Our American colleagues seem to have forgotten
what international law is. All they have left in their
diplomatic arsenal is ultimatums, sanctions and threats
of the use of force.
Needless to say, we realize that all of this has been
undertaken solely in order to accuse dissenting States
of obstructing the delivery of aid to Venezuelans. But
it is just another example of shameless propaganda.
On 26 February (see S/PV.8472), we spoke in detail
about the fact that Russia and China were delivering
humanitarian aid to the Venezuelan people freely and
without any problems. It was only the United States
that had failed to do so because it had disregarded a
State’s sovereignty and the inviolability of its borders.
I said this the day before yesterday and I will say it
again now. If the United States really wanted to help the
people of Venezuela, it would be operating officially
through any of the United Nations-accredited agencies
there. But that is not the goal. It is merely a pretext. Its
goal is regime change. This is probably the clearest and
most direct case we have seen of the implementation of
the infamous concept of humanitarian intervention, an
intervention with humanitarian components and under
humanitarian pretexts. That is the so-called rules-based
order, rather than international law, that our Western
colleagues are proposing and constantly talking about.
That is why we have prepared an alternative draft
resolution (S/2019/190), designed not to encourage
political intrigue and regime change but to provide
Venezuelans with real help in their efforts to normalize
the situation in their country. In the draft resolution
19-05862

28/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

we emphasize that any international assistance should
be based on the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality, independence and the consent of the
country’s legitimate Government. We also express
support for international mediation initiatives,
including the Montevideo Mechanism, which would
help Venezuelans to achieve what is the most important
thing right now, a political settlement. There is
simply nothing like this in the United States draft
resolution, because it is not aimed at solving any of the
problems involved.
Yesterday, we held expert consultations on our text
and listened to the views of Security Council members,
including the representative of the United States. We
heard not one concrete comment. The Western experts
said only that they would not work on our text, and
our American colleagues immediately presented their
draft for a vote. What is the point here of diplomacy
or the quest for a compromise? This whole scheme is
a propagandist public-relations stunt dictated in large
part by domestic political concerns, and we are sorry
that the Security Council has been dragged into it
once again.
We are seriously worried that today’s meeting
could be exploited as a stage for preparing not a
humanitarian intervention but a real one, an excuse for
outside interference based on the Security Council’s
alleged inability to resolve the situation in Venezuela.
We want to appeal once again to those members of the
Security Council who genuinely want to help rather than
pandering to this political show. We urge them to vote
against the United States draft resolution and in support
of our document, which has been specifically written
to avoid language that could create disagreement and
focuses entirely on giving Venezuelans real help in the
form of international assistance and mediation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall first put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2019/186, submitted by the United States of America.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, France, Germany,
Kuwait, Peru, Poland, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Against:
China, Russian Federation, South Africa

S/PV. 8476

Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Indonesia
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received nine votes in favour, three against
and three abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Abrams (United States of America): The
situation in Venezuela demands our action now. The
corrupt former Maduro regime has caused an economic
collapse that threatens peace and security throughout
the region. Millions of Venezuelans have fled their
country in search of food, medicine and opportunity.
The time for a peaceful transition to democracy is now.
Each member of the international community that joins
in recognizing the Guaidó Government is supporting
the people of Venezuela as they strive to reclaim
their democracy.
Regrettably, by voting against this draft resolution
(S/2019/186), some members of the Security Council
continue to shield Maduro and his cronies and prolong
the suffering of the Venezuelan people. This man-made
crisis has extended well beyond Venezuela’s borders
and threatens to destabilize the region. Events from this
past weekend show that Maduro will stop at nothing
to maintain power, including the use of gang violence
against unarmed Venezuelan citizens.
Regardless of the results of today’s voting, this
draft resolution shows that democracies around the
world — and especially in Latin America — are
mobilizing behind interim President Guaidó. The United
States will remain steadfast in our support for the
legitimate Guaidó Government and the National
Assembly. We look forward to genuinely free and fair
elections and to a Government that reflects the will and
aspirations of the Venezuelan people.
The United States will pursue all avenues to
increase humanitarian assistance to Venezuelans,
both inside and outside their country. In fact, there
was an additional aid delivery today to the border
region — Cúcuta, Colombia — of emergency medical
kits for 40,000 people, enough high-nutrition food for
10,000 infants for two months and hygiene kits for
35,000 people.

19-058623/12

S/PV.8476

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our concern about the safety and security of interim
President Juan Guaidó when he returns to Venezuela,
and we hope that all members of the Council will join
us in doing so.
Now is the time to strengthen our commitment
to the Venezuelan people. We call on members of the
Security Council to join in that commitment, and I
would like to express satisfaction that a clear majority
of the Council did so today.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
voted in favour of the draft resolution on the situation in
Venezuela (S/2019/186) in order to enable the Security
Council, in exercise of the mandate bestowed upon it by
the Charter of the United Nations, to adopt a decision
that contributes to regional peace and security, as
desired by the international community.
We deeply regret the lack of unity within the Council
to help address the situation in Venezuela — which
represents an unprecedented threat to the peace, security,
freedom and prosperity of the entire region — and to
prevent a further escalation of violence and address
the terrible humanitarian crisis causing the country to
suffer. It is even more incomprehensible given that this
was a minimum text that, for the sake of consensus,
had avoided mentioning relevant aspects such as the
constant violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms; the terrible humanitarian situation faced
by the population, especially those who are most
vulnerable; the breakdown of democratic order;
endemic corruption and economic collapse; and the
exodus of more than 3.4 million Venezuelans fleeing
this awful reality.
However, we are encouraged to note that the
majority of Council members have reaffirmed their
commitment, to and solidarity with, the brotherly
people of Venezuela, as well as their full willingness to
continue promoting the restoration of democracy in that
country This aspiration will be possible only through
the timely holding of free, fair and credible elections
that are open to the participation of all political parties,
with international backing and observation, thereby
guaranteeing the right of all Venezuelans to live in
democracy and freedom.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is paying close attention to the situation in Venezuela
and supports the Venezuelan Government in its efforts
to safeguard its national sovereignty, independence and
4/12

28/02/2019

stability. Venezuelan affairs should be decided by the
Venezuelan people independently. When it comes to the
Venezuela issue, China’s starting point in the Security
Council’s is to uphold the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations and the basic principles governing
international relations, promote a peaceful settlement
of the Venezuela issue and maintain long-term peace,
stability and development in Latin America.
China opposes external forces interfering in
Venezuela’s internal affairs and opposes military
intervention in Venezuela. It is regrettable that the
draft resolution before us (S/2019/186) was seriously
inconsistent with China’s principles and position
as previously stated. Therefore, China had to vote
against it.
China calls upon the Venezuelan Government and
opposition parties to seek a political solution through
dialogue and consultation within the constitutional
and legal framework. We hope that the international
community will take actions that are truly conducive to
the stability and economic development of Venezuela
and the improvement of the livelihoods of people
in the country. Under the premise of respecting
the sovereignty of Venezuela, we should provide
constructive assistance to the country to promote a
smooth resolution of relevant issues as far as possible.
Any actions taken by the Security Council on
Venezuela should be in line with those principles.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Belgium voted in favour of the draft
resolution (S/2019/186) on the situation in Venezuela
presented by the United States. We did so because, in
the view of both Belgium and the European Union,
the draft resolution includes the essential elements for
a way out of the crisis, namely, a peaceful political
process; free, fair and credible presidential elections,
with international electoral observation, in line with
the Venezuelan Constitution; the encouragement of
peaceful, inclusive and credible initiatives; the security
of Venezuelan citizens and political actors; and, finally,
unimpeded access to humanitarian aid, in accordance
with humanitarian principles. Belgium also supported
the draft resolution because nothing in its text justifies
the use of force and it advocates for seeking a peaceful
solution. We regret that some have blocked prospects
for this.
As the Security Council prepares to vote on a
competing draft resolution (S/2019/190), I wish to
19-05862

28/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

express the intention of my delegation to vote against it.
Indeed, the text lacks a critical element. For Belgium,
as well as for the European Union, the solution to the
Venezuelan crisis is through the organization of free,
fair and credible presidential elections. The Venezuelan
people have already suffered too much. It is high time
to let them decide their own future.
We also express our reservations with regard
to paragraph 3 of the draft resolution and stress the
importance of humanitarian assistance in line with
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. It is unacceptable for irregular
armed groups to intimidate civilians and members of
the National Assembly who have mobilized in order to
distribute aid.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We take the floor in explanation of
our vote in two regards.

S/PV. 8476

humanitarian assistance to alleviate the hardships
experienced by the people of Venezuela.
South Africa is concerned at the irregular procedure
in presenting the draft resolution before us. The
dispensing of the 48-hour practice for the consideration
of the draft resolution undermines due process and
our ability to meaningfully engage on the text to reach
consensus. We have before us two divergent draft
resolutions on the situation in Venezuela (S/2019/186
and S/2019/190). This is unfortunate, as South Africa
believes that the Council should be unified in its
approach to supporting the people of Venezuela in
finding a solution to the crisis. We must speak with
one voice when assisting the Venezuelan people in
weathering the humanitarian challenges faced as a
result of the political and economic difficulties in
their country.

First, the Dominican Republic believes that there is
no other possible solution to the crisis in Venezuela than
the holding of free and competitive elections without
delay, with guarantees for all groups and stakeholders.
Such a peaceful and inclusive political process must
lead Venezuelan society to reconcile with itself and
overcome the differences that have generated these
situations of permanent tension, which endanger the
Venezuelan people as well as the regional environment.

However, instead of bringing the Council and the
people of Venezuela together, the draft resolutions serve
to illustrate how far the Council is from contributing to
dealing with the crisis. The lack of unity of the Council
on this matter widens divisions and undermines
the credibility of the Council to make a meaningful
contribution to resolving the situation in Venezuela.
Ideally, the Council should adopt a draft resolution that
would facilitate internal, inclusive political dialogue
among the people in determining their own way out of
their political and economic difficulties.

Therefore, to dispel any suspicion, the use of force
is not an option for us. On the contrary, we favour an
inclusive dialogue in which all political actors and
civil society can participate — an indispensable step
for a peaceful, democratic outcome that respects
human rights.

Furthermore, a Council resolution should facilitate
the provision of international assistance based on the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
based on a thorough and accurate needs assessment.
Therefore, the provision of aid should be depoliticized
and must meet the needs of the people of Venezuelan.

Finally, we understand that it is necessary to create
the conditions conducive to providing assistance to
those in need, in light of the serious humanitarian crisis
afflicting the Venezuelan people.

While the draft resolution presented by the United
States (S/2019/186) calls for a peaceful political process,
it is prescriptive on the outcome of that process,
thereby infringing on the sovereignty of Venezuela.
Internal political processes should remain the national
prerogative of Member States. From the outside, we
can encourage parties to engage in political dialogue,
but we cannot dictate outcomes such as the holding of
elections. Furthermore, the context of the crisis, set out
in the United States draft resolution, does not reflect
a balanced understanding of the underpinnings of the
crisis in Venezuela.

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We take the floor to
explain our vote.
South Africa made clear its position on the situation
in Venezuela when we addressed the Security Council
two days ago (see S/PV.8472). We reiterate our view
that inclusive political dialogue is necessary to resolve
the political crisis in Venezuela. We remain concerned
about the serious humanitarian situation in the
country and support United Nations efforts to provide

There are three elements in the United States
draft resolution that are antithetical to the principles

19-058625/12

S/PV.8476

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

and values that underpin South Africa’s democratic
dispensation and our foreign policy.
First, in the fourth preambular paragraph, regarding
the authority of the National Assembly to release
political prisoners and grant amnesty, South Africa
views this as tantamount to a violation of the principle
of the separation of powers, on which the South African
Constitution is predicated. Therefore, South Africa
cannot support, at the international level, the violation
of this universal, sacrosanct and inviolable principle
that underpins the governance of the modern State.
Secondly, South Africa also cannot support
paragraph 1, which expresses deep concern that the
presidential elections of 20 May 2018 were neither free
nor fair. President Nicolás Maduro was elected for a
second six-year term in the presidential elections on
20 May according to the National Electoral Council
(NEC) of Venezuela. President Maduro was re-elected
by a wide margin, garnering over 5.8 million votes,
according to Ms. Tibisay Lucena, President of the NEC.
His closest challenger, Mr. Henri Falcón, received
approximately 1.8 million ballots, while the third-place
candidate, Mr. Javier Bertucci, received 925,042 votes.
Over 8.6 million Venezuelans went to the polls, putting
voter turnout at 46.01 per cent. The announcement was
made when the NEC had counted more than 92 per
cent of ballots. South Africa respects the authority of
the NEC as the constitutionally mandated body that is
charged with the management of the electoral process
in Venezuela — like in all of our countries. That
body declared President Maduro the winner, and that
should be respected as we respect all other electoral
processes elsewhere in the world. That is the basis
on which President Maduro enjoys legitimacy and
international recognition.
Thirdly, and finally, South Africa believes that
paragraph 4 is partisan and biased, as it stresses
the importance of ensuring only the security of the
members of the National Assembly and members of
the political opposition. A Council resolution cannot
stress the security of a certain sector to the exclusion of
others. As an impartial body, the United Nations should
insist on the security of all Venezuelans. South Africa
was therefore not in a position to support the United
States draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2019/190, submitted by the Russian Federation.
6/12

28/02/2019

A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
China, Equatorial Guinea, Russian Federation,
South Africa
Against:
Belgium, France, Germany, Peru, Poland, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Indonesia,
Kuwait
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received four votes in favour, seven against
and four abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, having failed to obtain the required number
of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As is clear, the
United Kingdom voted in favour of the American draft
resolution (S/2019/186) and against the Russian one
(S/2019/190). I think the fact that the Russian draft
resolution failed to obtain the required number of
votes whereas the American text was vetoed accurately
pinpoints the unease that many Members of the United
Nations feel about the situation in Venezuela and how
untenable it is for it to continue.
We were content to vote in favour of the United States
text because it addressed important issues in Venezuela
about which we too are concerned. It emphasized the
importance of establishing the necessary conditions
for a new and credible electoral process in Venezuela.
Despite the Russian polemic, the United States text did
not seek a permanent transfer of power to a different
leader. It called for free and fair elections, which we
also believe in. We believe that the Nicolás Maduro
presidency is illegitimate and that the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaidó, is constitutionally
interim President of Venezuela until credible, free
and fair elections can be held. Those elections are a
condition on the part of transition to peace.
Secondly, the American draft resolution
acknowledged deep concern about violence and the use
of excessive force by the security forces in Venezuela
against unarmed, peaceful protesters, including those
actively engaged in getting humanitarian assistance
19-05862

28/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

into the country to the benefit of ordinary citizens.
There is clear evidence that liberty and justice have
been systematically dismantled by Maduro’s regime.
Finally, the text addressed the economic collapse
brought about by Maduro’s corrupt policies, which led
to the humanitarian crisis that has so far forced more
than 3.5 million Venezuelans to leave their country
for other countries in the region. That has placed huge
strain on the social services of Venezuela’s neighbours.
We would like to thank the United States, as penholder
of the draft resolution, for drafting a text that properly
recognizes the gravity of the situation in Venezuela.
There are limits as to how far a Government can inflict
damage and suffering on its own people.
Turning to the Russian text, the United Kingdom
was compelled to vote against the draft resolution
proposed by the Russian Federation today. We
fundamentally disagreed with its content because it
pretended that there were threats to use force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
Venezuela. There have been no threats to Venezuela’s
political independence or territorial integrity.
Secondly, the Russian draft resolution focused on
alleged attempts to intervene in Venezuela’s domestic
affairs. As we have seen, the crisis has spilled far
beyond Venezuela’s borders, and the current situation
in Venezuela represents a clear threat to peace and
security in the region.
Thirdly, the text included a selective reading of the
Charter of the United Nations — one that we have heard
before. It presents a biased interpretation of the events
unfolding in Venezuela and its support for the Maduro
regime. A full reading of the United Nations Charter
would show that the Security Council should cooperate
to address the suffering of the Venezuelan people.
Finally, the text failed to explicitly recognize
two crucial aspects of the situation in Venezuela:
the humanitarian crisis — I should say the manmade humanitarian crisis brought about by corrupt
economic policies — and the need for free, fair and
credible elections.
Mr. Lindner (Germany): Let me explain why we
voted in favour of the draft resolution of the United
States of America (S/2019/186) and against the Russian
draft resolution (S/2019/190).
We supported the United States text because it
recognizes the dire humanitarian situation — a man-

S/PV. 8476

made humanitarian situation — respects the sovereignty
of Venezuela, conforms with the European Union’s
call for free, credible and transparent elections and
promotes a peaceful political solution to the crisis.
As for the text of the Russian Federation, it
does not present a solution to the crisis. It supports
a Government — the Maduro regime — that
does not represent the Venezuelan population and
refuses to recognize the humanitarian emergency
of its population. The text also includes unspecific
allegations of violations of the Charter of the United
Nations. However, efforts here in the Council and by the
international community do not constitute interference
in the internal affairs of a sovereign country. Serious
humanitarian rights violations by the Maduro regime,
plus the 3.5 million refugees fleeing from Venezuela
to Colombia, Brazil and even Peru and other countries,
have also made the situation in Venezuela a threat to
the stability and security of the entire region.
We want to recall our main aims for Venezuela.
We condemn the use of force. Secondly, the origins
of the ongoing crisis in Venezuela are political, and
the solution can therefore only be a political one.
An inclusive, political and peaceful solution to the
crisis must therefore urgently be found. Thirdly, we
stress the need to respond to the humanitarian needs
of the Venezuelan people — there is a humanitarian
crisis — and alleviate the suffering of the most
vulnerable. Fourthly, we strongly renew our call for
a peaceful restoration of democracy through free,
transparent and credible presidential elections, in
accordance with international democratic standards
and the Venezuelan constitutional order.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We regret
the two vetoes against the American draft resolution
(S/2019/186) — a draft resolution that could have
contributed to a political and peaceful resolution of the
crisis in Venezuela and relieved the suffering of the
Venezuelan people at a time when they are facing one
of the worst humanitarian crises in its history.
Contrary to what we have heard here in the
Chamber, the American text, which took into account
many of our requests, was neither a legal basis for the
use of force nor an attempt to undermine the sovereignty
of Venezuela. As everyone knows, France — along
with the whole of the European Union — has constantly
reiterated its repudiation of the use of force to resolve

19-058627/12

S/PV.8476

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

the Venezuelan crisis, to echo what the State Secretary
of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany has just said.
The draft resolution of which we voted in favour
reflects not only the tragic reality of Venezuela today,
but also our commitment to a peaceful and political
resolution of the crisis. As many States, including
France, pointed out last Tuesday (see S/PV.8472), the
holding of free, credible and transparent presidential
elections should be the priority objective for the
restoration of Venezuelan democracy. It is a matter of
delivering a political solution to a political crisis. That
is the raison d’être of the International Contact Group
launched by the European Union and Uruguay, of which
France is a member.
The stance of the countries that blocked the draft
resolution after having refused to participate in the
negotiations serves to protect Nicolás Maduro’s regime.
Along with the majority of the Council’s member
States, France believes that it is the responsibility of
the Security Council to strongly condemn the blockage
of humanitarian aid, as well as the use of violence
against women and men whose only crime is a desire to
provide help and assistance to their fellow citizens. The
use of the veto today serves to protect a regime that has
decided to starve its people.
Furthermore, the text submitted by Russia
(S/2019/190) clearly does not provide a solution to the
current crisis. It maintains the illusion that Venezuela
is in a peaceful situation and raises the spectre of
foreign invasion at a time when 3.5 million migrants
and refugees have fled the country and the majority
of the population has been plunged into total poverty.
The Russian draft resolution does not include a single
word on those tens of millions of people. Not once
does the word “humanitarian” appear in the draft
resolution. The Venezuelan population’s access to
neutral, transparent and independent international aid
is an absolute necessity.
Today’s impasse must not and cannot lead us to
resign ourselves to the situation. France will pursue its
efforts, in particular through the International Contact
Group. It is in that spirit that I wish to reiterate our
call for a peaceful and negotiated end to the crisis,
which entails the organization of free, credible and
transparent presidential elections as soon as possible,
as well as free access to humanitarian aid.
While Venezuela is now on the verge of collapse,
our responsibility is neither to supplant the Venezuelan
8/12

28/02/2019

people nor to make decisions for them. On the contrary,
it is to give them a voice and allow them to express
themselves freely in order for them to take ownership
of their destiny. Therein lies the compass that guides
France’s actions.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru did not support the proposed draft resolution
(S/2019/190) for the following reasons. It does not
take into account the fundamental aspect of the
problem in Venezuela, which is the existence of an
illegitimate regime that has caused one of the most
serious humanitarian crises and exoduses in the history
of the region — a result of its disastrous economic
management and corruption — and neither does it take
into account the flagrant violations of human rights
and individual freedoms or the urgency of holding free
presidential elections.
Peru ratifies its full commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations and its purposes and principles.
However, we cannot accept an approach that considers
only some of the Charter’s provisions that we consider
relevant to this case. We also cannot support the quest for
irrelevant dialogue mechanisms, which have repeatedly
failed by virtue of the illegitimate regime’s proven lack
of commitment, having been used only to gain time,
perpetuate its time in office and subsequently lash out
with new abuses and violations of human rights.
Peru questions the willingness of a regime
that — as we saw last weekend and heard in the Council
two days ago (see S/PV.8472) — not only opposes the
much-needed access to humanitarian assistance but
also denies the existence of an emergency and crisis,
ignoring the situation and showing no concern for the
3.4 million citizens who have had to flee the tragedy
caused by Nicolás Maduro.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Poland voted in favour
of the United States draft resolution on Venezuela
(S/2019/186). We decided to support that draft resolution
as we believe that it is the primary responsibility of the
Security Council to address urgently the worsening
humanitarian crisis affecting millions of Venezuelans.
The crisis has been further exacerbated by the blocking
of the delivery of humanitarian aid by pro-Maduro
security forces. Every day that passes without that aid
is a day with more and more people suffering, including
children, owing to the lack of basic services, food and
medicines. We therefore regret that not all members
of the Council decided to engage in the consultation
19-05862

28/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

process. Another division among Council members
sends a negative message to a place that deserves better.
At the same time, Poland decided to vote against
the Russian draft resolution (S/2019/190), as it lacked
the basic and most important element of acknowledging
the humanitarian catastrophe. We also reject the notion
that responding to the humanitarian crisis in Venezuela
undermines its sovereignty — quite the contrary. Let
me stress that it is the Council’s responsibility and
within its legitimate concern, in line with the Charter
of the United Nations, to address situations that
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, such as that taking place in Venezuela right
now. Moreover, we are responding to the calls of the
legitimate authorities in Venezuela.
In conclusion, what really matters is the suffering
of the people of Venezuela. They deserve a better
future. We hope that we will be able to meet their
rightful expectations.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): The text submitted
by the Russian Federation (S/2019/190) is consistent
with the South African Constitution and the values and
principles of democracy founded on the rule of law.
At the international level, the Russian text assesses
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and reinforces the founding principles of the United
Nations based on the sovereign equality of all its States
Members. That draft resolution speaks to the principle
of the peaceful settlement of international disputes, in
line with the provisions of Article 2. paragraph 3, and
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, on the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Furthermore, the Russian draft resolution reiterates
the need to fully respect the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence in the
provision of international humanitarian assistance. The
Russian text is a reaffirmation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which enjoys universality
in terms of its scope and application. It was on that
basis that South African supported the draft resolution.
Ultimately, South Africa will urge for any further
action by the Council to be guided by genuine efforts to
maintain international peace and security and promote
the unity of peoples in that regard.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia’s position on
the situation in Venezuela has always been consistent,
clear and principled, and we have had the opportunity
to express it a number of times. Indonesia regrets that

S/PV. 8476

we cannot achieve unity in the Security Council on how
to address the situation in Venezuela. The fact that two
separate draft resolutions (S/2019/186 and S/2019/190)
were submitted is clear evidence of the lack of a sense of
unity among Council members, which is sad. After my
less than two months on the Council, I must humbly say
that this is a sad day for the international community,
particularly the people of Venezuela. It is undoubtedly
a collective failure — a failure of the 15 of us seated
around this table — because we all came here today
knowing that we would not reach the consensus needed
for the adoption of a draft resolution. I would like to
address that failure to reach a consensus resolution
as follows.
First, neither draft resolution is complete, because
neither is comprehensive enough and both have been
overly politicized. Therefore neither would be useful
or helpful in ensuring the interests of the people of
Venezuela. Neither makes a serious attempt to find a
consensus on this highly sensitive matter. The need for
flexibility in the Council and the priority of reducing
the tensions in Venezuela are of the essence. We would
have liked to see more balanced and all-embracing
drafts. We would also have valued a more thorough
consultation and preparatory process for all parties to
the discussion.
The situation in Venezuela is still worrying and
therefore demands that the Council be united and
take the right actions, comprehensively and without
exacerbating the situation. In that regard, Indonesia
has always taken the principled position that in order to
achieve a durable solution, the following points should
be taken into account.
First, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of non-interference, sovereignty
and territorial integrity should be honoured and should
always be the starting point in discussing any issues
within the framework of the United Nations. Secondly,
any solution should focus on an inclusive political
dialogue involving all parties. We urgently need to
address the large deficit of trust, and we therefore call
on all the parties to accept the good offices offered by
the Secretary-General and refrain from taking action
that could lead to a further deterioration of the already
fragile situation on the ground. Thirdly, we must
urgently address the needs of the people of Venezuela,
who are in dire need of humanitarian assistance.
The United Nations must play an important role in
delivering and organizing support for humanitarian
assistance. Fourthly, the plight of Venezuelan refugees,

19-058629/12

S/PV.8476

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

which is affecting neighbouring countries, must be
urgently addressed.
Those four points should form the elements of a
good, consensus Security Council resolution. In the
absence of those elements, Indonesia refused to accept
or reject either draft resolution, because both are flawed.
If we really care about the people of Venezuela, we
should present a united front and find a joint solution.
We talk constantly about the importance of a united
front, and we do not have one.
In all honesty, I must admit that my delegation is
starting to believe that dialogue and negotiations are
a luxury here in the Council. I have been wondering
how the Council can promote dialogue for universally
acceptable solutions if its members have difficulty in
sitting together and having a dialogue to find common
ground. We beseech our colleagues to put aside their
differences. Now is not the time to be divided by
political rhetoric. Let us spare no effort in ensuring
that we will be part of the solution and not part of the
problem. Despite the deeply divergent views in the
Council, Indonesia is of the view that it is still possible
for us to arrive at a consensus in the future, as long as
the Council lives up to its mandate and responsibility.
We still have unfinished business, and that is
assisting Venezuela and its people in finding a peaceful
solution to their current challenges.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We deeply regret that the Security Council
has once again been dragged into this exhibition of
political adventurism.
Draft resolution S/2019/186, submitted by the
delegation of the United States, was written to instigate
regime change on a pretext of caring about people.
We have seen all of this before in Libya, Iraq, Syria
and Afghanistan. We adopted one resolution on Libya,
resolution 1973 (2011), that was used unscrupulously
to enable bombings and brutal regime change. We all
know what that led to. Where is Libya now? What has
become of it? And what has become of the African
countries to which international terrorism has spread
from Libya? Washington and London have once again
robbed an entire nation of billions of dollars and forcibly
imposed handouts to establish the circumstances for
regime change. First they create colossal humanitarian
problems and then they call on the world to solve them.
We were obliged to exercise our right of veto because
the United States draft resolution was not aimed at
10/12

28/02/2019

resolving the crisis in Venezuela. We therefore proposed
draft resolution S/2019/190, an alternative that could
have helped Venezuelans solve their own problems
themselves, without intervention from outside.
Many delegations have been saying today that
Venezuela should hold elections as soon as possible.
The decision to hold elections is one for Venezuelans
themselves. We do not need to decide it for them. The
most important thing is dialogue, but our colleagues
are burning bridges both literally and figuratively. Our
draft resolution included support for the Montevideo
Mechanism. But dialogue and mediation are clearly not
what Washington and the delegations that support it
were aiming for. Today we heard the same old line from
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom,
which is that the Russian text failed to receive enough
votes while the United States text was vetoed. That is
exactly why this whole scheme was concocted, so that
tomorrow the media will proclaim it, without a word
about how our draft resolution was shot down. This has
all happened before, as we all know and remember. It
was done on purpose. It is why they deliberately set
out to destroy the Council’s unity, as has been said
here today, not for the first time. Seven members of the
Security Council linked to that bloc to one degree or
another and in one group or another voted against our
draft resolution. And yet the number of supporters not
even so much of Venezuela but of international law itself
is much larger, at least 60 international delegations,
as the recent meeting we held on Venezuela showed.
Seriously, there are far more of them, and most are
sitting here in this Chamber now.
Today’s vote is a glaring example of why the veto is
necessary. It is needed to defend peace and the right of
peoples to decide their own destiny. It was clear today
that, had that right not been conscientiously exercised,
the Council itself would have risked transforming itself
into a threat to peace and security. It is a good thing that
did not happen.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): Venezuela is today at peace, which
is safeguarded by the constitutional Government of
President Nicolás Maduro Moros, who is in full exercise
of his legal powers and is guaranteeing the protection
of the Venezuelan people and territory and the effective
control of the country. We repeat — there is no violence
19-05862

28/02/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

of any kind in Venezuela. If there are any threats to the
peace, they are coming from abroad.
With regard to draft resolution S/2019/186,
submitted by the United States and the Government of
President Trump, we denounce, first, the falsification
of the content of the resolutions of the Organization of
American States (OAS), which are mentioned in the
draft resolution, as the very Charter of that regional
organization establishes that States do not have the
authority to determine the legitimacy of the electoral
processes of another country. That authority does not
exist. And, if a group of countries decided to ignore
the election results, the countries of that group did
so in their national capacities, which do not apply
whatsoever to that regional forum. This being about a
failed operation of political aggression, our country is
today fully exercising all its rights and privileges at the
Organization of American States. Therefore, it is not
true that we have been sanctioned or disregarded by the
OAS. That is false, yet it is cited as an example in draft
resolution S/2019/186.
We also reject the fact that our Constitution
continues to be used in an attempt to justify a colonial
intervention, while supporting a fictitious entity that
does not exist in our basic law. The self-proclaimed
Government constitutes a dictatorship, which has no
legal basis in Venezuela. Its spokespeople have even
already abandoned all intentions of calling for elections
and are intending to hold on to power for years without
consulting the people. For them it is enough to have the
support of President Trump.
The European countries that support the
Government of President Trump in this adventure do
so in spite of the fact that the legal experts of their own
Parliaments are warning them that their interference
in our internal affairs and their coercive illegal actions
constitute hostile and illegal acts against our nation. The
international community cannot understand how the
Security Council can allow the deliberate violation of
the Charter of the United Nations by Council members,
which have an obligation to enforce it.
We denounce the fact that no mention has been
made of the violent acts that occurred last weekend
from Colombian territory to Venezuelan territory.
That was an international incident, not a national
one. As an international incident, it falls under the
responsibility of the Security Council, but it has been
deliberately ignored. The Colombian Government still
has not submitted the protocols and photographs that

S/PV. 8476

it threatened to show a few days ago that allegedly
prove that it was a humanitarian operation and not
an operation of aggression. We are still awaiting that
alleged evidence. There is no international law that
protects a Government from presenting itself at the
border of another country and trying to force unknown
cargo into that foreign territory using unknown
protocols. Three days after the attack, there are still
people with masks on at those bridges — protected by
the Colombian Government — throwing firebombs
from Colombian territory at the Venezuelan forces of
public order. We still have not seen a single mention
of that, not to mention any condemnation of those acts
of aggression.
We want the world to know that, when some
countries in this Chamber express concern about the
humanitarian situation in Venezuela, they never refer
to the causes of the problem. It is illegal for acts of
economic war to be perpetrated against our country, in
violation of the human rights of our people and while
using them as hostages in a policy of calculated cruelty,
in total violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
In addition, after that policy of calculated cruelty, there
is concealment of the responsibility of the primary
perpetrators of that crime, which are — we will name
them here in the Chamber — the Government of the
United States and Government the United Kingdom.
We also denounce the fact that those two
colonial Powers — one still quite strong, the other in
decline — have, in the course of one week, carried
out the biggest robbery in our history — more than
$30 billion was stolen from the Venezuelan people. And
they want to conceal that pillage of historic proportions.
If they have a genuine interest in the humanitarian
situation and the well-being of the Venezuelan people,
the first thing they should do is to return what they
stole. The United States and the United Kingdom are
committing acts of looting and pillaging that cannot be
concealed under the cloak of humanitarian assistance.
It is the same colonialist plundering from two centuries
ago, but now it is disguised with a racist and messianic
ideology that proclaims itself to be saving third-world
countries. We do not need those saviours. We do not
need those saviours, who are motivated by greed and
end up destroying every nation they enter. We do not
need those saviours.
They are at this moment carrying out a massive
extortion operation against every country legally trading
with Venezuela. The United States and Europe are not a

19-0586211/12

S/PV.8476

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

world Government that regulates trade throughout the
rest of the world, and their illegal acts are the primary
cause of our people’s suffering. The Security Council
must ensure compliance with international law in the
face of the use, by the United States and the United
Kingdom, of international economic institutions as
weapons of mass destruction. Modern wars are not
conducted only with bombs, but also with banks. They
are using banks to destroy our people.
Given that the primary function of this organ is
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the world cannot understand why President Trump’s
Government refuses to adopt a draft resolution
prohibiting the use and threat of use of force in the
case of Venezuela. Do Council members know why it
does not do that? Because President Trump continues
to publicly threaten the Venezuelan people with the
military option. It is immoral and irresponsible to
blackmail an entire population in total violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The President of Costa Rica pointed out yesterday
that he did not endorse the communiqué issued by the
group of countries that met last Monday in Bogotá to
discuss the situation in Venezuela, because the issue of
the use of military force against Venezuela was openly
discussed. Both Costa Rica and other countries in the
region refuse to support the violence of the United
States and its allies against our people.
We want to denounce — and it is a very important
denunciation — the fact that there is an ongoing military
threat against Venezuela. It is for that reason that the
United Kingdom deployed a warship last Saturday less
than 80 kilometres off our coast. It still has not been
able to justify its presence. It is for that same reason
that the United States made a show of troop movements
on Colombian territory near our border, while at the
same time threatening to kill our Head of State.
We also denounce the fact that the spokespeople
of President Trump’s Government are currently
fabricating a narrative alleging an absurd number of
supposed defectors from the National Bolivarian Armed
Forces so as to justify the formation of a so-called
liberation army of Venezuela on Colombian territory,
with the aim of infiltrating our country and destroying
the peace of our nation. The organizers of that armed
criminal group flagrantly brag with total impunity in
the Colombian media. That is public data. We are not
saying that we have secret information. We will share

12/12

28/02/2019

all the information with the Council. It is no longer
about publicly using military force but instead of its
covert use in a war using paid mercenaries, in the same
manner as was done in Nicaragua during the cruel war
by the Contras. And, in a cruel twist of fate, the person
put in charge by the United States of the operation by
the Contras in Nicaragua was Elliott Abrams, who
is present here. He himself is today responsible for
the operation against Venezuela. He is the one who
used airplanes loaded with weapons disguised as
humanitarian aid to foment death and destruction in
Nicaragua. And he would have us believe that he is very
keen to send monetary assistance to Venezuela using
masked men throwing Molotov cocktails.
In conclusion, we demand from the Security
Council a clear statement condemning and prohibiting
the use of military force in all its forms and
manifestations against Venezuela. It is already publicly
known that the United States is right now attempting
to put together an indirect mercenary war using
irregular armed groups, which will make it possible
for it to seem — perversely — to be part of a colonial
humanitarian operation and thus the supposed saviours
of our nation. In brief, we are here to call for what
any other country or responsible State Member of the
United Nations would call for, that is, defence of the
principles of our founding Charter, including respect
for sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity, non-interference in internal affairs, the right
to the self-determination of peoples and the right of
States’ legal equality. But, above all, we have come to
request that Security Council uphold our right to peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be very brief
but, as a number of lurid claims were made against my
country, I would like to respond.
First, I have sent you a letter, Mr. President,
in response to allegations made by the Venezuelan
representative, which sets out very clearly British policy
towards his country — very much along the lines of
European Union policy, which we heard about earlier.
Secondly, if theft and plundering of the Venezuelan
people’s wealth is occurring, it is because of their own
Government. It is not because of mine.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

19-05862
