252

General Assembly-Fortieth Sesslon

Deeply alarmed at the continued occurrence on a large
scale of summary or arbitrary executions, including extralegal executions,
Recalling resolution 1982/ 13 of 7 September 1982 of
the Sub-Commission on Prevention ofDiscrimination and
Protection ofMinorities,1 90 in which the Sub-Commission
recommended that effective measures should be adopted
to prevent the occurrence of summary or arbitrary executions,
Welcoming Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/50 of 25 May 1984, and the safeguards guaranteeiñg
protection of the rights of those facing the death penalty
annexed thereto, which resolution was endorsed by the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders in its resolution
15, 138 as well as the ongoing work on summary or arbitrary
executions within the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control,
Convinced of the need for appropriate action to combat
and eventually eliminate the practice of summary or arbitrary executions, which represents a flagrant violation of
the most fundamental human right, the right to life,
l. Strongly condemns the large number of summary or
arbitrary executions, including extra-legal executions,
which continue to take place in various parts of the world;
2. Demands that the practice of summary or arbitrary
executions be brought to an end;
3. We/comes Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/35 of 7 May 1982, in which the Council decided to
appoint for one year a special rapporteur to examine the
questions related to summary or arbitrary executions;
4. A/so we/comes Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/40 of 30 May 1985, in which the Council
decided to continue the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, Mr. S. A. Wako, for a further year and requested the
Commission on Human Rights to consider the question of
summary or arbitrary executions as a matter ofhigh priority at its forty-second session;
5. Urges all Governments and all others concerned to
co-operate with and assist the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights in the implementation of
his mandate;
6. Requests the Special Rapporteur, in carrying out his
mandate, to respond effectively to information that comes
before him, in particular when a summary or arbitrary
execution is imminent or threatened, or when such an execution has recently occurred;
1. A/so requests the Special Rapporteur to consider, in
bis next report, possible measures to be taken by the
appropriate authorities when a death occurs in custody,
including adequate autopsy;
8. Considers that the Special Rapporteur, in carrying
out his mandate, should continue to seek and receive
information from Governments, United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide ali necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur so that he may
effectively carry out bis mandate;
10. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue
to use bis best endeavours in cases where the mínimum
standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 14
and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 7 appear not to be respected;
!90 See E/CN.411983/4-E/CN.4/Sub.2!1982/43 and Corr. l. cha p. XXI.

sect. A.

11. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-second session, on the basis of the report of the Special Rapporteur to be prepared in conformity with Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/35, 1983/36,
1984/35 and 1985/40, to make recommendations concerning appropriate action to combat and eventually eliminate the abhorrent practice of summary or arbitrary executions.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/144. Declaration on the human rights of individuals who are not nationals of the country in
which they live
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the human rights of
individuals who are not nationals of the country in which
they live,
Decides to adopt the Declaration on the Human Rights
of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the Country in
which They Live. which is annexed to the present resolution.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985
ANNEX
Dedaration on tbe Human RJ1b1s of lndhidaals Wbo are not Natioaals
of tbe Coantry ia wblcb Tbey Live
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Charter ofthe Unitcd Nations encourages univenal

respect for and observance of the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of ali human beinp, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religjon,
Consideringthat the Univenal Oeclaration ofHuman Rights6 procla,ms
that ali human beinp are bom free and equal in dignity and rights and that
everyone is entitled to ali the rights and freedoms set forth in that Oeclaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour. se~. language,
religion, political or other opinion. national or social origjn, property, birth
or other status,
Considering that the Univenal Oeclaration of Human Rights proclaims
further that everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person
before the law. that ali are equal before the law and entitled without any
discrimination to equal protection of the law, and that ali are entitled to
equal protection apinst any discrimination in violation of that Declaration
and against any incitcment to such discrimination,
Being aware that the States parties to the Jntemational Covenants on
Human Rights 24 undertake to ¡uarantee that the rights enunciated in these
Covenants will be exercised without discrimination of any kind as to race,
colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status,
Conscious that, with improving communications and the development
of peaceful and friendly relations among countries, individua Is increasingly
live in countrics of which they are not nationals,
Reaffirming the purposes and principies of the Charter of th~ United
Nations,
Recognizing that the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms provided for in intemational instruments should also be cnsured for
individuals who are not nationals of the country in which they live.
Proc/aims this Oeclaration:
Amele I

For the purposes of this Oeclaration, the term "alien" shall apply, w1th
due regard to qualifications made in subsequent articles, to any individual
who is not a national of thc Slate in which he or she is present.
Arllc/e 2

Nothing m th1s Declaration shall be interpreted as legitimizing the
illegal entry into and presence in a State of any alíen, nor shall any provi1.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

253

sion be interpreted as restricting the right of any State to promulgate laws

Artic/e 8

and regulations conceming the entry of aliens and the terrns and conditions

Aliens lawfully residing ,n the territory of a State shall also enjoy, in
accordance with the national laws, the following rights, subject to their
obligations under article 4:
(a) The right to safe and healthy working conditions, to fair wages and
equal remuneration for work of equal value without distinction of any
kind, in particular, women being guaranteed conditions of work not inferior to those enjoyed by men, with equal pay for equal work;
(b) The right to join trade unions and other organizations or associations of their choice and to participate in their activities. No restrictions
may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those prescribed by
law and which are necessary, in a democratic society, in the interests of
national security or public order or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others:
(e) The right to health protection. medica! care, social security, social
serv1ces, education, rest and leisure, provided that they fulfil the requirements under the relevant regulations for participation and that undue
strain is not placed on the resources of the State.
2. With a view to protccting the rights of aliens carrying on lawful paid
activities in the country in which they are present, such rights may be specified by the Governments concemed in multilateral or bilateral conventions.

oftheir stay orto establish differences between nationals and aliens. Howcvcr, such laws and regulations shall not be incompatible with the intemational legal obligations of that State, including those in the field of human
rights.

2. This Declaration shall not prejudice the enjoyment of the rights
accorded by domestic law and of the rights which under intemational law a
State is obliged to accord to aliens, even where this Declaration does not
recognize such rights or recognizes them to a lesser extent.
ArticleJ

Evcry State shall make public its national legislation or regulations
affecting alicns.
Article 4

Aliens shall observe the laws ofthe State in which they reside orare prescnt and regard with respect the customs and traditions of the people of that
State.
Artic/e 5

l. Aliens shall enjoy, in accordance with domestic law and subject to
the rele-vant intemational obligations ofthe State in which they are present,
in particular the following rights:

(a) Toe right to life and security of person; no alien shall be subjected
to arbitrary arrest or detention; no alien shall be deprived of bis or her libcrty except on such grounds and in accordance with such procedures as are
established by law;
(b) The right to protection against arbitrary or unlawful interference
with privacy, family, home or correspondence;
(e) Toe right to be equal before the courts, tribunals and ali other
orpns and authorities administering justice and, when necessary, to free
assistance of an interpreter in criminal proceedings and, when prescribed
by law, other proceedings;
(d) The right to choose a spouse, to marry, to found a family;
(e) Toe right to freedom of thought, opinion, conscience and religion;
the right to manifest their religion or beliefs, subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public safety,
order, health or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others;
(1) The right to retain thcir own language, culture and tradition;
(g) Thc right to transfer abroad eamings, savings or other personal
monetary asscts, subject to domestic currency regulations.
2. Subject to such restrictions as are prescribed by law and which are
necessary in a democratic society to protect national security, public safety,
public order, public health or morals or the rights and freedoms of others,
and which are consistent with the other rights recognized in the relevant
intemational instruments and those set forth in this Declaration, aliens
shall enjoy the following rights:
(a) The right to leave the country;
(b) The right to freedom of expression;
(e) The right to peaceful assembly:
(d) Thc right to own property alone as well as in association with
others, subject to domestic law.
3. Subjcct to the provisions referred to in paragraph 2, aliens lawfully
in the tcrritory of a State shall enjoy the right to liberty of movement and
freedom to choose their residence within the borders of the Sta te.
4. Subjcct to national legislation and due authorization, the spouse and
minor or dependen! children of an alien lawfully residing in the territory of
a State shall be admitted to accompany, join and stay with the alien.
Article 6

No alíen shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
trcatment or punishment and, in particular, no alíen shall be subjected
without his or her free consent to medica! or scientific experimentation.
Artic/e 7

An alien lawfully in the territory of a State may be expelled therefrom
only in pursuance of a dccision reached in accordance with law and shall,
cxcept where compelling reasons of national security otherwise require, be
allowed to submit the reasons why he or she should not be expelled and to
have the case reviewed by, and be represented for the purpose before, the
competen! authority or a person or persons specially designated by the
compctent authority. Individual or collective expulsion of such aliens on
grounds of race, colour, religion, culture, descent or national or ethnic origin is prohibited.

l.

Amele 9

No alien shall be arbitrarily deprived of his or her lawfully acquired
assets.
A.nicle JO

Any alien shall be free al any time to communicate with the consulate or
diplomatic mission of the State of which he or she is a national or, in the
absence thereof, with the consulate or diplomatic mission of any other
State entrusted with the protcction of the interests of the State of which he
or she is a national in the State where he or she resides.

40/145. Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile
The General Assembly,
A ware of its responsibility to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
ali, and determined to remain vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur,
Noting the obligation of the Chilean authorities to
respect and protect human rights in accordance with the
intemational instruments to which Chile is a party,
Bearing in mind that the concem of the intemational
community at the situation of human rights in Chile was
expressed by the General Assembly in its resolutions 3219
(XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3448 (XXX) of9 December
1975, 31/124 of 16 December 1976, 32/118 of 16 December 1977, 33/175 of 20 December 1978, 34/179 of 17
December 1979, 35/188 of 15 December 1980, 36/157 of
16 December 1981, 37/183 of 17 December 1982, 38/102
of 16 December 1983 and 39/121 of 14 December 1984,
as well as in its resolution 33/173 of20 December 1978 on
disappeared persons,
Recallingthe relevant resolutions ofthe Commission on
Human Rights, in particular resolution 1985/47 of 14
March 1985, 3º in which the Commission decided, inter
afia, to extend the mandate ofthe Special Rapporteur for a
year and to consider the question as a matter ofhigh priority in view of the increase in serious violations of human
rights in Chile,
Considering that the Special Rapporteur proposes to
submit to the Commission on Human Rights at its fortysecond session a final report on the situation of human
rights in Chile,
Considering a/so the public and notorious nature of
man y of the deeds which constitute serious and systematic
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
Chile,
Deploring once again the fact that the repeated appeals
of the General Assembly. the Commission on Human
