S/PV.9095

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9095th meeting

Friday, 15 July 2022, 5 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Benaabou
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Mathur
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-42760 (E)
*2242760*

S/PV.9095

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 5.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/560, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Mexico and the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2645 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
and we thank the members of the Security Council for
their support. Resolution 2645 (2022), which we put
forward with our co-penholder, Mexico, is based on
the recommendations of the Secretary-General and
is intended to ensure that the United Nations has the
mandate it needs.
As a result, BINUH will continue its critical
advisory efforts in support of facilitating political
dialogue, enhancing the capacity of the Haitian
National Police to address gang violence and protecting
human rights.
The mandate reflects the key challenges facing
Haiti, including the need to address illegal arms
trafficking and illicit financial flows and the fact
that the Security Council is ready to consider taking
measures, as appropriate, to address those challenges.
2/6

15/07/2022

Coordinated and enhanced support from the
international community remains essential to promoting
stability in Haiti. Once again, we must also note that it
is long past time for Haiti’s stakeholders to set aside
their differences and to reach agreement on a political
framework that will allow Haiti to hold presidential and
legislative elections when conditions permit.
We will continue to demand progress from Haiti’s
political actors in resolving those long-standing
challenges and remain steadfast in our support for the
people of Haiti.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Haiti
has been one of the most complicated and intractable
challenges on the Council’s agenda. For China, each
time the Council discusses the mandate of a United
Nations mission, the key has never been whether
to renew it or not, nor has it been the length of the
renewal. It is about what kind of mandate is needed for
the mission and what kind of mandate can effectively
help the people of Haiti.
The United Nations began its engagement in
Haiti in the early 1990s, yet Haiti today, compared
with 30 years ago, is hardly in any better shape. On
the contrary, it is caught in a more severe crisis.
Anyone who truly cares about the Haitian people and
the reputation of the United Nations will have grave
concerns over that. Exactly what has gone wrong? How
can the Security Council really make a difference and
break the vicious cycle?
Last October, with the facilitation of China and
other Council members, the Security Council requested
that the Secretary-General conduct an assessment of
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH) in the light of the actual conditions in
Haiti (see resolution 2600 (2021)), which would serve as
a reference for the Council to strengthen the mandate
in a targeted manner. Over the past nine months,
Haiti’s State institutions have been paralysed across the
board. Most of the country has fallen into a security
vacuum. Gang violence has become more rampant, and
the economic and humanitarian situations have been
in free fall. That fully demonstrates that the strategic
assessment and the fundamental adjustment of the
mandate of BINUH are imperative.
Just as the Security Council was in consultations on
the draft resolution, gang clashes broke out near Port-auPrince, and the situation has worsened to an appalling
state. Meaningful Council action is long overdue, and
22-42760

15/07/2022

The question concerning Haiti

we cannot afford to miss another opportunity to renew
the mandate this time.
While fully taking into account the recommendations
in the Secretary-General’s assessment report, the strong
aspirations of the Haitian people and the concerns of
Haiti’s neighbouring countries and countries of the
region, China put forward specific, reasonable and
feasible proposals on advancing the political process,
stepping up police capacity-building, combating illicit
flows of weapons and finance and strengthening port
and border management, among other things. We
welcome the fact that resolution 2645 (2022) included
many of China’s proposals. We thank the members of
the Security Council for their support, and appreciate
the positive attitude shown in the final stages by
the co-penholders, Mexico and the United States of
America. While the resolution just adopted certainly
still has room for improvement, on the whole it is
nevertheless a right step in the right direction.
This resolution sets clear expectations of the
Haitian authorities and leaders of political parties.
They must shoulder their responsibilities, bear in
mind the interests of the country and the people,
immediately put an end to the senseless political strife,
engage in dialogue on the political arrangements for the
transitional period and create the necessary conditions
for the early holding of general elections. The leadership
of the interim Government in Haiti should have a
greater sense of urgency in advancing the political
process and report progress satisfactory to the people of
Haiti to the Security Council before 17 October. China
welcomes the constructive roles played by countries of
the region and the Caribbean Community in advancing
intra-Haitian dialogue.
This resolution raises clear warnings to the gangs
that the Security Council is closely following their
actions. The gangsters must immediately stop the
violence and criminal activities, end the occupation of
public facilities and roads and cease all acts of human
rights violations. The Security Council will soon
impose sanctions on individuals who are gang members
or supporters of gang activities, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
in order to hold them fully accountable.
This resolution also confers a stronger mandate
upon BINUH or, in clearer terms, requires BINUH
to take on greater responsibilities. We hope that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
will earnestly follow the principle of Haitian-led

S/PV.9095

and Haitian-owned to lead BINUH in working with
objectivity and impartiality, making every effort
to push for inclusive dialogues among the parties,
mobilizing the international community and providing
more substantive help to Haiti. Through concrete
actions, BINUH should bring confidence and hope to
the people of Haiti.
We also expect the Secretary-General, as mandated
by the resolution, to consult with the Haitian authorities,
the relevant countries and regional organizations,
with a view to putting forward effective and feasible
solutions and recommendations on how to help Haiti
fight the gangs. Regional partners with the capabilities
should respond actively and contribute to improving
the security situation in Haiti.
Haiti itself is not a producer of weapons. Yet the
weapons possessed by the gangs far surpass those of the
Haitian National Police in quantity and quality, which
indicates that the illicit trafficking and proliferation
of weapons are a source of the ever-escalating gang
violence. While supporting Haiti in strengthening its
own security capabilities, countries should also act in
coordination and unity by banning the participation
of their citizens in the trafficking of weapons to Haiti
and preventing their territories from being used for
such purposes. That is a necessary step in effectively
containing the violent activities of gangs and the
minimum requirement in showing solidarity with the
Haitian people. Regrettably, the resolution failed to
provide for that in the strongest terms. We hope that
that will not send any wrong signals to the gangs. We
urge all countries to effectively strengthen the export
control of arms to prevent their illicit flow into the
hands of gangs in Haiti. China will also work with the
relevant countries in continuing to push for greater
Security Council efforts in that direction.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya thanks Mexico
and the United States of America for their dedicated
efforts to prepare and present resolution 2645 (2022)
to renew the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) for 12 months. Kenya voted in
favour of the resolution, and we are glad that it enjoyed
unanimous support in the Security Council.
The changes in the mandate were informed by the
independent assessment report and the desire by most
delegations for BINUH to be more supportive of Haiti
during this difficult period.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s report
by 15 October on how to better combat the high levels

22-427603/6

S/PV.9095

The question concerning Haiti

of gang violence. In the meantime, we join the rest of
the Council in urging States Members of the United
Nations and regional organizations to do their utmost
to support Haiti in combating illicit financial and
arms flows.
While Kenya appreciates the strengthening of
BINUH, we are all too aware of what it is not equipped,
or able, to achieve as a mission. The people of Haiti
are facing profoundly serious challenges. The most
immediate and apparent is the increasing threat of
gangs to the lives and livelihoods of Haitians. They are
impeding the movement of the people and the flow of
humanitarian aid and are adding an even greater burden
to an already strained-to-breaking-point economy.
The solutions to those challenges require a stable
Government, based on strong institutions. However,
that is what Haiti lacks today. The reasons are complex,
but underlying them is a lack of unity based on an
inclusive vision of Haiti’s future.
We, as Kenyans, as Africans, understand just
how difficult it is to sustain a competent and stable
Government, while trying to overcome poverty, foreign
intervention and transnational criminality that has a
political dimension. We do not pretend to know the
day-to-day realities of Haiti, but we have experience in
pulling our countries back from the brink of collapse,
using dialogue to arrive at a vision of the future,
building Governments of national unity, undertaking
fundamental legal and constitutional reforms and
holding successful democratic elections.
We are ready to share our experiences with Haiti.
We are ready not because it is a favour or charity, but
because we have an obligation to Haiti and its people.
I say to the Haitians that their magnificent
revolution of 1791 struck the first critical blow to the
ending of the mass enslavement of African peoples, to
colonial tyranny and to the violent and unjust racism
on which it was based. Because the people of Haiti
stood tall, we Africans are standing tall today. Their
revolutionary war against slavery and domination was
echoed in our own war against colonialism.
Today Haiti is part of the sixth region of the African
Union, according to our Constitutive Act. Africa owes it
every support. Kenya is ready to act on that obligation.
We are proud to have been guided by the spirit of panAfrican solidarity in our engagement with the Haiti file
while here in the Security Council.
4/6

15/07/2022

We thank the other African members of the Security
Council, known as the A3 — without forgetting
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, which formed the
A3+1 — for our common stand for Haiti. Gabon, Ghana,
the Niger and Tunisia have all stood by Haiti and I am
sure that future members of the A3 will continue to
do the same. In that regard, we welcome and support
the recent initiatives by the Caribbean Community in
support of Haiti and call on the African Union to follow
suit. Kenya is determined to do its utmost to find a way
to implement the pledge that President Kenyatta made
in October, during our presidency of the Council, to
provide training for Haitian professionals in our public
services, colleges and schools, and we stand ready to do
everything in our power to continue working together.
Kenya has needed mediation, and we have also
offered it. We urge the leaders and people of Haiti to
give themselves the gift of dialogue, mediation and
reconciliation. We believe that every solution to their
challenges must be Haitian-led and Haitian-owned, and
despite the divergent views they may have today, we
are confident that Haitian political leaders have the will
and the capacity to build consensus and chart a viable
way forward. We urge the international community, the
United Nations leadership and all States engaged with
Haiti to always be guided by the belief that Haiti has the
ability to attain stability and from there, lasting peace
and prosperity. It is that kind of faith in the people of
Haiti that will lead us to give them the right kinds of
support in their efforts.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm Kenya’s
unwavering solidarity with and respect for the
sovereignty and political independence of Haiti and
its people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note that once again, it was anything but
simple for Council members to arrive at an agreement
on resolution 2645 (2022). In our view, the problem
lies in a discrepancy between words and actions. We
hear voices on all sides advocating the importance of
a speedy political settlement in Haiti, without which
no sustainable resolution of the other outstanding
issues, including, above all, the most urgent of them,
the security situation. At the same time, neither in
the reports of the Secretary-General nor the positions
of some Council members do we see any willingness
to take concrete steps to incentivize Haitian actors
to establish a dialogue as soon as possible. The same
applies to countering the uncontrolled flow into the
country of weapons, which inevitably fall into the hands
22-42760

15/07/2022

The question concerning Haiti

of rampant gangs. Everyone seems to acknowledge that
the problem has reached an unacceptable scale, yet we
see no desire to take concrete action.
By comparison, we are seeing the total opposite
in countries such as the Sudan, South Sudan, Mali
and the Central African Republic, where there are
attempts to cling on to sanctions regimes at all costs,
even when they are becoming a real obstacle to
equipping law-enforcement forces. What is that if not
a double standard? Even the duration of the mandate
of the special political mission in Haiti has become a
stumbling block. Take the situation in Cyprus, which is
also on the Security Council’s agenda. While it cannot
be compared to Haiti, the mandate of the United Nations
mission there is renewed every six months, which
enables us to keep our finger on its pulse. But when
it comes to Haiti, some members seem to believe that
the less the Council considers the rapidly deteriorating
situation there the better.
We believe that with such an approach we can
hardly speak of providing the Haitian people with
effective assistance to in overcoming the problems
they face. One is compelled to wonder whether the
Council is making the right decisions on this dossier at
all, because we are hearing increasingly loud Haitian
voices saying that the mission there has become part of
the problem rather than the solution.
One thing is clear, which is that without an urgent
and broad dialogue on determining ways out of the
crisis and related terms acceptable for all Haitians
acceptable, we will never be able to solve all the other
problems. That is why we believe that the special
political mission’s main task is to assist in establishing
a political dialogue. On its part, the Council must
ensure that its decisions ultimately guarantee that the
Haitians can resolve their problems independently and
without external direction. We will contribute to that
end in any way we can.
All things considered, we did not object to the
adoption of today’s resolution, and we hope that the
strengthened text will make the United Nations efforts
in Haiti more effective.
Mr. Boateng (Ghana): Ghana welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2645 (2022) today
and thanks all Council members for showing the
necessary flexibility and constructive engagement
throughout the negotiations. We voted in favour of
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti until 15 July 2023 because it

S/PV.9095

enables the United Nations to continue its support with
a view to addressing the dire situation on the security,
political and socioeconomic fronts in Haiti, particularly
with regard to the immediate restoration of public law
and order.
We note and acknowledge that there are persistent
differences among Council members as to what measures
will be effective in stamping out the growing gang
violence and other threats to peace in Haiti. However, at
this critical juncture, it is absolutely essential to ensure
that the Council acts in a manner that sends a strong
and unified message of its unwavering commitment
to ensuring the stability and proper functioning of the
Haitian State. It is our hope that the resolution just
adopted will serve as a good basis for the Council to
continue exploring the additional pragmatic steps we
need to help the Haitian authorities preserve peace and
stability in their country.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2645 (2022), which renews and strengthens the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH). As a co-penholder of the resolution, together
with the United States, Mexico thanks all Security
Council members for their valuable contributions.
The resolution that we have just adopted responds to
the deteriorating political, economic and humanitarian
situation in Haiti and recognizes the multidimensional
causes of those issues. It also makes an unequivocal
appeal for an immediate cessation of the violence. With
its adoption, the Council is sending a clear message
to Haiti’s political actors regarding the urgent need
to reach agreements that will enable them to resume
a dialogue and restore institutional order throughout
the country, as well as to launch a participative and
democratic political process. Haiti will have to provide
information on the progress made within a reasonable
time frame.
In terms of security — a critical and unavoidable
component that must be dealt with urgently — the
Council has called on every country to prohibit the
transfer of arms to gangs and criminal groups, since
such weapons perpetuate the cycle of violence that
has the country in its grip. We therefore ask BINUH
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
support Haiti in the fight against arms trafficking and
illicit financial flows. It is also clear that the Haitian
National Police requires support from the international
community. In that connection, the resolution urges

22-427605/6

S/PV.9095

The question concerning Haiti

States to contribute to the basket fund to finance
projects for improving security, as well as asking the
Secretary-General to consult Haiti and other relevant
countries and organizations on possible options that
can enable more effective support to be given to the
tasks undertaken by the Haitian National Police.
With resolution 2645 (2022), the Council is sending
a message of solidarity with the Government and the
people of Haiti, without ruling out the possibility of
adopting additional measures in the not-too-distant
future, should circumstances require them.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
Brazil hopes that the mandate in resolution 2645
(2022), adopted by the Security Council today, will
provide the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) with increased financial means and better
tools to help Haiti. Haiti has been a priority for Brazil
and will remain so. It is worth remembering that while
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was
operational, Brazil deployed tens of thousands of Blue
Helmets, as well as every single Force Commander to
the peacekeeping operations there, for more than 13
consecutive years.
Since then, Brazil has been on the ground providing
bilateral assistance to Haiti and developing cooperation
projects with the country, which resulted in 2022, inter
alia, in the construction of three referral hospitals that
represent an important contribution to the Haitian
health system and the inauguration of a professional
training centre in Les Cayes.
As an elected member of the Council, Brazil has
engaged in the negotiating process for the renewal of
BINUH, with the sole objective of galvanizing efforts to
help Haiti overcome the economic, security and political
crises in which it regrettably remains plunged. From
the outset, we have emphasized that it was paramount
to reinforce BINUH in terms of security, capacity and
resources in order to help the country control gang
violence and reinstate a minimum level of governance.
Increasing BINUH’s ability to help national authorities
in preventing and responding to sexual and genderbased violence was also a major objective.
Although we believe that more could have been
achieved if we had had more time for in-depth debate,
we hope that resolution 2645 (2022) will encourage and
foster positive developments. It is clear that Haiti needs
to remain at the forefront of our attention. The Council

6/6

15/07/2022

needs to closely follow the implementation of BINUH’s
mandate and new developments on the ground, while
carefully considering the need for new measures.
Moreover, the resolution includes provisions that
require further debate on their implementation. Brazil
is willing to engage constructively in such discussions.
For the time being, we would like to underscore that
prohibiting the transfer of small arms, light weapons
and ammunition to non-State actors in Haiti may be an
important measure to curb the escalation of violence.
However, a monitoring mechanism might be necessary
to oversee its effectiveness.
With regard to the possibility of imposing
appropriate measures against those engaging in or
supporting violence, including an asset freeze or a travel
ban, Brazil highlights the need to develop monitoring
mechanisms, listing criteria, humanitarian exemptions
and carve-outs and the conditions for lifting the
sanctions. Those parameters are essential to applying
such measures in a responsible and effective manner.
Furthermore, the Council needs to ensure that such
measures, if adopted, do not have adverse humanitarian
consequences for the civilian population, especially
given the traumatic history of comprehensive sanctions
imposed on Haiti in past decades.
It is unfortunate that a legal scrubbing of the
language on possible sanctions was not thoroughly
carried out among all Council members. We reserve the
right to further develop the language of the resolution
in future meetings. In the light of the seriousness of
the situation in Haiti, we note that we would have
appreciated having had more time for meaningful
discussions on these issues and other measures that the
Council could have taken in support of BINUH and the
Haitian authorities.
In conclusion, I would like to call on all Haitian
stakeholders to engage promptly in dialogue to
find a political breakthrough that will allow for the
re-establishment of institutional normalcy in the
country. I would also like to reaffirm that Brazil’s
commitment to Haiti is unwavering and that we are not
oblivious to the suffering of the Haitian people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

22-42760
