United Nations

S/PV.6305

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6305th meeting
Friday, 30 April 2010, 5.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Moretti
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Ramadan
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2010/175)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-33760 (E)

*1033760*

S/PV.6305

The meeting was called to order at 5.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2010/175)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Spain, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/175, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/216, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, the Russian
Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall now read out
the following revised first preambular paragraph of the
draft resolution:
“Recalling and reaffirming all its previous
resolutions on Western Sahara”.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall now read out
the following revised eighth preambular paragraph:

2

“Stressing the importance of making
progress on the human dimension of the conflict
as a means to promote transparency and mutual
confidence through constructive dialogue and
humanitarian confidence-building measures, and
noting the need for all parties to adhere to their
obligations, taking into account the roles and
responsibilities of the United Nations system and
the relevant paragraphs of the United Nations
Secretary-General’s report”.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall now read out
the following revised operative paragraph 9:
“Decides to extend the existing mandate of
MINURSO until 30 April 2011”.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it,
as orally amended. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
proceed to put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I would like to take this
opportunity to explain Uganda’s vote before the voting
on this important draft resolution on the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) (S/2010/216).
Western Sahara has been a full-fledged member
of the African Union since 1982. It is the only country
in Africa still awaiting the completion of its process of
decolonization. It is important to recall and reaffirm
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, as stipulated in
Security Council resolution 690 (1991). MINURSO’s
core mandate is to monitor the ceasefire and organize
and conduct a referendum to enable the Saharawi
people to choose between integration with Morocco
and independence. Uganda would like to emphasize
that any attempt to deviate from that core guiding
principle of MINURSO’s mandate will only be
counterproductive. It is essential to take a balanced and
impartial approach in dealing with the question of
Western Sahara.
We are deeply concerned about the allegations of
widespread violations of human rights in the territory

10-33760

S/PV.6305

of Western Sahara and in the refugee camps near
Tindouf. Uganda shares the Secretary-General’s view,
stated in his report, that

underpins such negotiations. We feel that this does not
augur well for the reputation of the Council or, more
important, for the preservation of its unity.

“The United Nations and the international
community as a whole have an interest in
advancing respect for international human rights
standards and in ensuring that each party to the
conflict understands its responsibilities in this
regard”. (S/2010/175, para. 76)

There is also a substantive issue at stake. At its
2984th meeting on 29 April 1991, the Security Council
established through resolution 690 (1991) the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara. Central to MINURSO’s mandate is the
referendum in Western Sahara as part of a peaceful
negotiated settlement of an intractable problem. In
essence, MINURSO derives its legal basis and
relevance from that resolution. We are deeply troubled
by the lack of reference to resolution 690 (1991) in the
current draft resolution.

We also concur with the Secretary-General that “the
United Nations recognizes its duty to uphold human
rights standards in all its operations, including those
relating to Western Sahara” (ibid., para. 59).
We therefore note with concern that the
Secretary-General clearly states that MINURSO has no
staff on the ground to address human rights issues. We
are convinced that the setting up of a mechanism for
human rights monitoring is an essential confidencebuilding measure that would contribute to advancing
the peaceful resolution of the question of Western
Sahara.
The process of negotiating this draft resolution
left a lot to be desired. It is our view that, in future, the
process should be more inclusive and should be
conducted in a timely manner.
Uganda supports MINURSO, and consequently
Uganda will vote in support of the draft resolution.
Mr.
Onemola
(Nigeria):
Last
week,
Mr. President, you presided over an open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council (see
S/PV.6300). Contributions to the debate by members
and non-members of the Council were rich and
substantive. Barely one week after that fruitful debate,
we are constrained to express our views on issues of
process and substance related to the draft resolution
contained in document S/2010/216, on the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO).
With regard to process, we are dissatisfied that
the draft resolution was negotiated by a handful — at
best, a minority — rather than by the collective
membership of the Council. That does not measure up
to the expectation of and quest for inclusiveness and
transparency in the work of the Council. Moreover, the
difficulty of incorporating changes to the draft text of
the Group of Friends has really damaged the spirit of
accommodation, flexibility and openness that

10-33760

All States Members of the United Nations have
emphasized the need for coherence and consistency in
the policies we promote. In 2005, human rights
received a major boost with the establishment of the
Human Rights Council. Collectively, Members
reaffirmed their commitment and obligation to promote
universal respect for and the observance and protection
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter. This is
all the more true in cases in which parties to a conflict
accuse each other of human rights violations.
Not long ago, we were reminded of the need for
the Council to be told what needs to be said, and not
what needs to be heard. In other words, hard and bitter
truths should be told. In that spirit, we would like to
say that it is a matter of regret that, with respect to
Western Sahara, there is not only an apparent
reluctance of the Council to be coherent, consistent and
forthcoming on the important question of human rights,
but also an attempt to downplay the seriousness of their
abuse. The failure of the Council to address the human
rights challenges in Western Sahara is doing serious
harm to its credibility and commitment to the
protection and defence of human rights.
Only two days ago, more than 30 Nigerian
non-governmental organizations and well-meaning
individuals in Abuja called on the United Nations to
protect human rights in Western Sahara and to enable
the Saharan people to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence. Indeed, in his latest
report to the Council (S/2010/175), the SecretaryGeneral has expressed concern over the human rights
challenges in Western Sahara. The minimum this
Council can do is to be seen to promote and vigorously

3

S/PV.6305

defend human rights as a universal principle in all
circumstances.
The Council should not portray itself as
sacrificing fundamental principles on the alluring altar
of expedience. There is neither a logical explanation
for nor a justification of the fact that all United Nations
peacekeeping missions, except that in Western Sahara,
have human rights components in their mandates. The
Council bears a moral burden and duty to explain the
non-inclusion of a provision in the current draft
resolution calling on the parties to engage in dialogue
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We are convinced of
the necessity of such a call to encourage respect for
and the promotion and defence of human rights by all
parties as a universal principle.
Nigeria appreciates the efforts made by all
concerned in preparing and presenting the draft
resolution before us. We take note of the work of the
Group of Friends seized with the matter, and encourage
it to redouble its efforts in that regard. However, it is
Nigeria’s abiding hope that, at the end of the day, the
long-suffering people of Western Sahara will come to
know peace and that the logic of peace and respect for
the fundamental freedoms of all the people of the
territory will prevail.
Finally, we strongly suggest that future
negotiations on MINURSO be broadened from the
onset in order to avoid the cumbersome process of
renegotiating the agreements and delicate balances
achieved by the Group of Friends. Perhaps the Council
needs to revisit the role of the Group of Friends, given
the experience of 2009 and the negotiations that led to
the draft resolution before us.
Nigeria will support the draft resolution before
us.
The President: I now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/2010/216, as orally
amended.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

4

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution, as orally amended, has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1920 (2010).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): The
United States fully supports the Secretary-General and
his Personal Envoy, Chris Ross, in their efforts to find
a peaceful, sustainable and mutually agreed solution to
the Western Sahara conflict, and welcomes the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara and head of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), Hany
Abdel-Aziz.
We welcome the fact that, during Ambassador
Ross’s recent trip to the region, all of his interlocutors
confirmed their commitment to cooperating with the
United Nations to reach a solution to the Western
Sahara conflict as soon as possible. We encourage all
involved to come to the table without preconditions.
This conflict has languished for too long and has
hindered regional cooperation on urgent and emerging
issues facing North Africa. We believe that it is
essential that the parties demonstrate the political will
to identify a mutually acceptable solution, and we hope
that neighbouring States will assist the parties in doing
so.
We call on the parties to work collaboratively
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to facilitate the
implementation of their agreement regarding family
visits, including the establishment of family visits by
land. We hope that family visits by air will be resumed
as soon as possible and that the parties will engage
constructively with each other and the Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General to pursue other forms of
confidence-building measures.
We are deeply concerned about the allegations of
human rights abuses by the parties. We urge the parties
to work with the international community to ensure full
respect for human rights both in Western Sahara and in
the Tindouf camps. In this context, we underscore the
importance of making progress on the human rights
situation. Given the current situation on the ground and
Ambassador Ross’s continuing efforts, we agree that
the presence of MINURSO remains indispensable. That
is why we have just supported renewing MINURSO’s
mandate for another 12 months.

10-33760

S/PV.6305

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The
resolution we have just adopted highlights the
importance which the international community attaches
to the political process in Western Sahara. The status
quo is unacceptable in the long term. We call on all the
parties to display greater political will to reach a
solution that is fair, lasting and mutually acceptable.
In that regard, my delegation recalls the
importance of the autonomy proposal put forward by
the Kingdom of Morocco in 2007, which allowed
negotiations to resume and which, in our opinion,
constitutes the basis for credible, open and constructive
negotiations that respect the principle of selfdetermination. The proposal therefore deserves to be
carefully considered by the various parties.
This year, the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral held two informal negotiating sessions and
made two visits to the region. The dialogue has been
patiently renewed. The process is slow but moving
forward. We commend the skill with which
Mr. Christopher Ross has shepherded progress and
trust in his capacity to move ahead with our full
support. However, he will be able to do nothing
without the full commitment of the parties, which must
participate seriously in the negotiations, display a
sense of realism and a spirit of compromise, and
abstain from all provocation. The settlement of this
issue is necessary to the people of Western Sahara and
to the security, stability and integration of the Maghreb
region.
Resolution 1920 (2010) also sends a critical
message about confidence-building measures, in
particular family visits. Visits by air, which have been
halted since March, must be re-established, and visits
by land must be inaugurated as soon as possible. It not
acceptable that civilian populations be held hostage by
political considerations. Everything must be done to
alleviate their daily struggles, and we welcome the role
played by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in that regard.
We also support all measures to be taken in the
political and humanitarian spheres, with the agreement
of the parties, to promote mutual trust.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
highlight one particular issue and recall how important
it is that the Council be able to ensure better financial
tracking for all peacekeeping operations, including
MINURSO, in line with the initiative launched jointly

10-33760

with the United Kingdom. This means that the reports
of the Secretary-General published prior to mandate
renewals should contain financial estimates for the
recommendations made in them.
We note also that the MINURSO budget has
grown considerably since two years ago, while the
mandate and format of the Mission have not changed
substantially. We hope that the discussions that will
take place in the Fifth Committee will make possible a
convincing argument for the validity of the premises
underpinning the 2010-2011 budget.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
joined the consensus on resolution 1920 (2010), which
we have just adopted, thus expressing our support to
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) and the steps taken by the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General to find a final
solution to the question of Western Sahara.
Nonetheless, we would have preferred a more
balanced and direct text that would have addressed
every issue and not avoided matters that are central to
the situation in Western Sahara or set aside essential
principles of international law. Respect for the selfdetermination of peoples and the question of human
rights, which are at the core of the situation, deserved
to be addressed in greater depth and more directly, as
in Security Council resolutions in general.
We must also learn from the process of
negotiating this resolution. The negotiations on
Western Sahara are not and can no longer be the
monopoly of any group of countries. They must be the
collective responsibility of all Council members.
Indeed, today we were able to reach this consensus
with the participation and proposals of all delegations.
This should be a lesson for the future.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria fully
supports the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) for another 12 months and underlines its
continued support for the efforts by the SecretaryGeneral and his Personal Envoy for the resumption of
substantive and results-oriented negotiations.
We are very glad that the Council was able to
maintain consensus and are grateful to all those who
cooperated towards that effort. The unanimous
message of support of the Council for the efforts of the
United Nations is essential to move the parties beyond

5

S/PV.6305

the current impasse. Building consensus on the text
was a laborious process in view of the double-track
process used to prepare this resolution. We also
strongly encourage that this modus operandi be
reconsidered next year.
As both parties have the obligation to ensure
respect for the human rights of the people of Western
Sahara, Austria would have preferred explicit support
for the Secretary-General’s call on the parties for a
continuous and constructive dialogue with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, with a view to ensuring respect for the human
rights of the people of Western Sahara in the territory
and the refugee camps.
At the same time, Austria strongly supports the
resolution’s call for progress in the human dimension
of the conflict. The programme of visits by air should
be continued without further delay and the visits by
land inaugurated, as called for in this resolution.
We urge the parties to resume their dialogue as
soon as possible and to work in good faith and without
preconditions to overcome the impasse and provide the
people of Western Sahara with the prospect of a
dignified future of their choice.
Thus, Austria will continue to actively support all
United Nations efforts towards a just, lasting and
mutually acceptable solution that will provide for selfdetermination in accordance with international law.
Austria stands ready to assist the Secretary-General
and the parties in advancing their dialogue towards that
goal.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly supports the negotiation process
under the auspices of Ambassador Ross, which, as this
Council has long maintained, should lead to a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution that
provides for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara. The unanimous adoption of resolution
1920 (2010) today sends an important message of the
Council’s support for Ambassador Ross in his efforts to
build confidence between the parties.
The failure to resolve this conflict affects both the
peoples of the region and regional cooperation to
address the serious security threats that it faces. We
strongly urge all those involved to remain committed to
the negotiation process and to demonstrate further
political will towards a solution by drawing on and

6

developing the current proposals. They should avoid
activity that could damage the negotiations, including
acts that could violate the ceasefire agreements, which
have played an important role in preserving peace.
We share the Secretary-General’s concerns about
the human dimension of the conflict and his call to
address it through confidence-building measures. We
welcome the expansion of the family visits programme,
and we urge the parties to cooperate fully with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to implement their agreement.
We also share the Secretary-General’s concerns
about the human rights situation. We believe that
transparency and openness on human rights will do
much to establish trust and confidence between the
parties and thereby enable further progress in the
negotiations. As noted by the Secretary-General, it is
important to ensure respect for the human rights of the
people of Western Sahara, both in the territory and in
the refugee camps. We encourage the parties to make
progress before next year by engaging with the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, as called
for by the Secretary-General, and by exploring options
for the creation of other mechanisms to monitor the
human rights situation.
We have today renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) for another year. In line with our
ongoing discussions on peacekeeping, we underline the
need for the Council to take a strategic view of all its
peacekeeping operations. We should ensure that
MINURSO is making a positive contribution to the
resolution of the conflict in Western Sahara and not
mandate a mission that entrenches the status quo. In
this respect, we ask the Secretariat to develop suitable
benchmarks against which the progress of MINURSO
in achieving its mandate can be measured and to
include an assessment of such progress in the next
report with a view to its future configuration.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Resolution 1920 (2010), extending by a
further 12 months the mandate of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, is the
result of prolonged and complex discussions, first
within the Group of Friends and then within the
Security Council. Working on the resolution, the
Russian Federation saw the need to draft a Security
Council decision that would ensure progress in the

10-33760

S/PV.6305

negotiating process and be of use to the Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Christopher Ross,
whose efforts we support.
The decision of the Security Council meets that
need. The resolution achieves a good balance between
the interests of the two parties and will help them to
preserve and, we hope, consolidate their progress
towards reaching a fair, lasting and mutually beneficial
solution to the problem in Western Sahara. We are
convinced that the resolution meets the criteria of
impartiality and objectivity and, to the greatest

10-33760

possible extent, takes into account the perspectives of
the parties. We believe that the resolution adopted
today will facilitate effective progress in the settlement
process in Western Sahara, with the support of the
United Nations.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

7
