General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

256

Geneva, Vienna, Nairobi and the headquarters of regional
commissions 112 and the related report of the Advisory Com­
mittee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;113
2. Adopts, on an interim basis, the recommendations
made by the Advisory Committee in its report;
3. Decides to consider fully the question of the con­
tractual status of language teachers at its thirty-eighth ses­
sion on the basis of an updated report to be submitted by
the Secretary-General.
114th plenary meeting
21 December l 982

37/238. Review of the financing of the administrative
costs of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

report on the major issues identified by the Committee,
including changes in the administrative structure that he
considers appropriate.
114th plenary meeting
21 December 1982

37/240. Travel and Subsistence Regulations of the International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 85 (I) of 11 December 1946,
Approves the revised Travel and Subsistence Regulations

of the International Court of Justice as contained in the annex
to the present resolution.
114th plenary meeting
21 December 1982

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on

the review of the financing of the administrative costs of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees114 and the related report of the Advisory Com­
mittee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,115
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Endorses the opinion of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions that decisions on
the proposals of the Secretary-General concerning the trans­
fer of .posts should be taken on a case-by-case basis in the
context of his proposed programme budgets for the 19841985 and subsequent bienniums;
3. Concurs in the other comments and observations of
the Advisory Committee in its report.
114th plenary meeting
21 December l 982

37/239. Report of the Committee of Governmental Ex­
perts to Evaluate the Present Structure of the
Secretariat in the Administrative, Finance and
Personnel Areas
The General Assembly
1. Takes note with appreciation of the final report of

the Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the
Present Structure of the Secretariat in the Administrative,
Finance and Personnel Areas;116
2. Commends the report of the Committee to the Sec­
retary-General;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take into account
the suggestions highlighted in paragraph 39 of the report of
the Committee, as well as the related views of the Fifth
Committee thereon, in his consideration of the administra­
tive structure of the Secretariat and his present review on
decentralizing the decision-making in administrative matters
referred to in paragraph 25 and in annex I, paragraph 15,
of the report;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Gen­
eral Assembly, at its thirty-ninth session, within the context
of the programme budget for the biennium 1984-1985, a

112 A/C.5/37/63.

113 Official Records of the General Assembly.

Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 7A (A/3711/Add. l-24). document A/37/7/Add.24.
11• AJC.5/37/1

and Corr. l.

115 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 7A (A/3711/Add. 1-24), document A/37/7/Add.3.
116 lbid., Supplement No. 44 (A/37/44).

ANNEX
Travel and Subsistence Regulations of the
International Court of Justice

Article I
TRAVEL EXPENSES

I. The United Nations shall pay, subject to the conditions of these
regulations, the travel expenses of the members of the International Court
of Justice necessarily incurred on duly authorized journeys. The following
shall be deemed to be duly authorized journeys:
(a) For members of the Court and one close relative residing with them
to attend sessions at the seat of the Court;
(b) For members of the Court and one close relative residing with them
to attend a session which is held at a place other than the seat of the Court;
(c) In the case of the President of the Court, who by virtue of Article
22 of the Statute must reside at the seat of the Court:
(i)

At the time of his election to the Presidency, a journey from his
home to the seat of the Court in connection with any transfer of
residence;

(ii)

In the calendar year following that of his election to the Presidency,
a return journey from the seat of the Court to his home at the time
of that election;

(iii)

At the end of his term of office as President, a journey from the
seat of the Court to his home at the time of his election to that
office, or to any other place provided that the cost of the journey
is no greater.

Where the spouse and/or dependent children of the President reside with
him at the seat of the Court, the United Nations shall reimburse their travel
expenses for journeys undertaken in conjunction with (i), (ii) and (iii)
above;
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (a) above, in the
case of any member of the Court other than the President who takes up
residence at the seat of the Court in compliance with Article 23 of its
Statute, solely:
(i)

A journey from his home, at the time of appointment, to the seat
of the Court, in connection with the transfer of his residence;

(ii)

A return journey every second calendar year after the year of
appointment from the seat of the Court to his home at the time
of appointment;

(iii)

A journey upon termination of appointment from the seat of the
Court to his home at the time of appointment, or to any other
place provided that the cost of the journey is not greater than the
cost of the journey to his home at the time of appointment.
Where the spouse and/or dependent children of the member of the Court
reside with him at the seat of the Court, the United Nations shall reimburse
the travel expenses for journeys undertaken in conjunction with (i). (ii)
and (iii) of the present subparagraph;
(iv)

Any journey within the meaning of subparagraph (b) above;

(e) Journeys of any ad hoe judge chosen under Article 31 of the Statute
of the Court and one close relative residing with him, in accordance with
