254

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

37/2'3<,.

Respect for the privileges and immunities of
officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/212 of 17 December 1980
and 36/232 of 18 December 198 I ,
1. Takes note with concern of the report submitted to
the General Assembly by the Secretary-General on behalf
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, 94 which
showed, inter alia, a marked deterioration in the observance
of the principles related to privileges and immunities of
officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies
and related organizations;
2. Reaffirms the above-mentioned resolutions;
3. Welcomes the measures approved by the SecretaryGeneral to enhance the safety and protection of international
civil servants as outlined in his report;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to suggest in
his annual report on this issue to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session further steps designed
to alleviate the present situation.
l 14th plenary meeting
21 December 1982
B

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
respect for the privileges and immunities of officials of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies and related
organizations, 94
Drawing attention to the unprecedented character of the
mass arrest by the Israeli authorities in the territory of Lebanon of a great number of the officials of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and as mentioned in paragraph 6 of the SecretaryGeneral's report,
1. Calls upon the Secretary-General to take measures
without delay to establish the whereabouts of, to find out
the charges made against and to arrange a meeting with the
officials of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East incarcerated by the
Israeli authorities in Lebanon, in order to obtain their earliest
release;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to inform Member
States promptly about measures taken under paragraph I
above and about their results.
l 14th plenary meeting
21 December 1982

under the relevant resolutions ot the General Assembly, to
payment from United Nations funds of any or all travel
expenses, subsistence allowance and honorariums in connection with their attendance at sessions of the said body,
is designated as the preparatory body for a special conference, the members' entitlement to such payments shall not
extend to sessions at which the body in question acts as the
preparatory body for the special conference, unless the Assembly decides otherwise;

II
TRAVEL OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE LEAST DEVELOPED
COUNTRIES TO ATTEND REGIONAL PREPARATORY MEETINGS FOR THE SEVENTH UNITED NATIONS CONGRESS ON
THE PREVENTION OF CRIME AND THE TREATMENT OF
OFFENDERS

Authorizes, as an exception to the provisions of paragraph 2 (b) of its resolution 1798 (XVII) of 11 December
1962, the necessary resources for the implementation of paragraph 10 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/
29 of 4 May 1982;

Ill
FIRST-CLASS TRAVEL IN THE UNITED NATIONS

I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
first-class travel in the United Nations95 and the related oral
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;96
2. Concurs with the interpretation of paragraph 2 (b)
of its resolution 32/198 of 21 December 1977 proposed by
the Secretary-General in his report, in respect of the travel
of members of organs, subsidiary organs or other bodies
established by the General Assembly whose membership
consists of persons serving in their individual capacities and
chairmen of intergovernmental committees who travel at
United Nations expense;

IV
INTERIM ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
JUTE COUNCIL

Decides that, should the appropriations approved at the
current session as an advance to the International Jute Council not be required in 1983 or should they be used only partially,
any uncommitted balance remaining at the end of the biennium 1982-1983 should be treated in accordance with the
provisions of regulations 5.2 (d), 4.3 and 4.4 of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations, and that the provisions of General Assembly resolution 36/116 B of 10
December 1981 should not apply to any such balance;
V
COMMUNICATIONS IN THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM

37 /237.

Questions relating to the programme budget
for the biennium 1982-1983

The General Assembly

'fRA VEL AND SUBSISTENCE COSTS IN RESPECT OF MEMBERS
OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL PREPARATORY BODIES FOR SPECIAL CONFERENCES

Decides that, when a commission, committee or other
intergovernmental body, the members of which are entitled,
94

A/C.5/37/34 and Corr. I.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit entitled "Communications in the United
Nations system" ,97 of the comments thereon of the
Secretary-General 98 and of the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, 99 as well as of the related oral report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions; 100
9

A/C.5/37/18 and Corr.I.
Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirtv-,,eventh Session.
Fifth Committee, 22nd meeting. para. 61.
·
·
97
See A/37/372.
9
• A/37/372/Add. l, annex.
99
A/37/372/Add.2, annex.
100
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtv-w1·,•nth Session.
Fifth Committee. 39th meeting. paras. 7 and 8.
'

96

VIII.

255

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

VI
INTERNATIONAL COMPUTING CENTRE

Approves the 1983 budget estimates of the International
Computing Centre, amounting to $5,580,200, as contained
in the report of the Secretary-General; 101

Nairobi 107 and of the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 108
2. Concurs with the observations and recommendations
of the Advisory Committee contained in paragraphs 15 and
16 of its report;

XI
VII
INTERORGANIZATION SECRETARIAT SERVICES FOR
INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Approves the proposal made by the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination at its third regular session in 1982
for the continuation in 1983 of interorganization secretariat
services in the field of information systems at the same real
level as embodied in the budget of the secretariat of the
Inter-Organization Board for Information Systems for the
biennium 1980-1981 ;

VIII
USE OF CONSULT ANTS AND EXPERTS IN THE
UNITED NATIONS

l. Talres note of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit, 102
the comments thereon of the Secretary-General 103 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions; 104
2. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his future reports on consultants and experts detailed information
on the employment of former staff members, including the
date of separation from service, the period of post-separation
employment and the amount paid to the former staff member;
3. Decides that, as an interim measure, no former staff
member who is in receipt of a pension benefit from the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shall receive from
United Nations funds, regular budget or extrabudgetary, for
work performed by him or her under contract or a special
service agreement, emoluments in a total amount exceeding
$12,000 in any one calendar year;
4. Decides further to review the situation at its thirtyninth session in the light of the additional information to be
provided by the Secretary-General in response to the request
addressed to him in paragraph 2 above;

IX
UNITED NATIONS ACCOMMODATION AT NAIROBI

ADEQUACY OF THE CONFERENCE FACILITIES OF THE
EcONOMIC COMMISSION FOR AFRICA AT ADDIS ABABA

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
adequacy of the conference facilities of the Economic Commission for Africa at Addis Ababa 109 and of the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions; 110

XII
CHANGES IN THE TOP ECHELON OF THE SECRETARIAT

Approves, with effect from I January 1983, the following
reclassifications:
(a) To the level of Under-Secretary-General, the
posts of:
(i) Director-General of the United Nations Office at
Vienna;
(ii) Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East;
(b) To the level of Assistant Secretary-General, the posts
of:
(i) Head of the Centre against Apartheid of the Department of Political and Security Council Affairs;
(ii) Head of the Centre for Human Rights;

XIII
Joe CLASSIFICATION AND CAREER DEVELOPMENT OF
LANGUAGE STAFF

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
job classification and career development of language staff; 111
XIV
EDUCATION GRANT FOR CERTAIN FULL-TIME OFFICIALS
OTHER THAN MEMBERS OF THE SECRETARIAT

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations accommodation at Nairobi 105 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions; 106
2. Approves the proposals of the Secretary-General as
described in paragraphs 24 and 27 of his report, subject to
the conditions specified in paragraph I O of the report of the
Advisory Committee;

I. Takes note of the views expressed by Member States
on the question of the education grant for certain full-time
officials other than members of the Secretariat;
2. Decides to consider this question as part of an overall
review of compensation and other conditions of service of
the full-time officials other than members of the Secretariat;
3. Further decides that this review shall be carried out
at its thirty-eighth session on the basis of a report by the
Secretary-General;

X

xv

COMMON SERVICES AT THE UNITED NATIONS
ACCOMMODATION AT NAIROBI

CONTRACTUAL STATUS OF LANGUAGE TEACHERS

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
common services at the United Nations accommodation at
IOI

A/C.5/37/40.

rn2 See A/37/358 and Corr.2.
• 03
104

A/37/358/Add. I, annex.
A/37/684.
'°'00 A/C.5/37/66.
'
Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Session, Supplement No. 7A (A/3717/Add.l-24), document A/37/7/Add.l7.
sect. A.

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the contractual status of language teachers at Headquarters.
107
A/C.5137/49.
"'" Official Records of thf' General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session. Supplement No. 7A (A/3717/Add. l-24), document A/3717/Add.17.
sect. B.
100 A/C. 5/37/6 7.
"" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Se.uion.
Supplement No. 7A (A/3717/Add. l-24), document A/3717/Add.18.
111
AIC.5/37/65/Add.2 and Corr. I.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

256

Geneva, Vienna, Nairobi and the headquarters of regional
commissions 112 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 113
2. Adopts, on an interim basis, the recommendations
made by the Advisory Committee in its report;
3. Decides to consider fully the question of the contractual status of language teachers at its thirty-eighth session on the basis of an updated report to be submitted by
the Secretary-General.
114th plenary meeting
21 December l 982

37/238.

Review of the financing of the administrative
costs of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the review of the financing of the administrative costs of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees 114 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 115
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Endorses the opinion of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions that decisions on
the proposals of the Secretary-General concerning the transfer of .posts should be taken on a case-by-case basis in the
context of his proposed programme budgets for the 19841985 and subsequent bienniums;
3. Concurs in the other comments and observations of
the Advisory Committee in its report.
114th plenary meeting
21 December l 982
37/239.

Report of the Committee of Governmental Ex-

perts to Evaluate the Present Structure of the
Secretariat in the Administrative, Finance and
Personnel Areas
The General Assembly
1. Takes note with appreciation of the final report of
the Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the
Present Structure of the Secretariat in the Administrative,
Finance and Personnel Areas; 116
2. Commends the report of the Committee to the Secretary-General;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take into account
the suggestions highlighted in paragraph 39 of the report of
the Committee, as well as the related views of the Fifth
Committee thereon, in his consideration of the administrative structure of the Secretariat and his present review on
decentralizing the decision-making in administrative matters
referred to in paragraph 25 and in annex I, paragraph 15,
of the report;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its thirty-ninth session, within the context
of the programme budget for the biennium 1984-1985, a

112 A/C.5/37/63.
113

Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 7A (A/3711/Add. l-24). document A/3711/Add.24.
11 • AJC.5/37/1 and Corr. l.
115
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 7A (A/3711/Add. 1-24), document A/3717/Add.3.
116 lbid., Supplement No. 44 (A/37/44).

report on the major issues identified by the Committee,
including changes in the administrative structure that he
considers appropriate.
114th plenary meeting
21 December 1982

37/240.

Travel and Subsistence Regulations of the International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 85 (I) of 11 December 1946,
Approves the revised Travel and Subsistence Regulations
of the International Court of Justice as contained in the annex
to the present resolution.
114th plenary meeting
21 December 1982
ANNEX
Travel and Subsistence Regulations of the
International Court of Justice
Article I
TRAVEL EXPENSES

I. The United Nations shall pay, subject to the conditions of these
regulations, the travel expenses of the members of the International Court
of Justice necessarily incurred on duly authorized journeys. The following
shall be deemed to be duly authorized journeys:
(a) For members of the Court and one close relative residing with them
to attend sessions at the seat of the Court;
(b) For members of the Court and one close relative residing with them
to attend a session which is held at a place other than the seat of the Court;
(c) In the case of the President of the Court, who by virtue of Article
22 of the Statute must reside at the seat of the Court:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

At the time of his election to the Presidency, a journey from his
home to the seat of the Court in connection with any transfer of
residence;
In the calendar year following that of his election to the Presidency,
a return journey from the seat of the Court to his home at the time
of that election;
At the end of his term of office as President, a journey from the
seat of the Court to his home at the time of his election to that
office, or to any other place provided that the cost of the journey
is no greater.

Where the spouse and/or dependent children of the President reside with
him at the seat of the Court, the United Nations shall reimburse their travel
expenses for journeys undertaken in conjunction with (i), (ii) and (iii)
above;
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (a) above, in the
case of any member of the Court other than the President who takes up
residence at the seat of the Court in compliance with Article 23 of its
Statute, solely:
(i)

A journey from his home, at the time of appointment, to the seat
of the Court, in connection with the transfer of his residence;
(ii) A return journey every second calendar year after the year of
appointment from the seat of the Court to his home at the time
of appointment;
(iii) A journey upon termination of appointment from the seat of the
Court to his home at the time of appointment, or to any other
place provided that the cost of the journey is not greater than the
cost of the journey to his home at the time of appointment.
Where the spouse and/or dependent children of the member of the Court
reside with him at the seat of the Court, the United Nations shall reimburse
the travel expenses for journeys undertaken in conjunction with (i). (ii)
and (iii) of the present subparagraph;
(iv) Any journey within the meaning of subparagraph (b) above;
(e) Journeys of any ad hoe judge chosen under Article 31 of the Statute
of the Court and one close relative residing with him, in accordance with
