United Nations

S/PV.6769

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6769th meeting
Monday, 14 May 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/275)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-33797 (E)

*1233797*

S/PV.6769

and instability that remain far too close to the surface
some 13 years after the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999).

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/275)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/275, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: During the last briefing to the Security
Council, in February, Assistant Secretary-General
Edmond Mulet urged it to see 2012 as a year for fresh
re-examination of the international effort in Kosovo
(see S/PV.6713). He suggested that 2012 would offer
both opportunities and risks to the goals of peaceful
resolution and longer-term stability in Kosovo and in
the region. That was borne out by developments during
the first quarter of the year and is well documented in
the report (S/2012/275) before the Council today. Some
of the developments during the reporting period give
us reason for cautious optimism and satisfaction.
Others are stark reminders of the persistent fragility

2

I believe that the stage is now set for more
decisive efforts from the international community to
tackle fundamental issues before the end of 2012.
Accordingly, alongside the report of the SecretaryGeneral, I wish to implore the members of the Council
to consider anew the possibilities for greater political
consensus and harmony of effort in the application of
resources. As matters stand today, business as usual is
not only proving inadequate to guarantee stability, but
it is also expensive and often inexcusably inefficient in
achieving progress towards a more durable peace in the
region.
Before briefly highlighting a few key trends
during the latest reporting period, I wish to
acknowledge an important development that took place
only eight days ago in Serbia and in Kosovo. Voting in
the Serbian general and presidential elections was
facilitated safely and calmly in Kosovo on 6 May. Even
though political agreement from the parties came very
late, a highly professional facilitation operation was
organized and carried out by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), in line
with the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
The OSCE engagement with Serbia was
instrumental in diminishing tensions related to
controversies about voting in Kosovo in the Serbian
elections. The OSCE’s exemplary performance was
greatly assisted by the contributions of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo
authorities, which provided essential support and
helped to ensure that voting proceeded without major
incident.
That successful operation demonstrates how the
international community, by operating in a united
manner, can effectively manage sensitive issues and
support the emergence of peaceful solutions supported
by all sides. OSCE facilitation efforts for the second
round of voting in the presidential election will again
be conducted on 20 May. I call on all concerned to
show on that occasion the same sense of responsibility
and cooperation as that which was demonstrated on
6 May.
There were further positive developments during
the reporting period that I would like to present briefly

12-33797

S/PV.6769

to the Council. Ties between the Western Balkans and
the European Union took significant steps forward with
the decisions to grant candidate status to Serbia and
launch a feasibility study in Kosovo. The organization
of institutional presences of the European Union (EU)
on the ground since February have been consolidated
under the fresh leadership of the EU Special
Representative in Kosovo, Mr. Samuel Žbogar, who
has moved swiftly to prioritize activities on the ground
and has already formed close working partnerships
with other key stakeholders.
In spite of the fact that two municipalities in
northern Kosovo proceeded with plans to conduct their
own local elections outside the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), both Belgrade and the
international community have taken unambiguous
positions on that matter, leaving no doubt about the
question of legitimacy. I have impressed upon local
leaders in the north that they will need to pursue a
different path if they wish to attain such legitimacy. I
am currently leading a consultative process to explore
possibilities for promoting more legitimate and viable
local representation, and will call upon support from
the Security Council for any emerging consensus in the
future.
In spite tensions in the north, including in relation
to the matter of elections, there has been some progress
in that area, which is noteworthy. In the preceding
reporting period, EULEX had reached a point at which
it enjoyed almost no freedom of movement in the
north. Since then, it has implemented new outreach
strategies, including more regular dismounted patrols
and other modes of direct communication, which are
having an impact, although so far not in the area of
Zubin Potok. Our own institutional presence in the
north is operating in close collaboration with KFOR,
EULEX and the OSCE, among others, to ensure
common messaging and outreach towards the
communities.
Regrettably, some negative trends have also
continued during the reporting period. The most
important of those trends has been a concentration of
serious security and criminal incidents throughout
ethnically mixed areas, but particularly in the north,
which was documented during the period; such
incidents were occurring before and have continued to
occur since the Serbian election. While the occurrence
of any such incident could significantly inflame
tensions, a greater concentration and frequency of

12-33797

incidents in the reporting period is ample evidence that
the status quo is not a stable one.
Unfortunately, incendiary and opportunistic
political rhetoric has been the frequent response to
incidents by local politicians on all sides. Rather than
assuming responsibility for reducing tensions, they
instead make choices to inflame passions in what
amount to efforts at short-term political point-scoring.
These continue to exact a high price on the prospects
for achieving far more serious goals. The tit-for-tat
police arrests during the reporting period, directed
from both Pristina and Belgrade, illustrate the same
fundamental problem.
The power of the EU perspective for the region,
as an incentive for the parties to overcome differences
and to be able to enhance their prosperity and political
futures, is absolutely critical. Regrettably, this
incentive is itself sometimes undermined by a
demonstrable absence of unity of purpose among key
international actors. In such circumstances, the results
obtained from substantial international investments,
primarily in the mandated international presences, will
continue to be less than what they could or should be.
As the European Union steps forward in more
institutional leadership roles, its room for manoeuvre
and effectiveness will depend heavily upon strength or
lack of broader international consensus. Closer
cohesion of efforts among international actors,
including members of the Security Council, may help
to facilitate efficient the rationalization of efforts on
the ground. A clearer sense of perspective and common
purpose is therefore necessary to improve the overall
efficiency of the use of limited international resources.
For example, the European Union is currently
considering an important review of activities and plans
for EULEX, which operates under the overall authority
of the United Nations. I hope that this opportunity will
be used to take full stock, in a coordinated manner, of
the challenges that lie ahead. In this context, the
disposition of stewardship over the key executive
powers given under resolution 1244 (1999), and
subsequently entrusted to EULEX, need to follow a
careful analysis of the implications for progress
towards the original objectives set for the mission.
I also continue to stress that our common efforts
should not flag on issues that are fundamental to
reconciliation and the protection of the rights of
minority communities throughout Kosovo. These

3

S/PV.6769

especially include progress in determining the fate of
the missing, creating conditions for safe voluntary
returns, the fair adjudication and resolution of property
claims, and the full and effective implementation of the
legal frameworks for the protection and preservation of
the cultural and religious heritage. And I reiterate my
call on the Kosovo authorities to improve their
outreach messages and efforts, and to clearly
demonstrate their intention to listen to and take into
account the concerns of the Kosovo Serb community
north and south of the River Ibër/Ibar.
With the conclusion of elections in Serbia, we
expect a new Government soon to be in place in
Belgrade, with a fresh mandate also to look into
matters related to Kosovo. Importantly, general
elections in Kosovo are not foreseen for the next
18 months. Accordingly, we are approaching a period
in which it may be possible to explore avenues of
political engagement more removed from the
rhetorically charged atmosphere of the frequent
political campaigns and elections.
To the extent that the parties can increasingly find
ways to put the past behind them and focus instead on
shared interests in prosperity and stability, new space
may open for settling some of the differences that have
remained hitherto unresolved. Lessons and limitations
exposed in the current framework of technical
dialogue, especially concerning follow-up and
implementation, should
be used
to inform
improvements during the next phase.
The international community now faces
opportunities alongside the familiar risks. Achieving
better results will require, in practice, not only renewed
energy and focus on the part of those working on the
ground and around the region, but, I would submit,
also from the members of the Council and all among
the international community who have invested heavily
in Kosovo.
I wish to thank the Council members for their
continuing support of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, and ask them to
assume a proactive approach to the continuing
challenges. I urge them to use their authority and
influence with the parties to encourage them to engage
in good faith — something which is, in the end, very
clearly in their own interests. And above all, I ask for
Council members’ support in forging increased unity of
purpose that may help the sides and all of us to deal

4

with unfinished business and to reach substantial and
sustainable solutions sooner rather than later.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council pursuant
to resolution 1244 (1999).
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Farid Zarif, and I thank him for his statement.
The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is a crucial pillar of
peace and stability in Kosovo. We support its important
work, and concur with the Secretary-General’s
statement in the report before us today that “actions
undertaken by the international actors operating within
the framework of the United Nations and resolution
1244 (1999) need to be strategically aligned and
closely coordinated” (S/2012/275, para. 62). This
includes the possible reconfiguration of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX),
mentioned in annex I of the report.
Unfortunately, no details as to what these
structural changes might involve have been provided.
Our long-standing position on the engagement of the
European Union (EU) in Kosovo remains unchanged.
We believe that the EU should sustain its status-neutral
efforts in order to build the missing institutional
environment and improve the dismal societal
conditions in the province.
The Secretary-General’s assessment is that
“tension and confrontation on the ground continue to
cause tangible risks to peace and stability in Kosovo
and the region” (ibid., para. 58). Such a precarious
state of affairs has disproportionally affected the
Kosovo Serb community. The report states that interethnic crimes, “including intimidation, assault, theft,
arson, vandalism and damage to Serbian Orthodox
churches and household property, [appear] to be on the
increase from the same period one year ago” (ibid.,
para. 21).
Serbia’s Ministry for Kosovo records more than
180 separate attacks against Serbs, their possessions or
their holy sites that took place in the first quarter of
2012, at an average of more than two per day. Such
figures help explain what the report qualifies as the

12-33797

S/PV.6769

“continuously declining trend” of Kosovo Serbs
coming back to the province. According to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, only 33 of them returned in the first three
and a half months of 2012. This is about half the
number who did so during the same period last year.
Since our last meeting in this Chamber, Pristina
has unfortunately continued to engage in a campaign of
intimidation against Serbs in Kosovo. For instance, in
late February, six of our nationals who reside in
Kosovo but work in central Serbia as clerks in an
Interior Ministry branch office were arrested on what
the report calls “political charges”. They remained
incarcerated for several weeks, and are now under
house arrest. On five different occasions in less than a
month’s time, Kosovo police arrested dozens of people
tasked with distributing pension checks to tens of
thousands of Kosovo Serb retirees, depriving them of
their only source of income. During the same period, a
number of prominent Kosovo Serbs were thrown in
jail, including several elected officials.
Another serious incident took place in Pristina on
4 April. The director of Serbia’s Dialogue
Implementation Office was assaulted by militants of
the Self-Determination Movement parliamentary party.
That happened as he was leaving the building of the
so-called Kosovo Cadaster, which is located just across
the street from EULEX headquarters in the centre of
Pristina. He had travelled to the province at the
invitation of EULEX to discuss how to operationalize
previously reached agreements in the technical
dialogue facilitated by the EU.
The local policemen assigned to protect him and
his delegation completely failed to do so. Regrettably,
neither they nor any other Kosovo Police Service
personnel have been investigated for misconduct or
incompetence as a result of that attack — or, for that
matter, with regard to the assault on President Tadic’s
convoy at Christmas near the monastery of Visoki
Decani.
In protest letters to United Nations and EU
officials, Serbia’s Prime Minister, Mr. Mirko
Cvetković, wrote that the attack was yet another
attempt by extremists to intimidate the Serbian
population in the southern province and prevent
dialogue, the implementation of agreements and a
peaceful settlement of the problem. The Prime Minister
called for greater involvement of all the international

12-33797

missions in the field, as well as a more adequate
assessment of security risks and an appropriate level
protection.
The eighth anniversary of the pogrom against
Serbs in Kosovo took place during the reporting
period. On 17 March 2004, 35 churches and
monasteries, many dating back to the fourteenth
century or earlier, were damaged or destroyed. Dozens
were killed and hundreds were injured. Thousands of
homes and businesses were burned to the ground. More
than 8,000 Kosovo Serbs were ethnically cleansed
from their homes.
At that time, Human Rights Watch wrote that
“large ethnic Albanian crowds had acted with ferocious
efficiency to rid their areas of all remaining vestiges of
a Serb presence”. Close to a decade later, the
Secretary-General tells us in his report that
“significant resistance remains in the Kosovo
Albanian population against legislative measures
and their implementation aiming at the protection
of Serb cultural and religious sites, and a gap
persists between the commitments made by the
Kosovo authorities in this area and their
implementation.” (S/2012/275, para. 45)
Today the desecration of Orthodox churches and
graveyards
in
Kosovo
continues
unabated.
Unfortunately, the report does not list any of the
specifics concerning those attacks against our holy
shrines. For instance, two of the four UNESCO World
Heritage Sites in the province were targeted on the
same day. On 31 March, graffiti appeared at the
monastery of Visoki Decani, reading “Property of the
Kosovo Liberation Army”. A few hours later, an
extremely hazardous submunitions device was
discovered on the grounds of the Church of the Holy
Virgin of Ljeviska, located in the old quarter of the
ancient Serbian capital of Prizren. It had been planted
just behind the eastern wall of the sanctuary, metres
away from the altar. That took place mere days before
the UNESCO-sponsored restoration of frescos
destroyed during the March 2004 pogrom was to
commence. Between 17 March and 19 April, parish
churches in a number of enclaves in south Kosovo
were desecrated, vandalized or, in one instance, fired
upon by an automatic weapon.
During the reporting period, not a single
perpetrator was arrested for committing hate crimes
against places that represent the core of Serbian

5

S/PV.6769

national identity. No senior ethnic Albanian official
spoke out against acts of desecration, either.

the Council of Europe, the OSCE and any institutions
or agencies in the United Nations system.

On 6 May, Serbian presidential and parliamentary
elections were held in both north and south Kosovo, in
accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of
Serbia and resolution 1244 (1999). I want to
acknowledge the efforts of both Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zarif and Secretary General
Zannier of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to help Serbs exercise
their democratic right to vote. I would also like to
thank Commander Erhard Drews of the Kosovo Force
for ordering several hundred additional troops to
Kosovo as a deterrent. That ensured that threats to use
force to prevent the elections from taking place, such
as the one made in mid-March by the Kosovo
Liberation Army’s war-time spokesman and current
Chairman of the Kosovo Assembly, Mr. Jakup
Krasnigi, could not be carried out. The second and
final round of presidential elections will take place on
Sunday, 20 May. We expect that all the necessary
security measures will stay in place so that the vote can
be held in safety, as was the case on 6 May.

The report states that the room for dialogue in the
coming months may be narrowed if calm is not
sustained, particularly if public responses to incidents
and provocations on the ground are imprudent. We
share the Secretary-General’s apprehension, especially
as it appears that ethnic Albanian public opinion is
turning increasingly hostile to the continuation of any
sort of negotiations. I want to underline that Serbia
remains fully committed to the process.

It was with regret that we took note of the letter
dated 22 March by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif addressed to Serbia’s Minister
for Kosovo and Metohija, Mr. Goran Bogdanović, in
which he indicated UNMIK’s inability to organize
local elections in the province that comply with
resolution 1244 (1999). In response, we have proposed
to start jointly monitoring developments relevant to
conducting such elections, with the aim of revisiting
the issue over the next six months.
In late February, an agreement was reached in the
ninth round of the EU-facilitated technical dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina on the sensitive matter
of regional representation and cooperation. Some of
the details are mentioned in paragraphs 13 and 14 of
the report before the Council. That status-neutral
arrangement, which is in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), allows the Pristina authorities to
participate in meetings as a non-State actor in the
regional organizations whose aim, according to the
agreed terms, is to promote cooperation or integration
in the Balkan region. I want to be very clear that the
agreement does not extend to multilateral forums in
which membership is reserved for sovereign States,
such as the South-East European Cooperation Process,

6

Disagreements on status must not impede our
ability to act in concert on resolving practical issues.
Much work remains to be done in improving the lives
of the people through talks conducted in good faith.
Moreover, as President Tadić has repeatedly said, we
must provide for ironclad, internationally guaranteed
assurances that safeguard our interests inside the
province by securing, first, a realistic solution for north
Kosovo; secondly, protecting our enclaves in south
Kosovo; thirdly, preserving Serbian identity and
religious heritage throughout the province; and,
fourthly, settling private and commercial property
claims.
Between the end of the reporting period and
today’s Security Council meeting, disturbing
developments have set further back the cause of justice
in Kosovo. The most glaring instance is the case of
Fatmir Limaj, a former senior commander of the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and close associate of
the so-called Prime Minister of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi.
On 23 April, prosecutors failed to meet a 24-month
statutory deadline to file charges against Limaj for
money laundering and organized crime during his
tenure as the so-called Minister of Transport.
According
to
a
prominent
Pristina-based
non-governmental organization, Limaj can no longer
be indicted for the misuse and disappearance of about
€80 million in public funds. A few days later, on
2 May, Limaj was acquitted of war crimes for the 1999
torture and killing of Serbs in the infamous Klecka
prison camp. That came in the wake of the dismissal by
the court of all evidence provided by Mr. Agim Zogaj,
the only witness who lived long enough for prosecutors
to depose. He died under mysterious circumstances
while in a witness protection programme, two months
before the trial began.

12-33797

S/PV.6769

The not-guilty verdict shocked Serbian public
opinion. The families of the victims were outraged.
According to Serbia’s War Crimes Prosecutor, the
judgement legitimately raised the question as to
whether the Kosovo courts will ever convict a single
person of war crimes against Kosovo Serbs. It is
encouraging, however, that the EULEX Special
Prosecutor’s Office announced that it would appeal the
ruling.
We remain seriously apprehensive with regard to
another case purportedly involving Limaj, as well as
Thaçi and several other KLA figures. We have
studiously followed the investigation launched by
EULEX into the allegations made in a December 2010
Council of Europe report entitled “Investigation of
allegations of inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo”. According to
that report, hundreds of Serbs were abducted in
Kosovo before, during and immediately after the 1999
conflict and were sent to secret detention camps in the
Republic of Albania, where many of them were singled
out for forced surgery before being murdered. Their
internal organs were extracted and sold on the
international black market. Annex 1 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report states that the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force has continued to develop its
capabilities and has progressed with its work in that
case. However, we believe that the lack of transparency
in the conduct of its inquiry should be a matter of great
concern for the Council.
During the current reporting period, many critical
questions, including those related to accountability,
mandate, jurisdiction and witness protection and
relocation, did not receive adequate answers.
Uncovering the full truth about those monstrous
allegations — unprecedented in the history of
warfare — must remain our top priority. As a recent
Amnesty International report concluded,
“More than 400 Serbian families are still waiting
for the bodies of their relatives to be found; many
believe that their son, father or brother may be
among the Serbs taken to Albania. They are still
waiting for justice”.
The unilateral declaration of independence by the
ethnic Albanian authorities of our southern province of
Kosovo and Metohija, on 17 February 2008, continues
to divide the world. As the Secretary-General states in
today’s report, we face “a widening perception that

12-33797

fundamental resolution remains elusive for the
underlying issues of the conflict” (ibid, para. 4). At the
heart of all our difficulties lies the unresolved status of
Kosovo.
I would like to express my country’s sincere
gratitude to the vast majority of States Members of the
United Nations, as well as to the majority of those
seated in the Security Council, that respect Serbia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. I appeal to them to
continue to refrain from recognizing any solution to
Kosovo that is not the product of a clear agreement
between the parties. That is the only way to help us
reach an equitable negotiated settlement in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999). Despite all protestations
to the contrary, any other outcome would, in effect,
constitute a deeply dangerous precedent that would
permanently threaten the stability and borders of many
States Members of the United Nations.
Serbia has put diplomacy at the forefront of its
peaceful efforts to undo the damage caused by the
unilateral declaration of independence. We took to the
task vigorously, as would any other dignified country
that found itself in our situation. But for the first time
in our region’s history, the impulse for vengeance and
retribution was consciously suppressed. For the first
time, when faced with a threat of such magnitude, a
Balkan nation did not reach for its sword. Serbia’s
resolve was not, nor will it be, bellicose or belligerent.
We shall, however, stand firm and unequivocal in
resisting attempts to partition our homeland, claim our
heritage and compel our citizens to live in a country
that they do not consider their own.
What we seek is a just conclusion to the Kosovo
conflict. No maximalist, one-sided imposition can
propel the Western Balkans past the point of no return
towards its European future. One of the principal
lessons of our history is that zero-sum outcomes never
fulfil their promise. Whenever one side got everything,
the other just bided its time, in anticipation of more
favourable circumstances that would allow for the
return of what was thought to have been wrongly taken
away. Again and again, today’s victor became
tomorrow’s vanquished. In the absence of true consent
by all, lasting harmony remained beyond reach. Thus
has the cycle of enmity continued unabated for
centuries.
Democratic Serbia is determined to bring that
bane to an end. Our hand is outstretched. But a

7

S/PV.6769

conscious choice to replace hostility with concord must
be made in unison by true leaders, compassionate in
their hearts and steady in their vision. Forging a
covenant of peace is the only way for Serbs and
Albanians to end up on the same side, at long last.
In pursuing that noble goal, we may draw
inspiration from the words of one of the founding
fathers of the Non-Aligned Movement who, not too far
from this Chamber, asked the world many years ago to
remember that peace was not a relationship of nations,
but a condition of mind brought about by a serenity of
soul. Lasting peace can come only to peaceful people.
The President:
Mr. Hoxhaj.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Mr. Hoxhaj: It is my honour and pleasure to
address the Security Council today with regard to the
latest developments in Kosovo. First, let me thank the
Secretary-General for his efforts for peace, stability
and progress in my country and in the Western
Balkans. I would also like to thank all States Members
of the United Nations for their support in building a
democratic and independent Kosovo. Let me reiterate
here that the only aspiration Kosovo has today is
integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions and
membership in the United Nations.
Today, Kosovo is an independent State in its fifth
year. Its State-building process during those years is a
Kosovar, European and international success story. We
adopted and implemented a modern Constitution that
includes all provisions of United Nations Special
Envoy Martii Ahtisaarí’s comprehensive settlement
proposal — a Constitution that commits Kosovo to the
principles of democracy, secularism and multiethnicity.
Before the declaration of Kosovo’s independence
there were perceptions that its statehood would create
instability in the region. However, in the period since
17 February 2008, Kosovo’s independence produced
peace, stability and security in the whole region. That
is why Kosovo’s independence has been recognized by
all of its neighbours, with the exception of Serbia, and
by the overwhelming majority of European countries.
Today, close to half of the States Members of the
United Nations have recognized our State. I would like
to thank Haiti, Sao Tome and Principe, and Brunei
Darussalam for their decision to formally recognize
Kosovo.

8

Today, I will speak about Kosovo’s current
situation, the progress we have made and the
challenges that lie ahead. I should like to make four
points. The first relates to Kosovo’s consolidation of
statehood. During the reporting period, Kosovo’s
leaders and its citizens, due to the commitment and
support of international partners, focused on
strengthening its multi-ethnic and democratic
institutions. The President, Parliament and the
Government were active and effective in further
building a cohesive State, strengthening the rule of law,
implementing needed reforms and tackling the pressing
priorities of our society. Besides other important
national and international tasks, the President was
active in the fight against corruption and in our
European agenda. Under her leadership, Kosovo has
established two important bodies, the National
Anti-Corruption Council and the National Council for
European Integration.
Parliament adopted 22 important laws and made
significant progress in aligning Kosovo’s legislation
with European standards. Two of those laws help to
promote and protect the cultural and religious heritage
of the city of Prizren and the village of Velika Hoča.
Kosovo’s institutions have granted special protection to
45 Serbian Orthodox cultural heritage sites, based on
the highest international standards.
We have undertaken reforms and made
investments to ensure economic growth and to enable
Kosovo to compete with other countries. As a result,
Kosovo’s gross domestic product growth is estimated
at 5 per cent — a rate twice as high as in the period
before independence and twice as high as that in the
region. However, unemployment is a pressing issue for
us. While Europe is facing financial and debt crises,
Kosovo has maintained its macroeconomic and fiscal
stability. Due to very good planning and
implementation, Kosovo reached a new stand-by
arrangement with the International Monetary Fund,
whereby the Fund will provide €107 million in support
for our Government’s programmes.
Kosovo’s institutions have also been very focused
on law enforcement, reforming the justice system and
public administration. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/275) confirms, Kosovo’s institutions
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) have done very good work on
several trials and cases involving war crimes,
corruption and organized crime. Such cases are the

12-33797

S/PV.6769

main focus of EULEX. Kosovo’s police continues to
devote itself to the rule of law and has incorporated a
relatively strong representation of Kosovo Serbs and
other communities. Thanks to our justice and police
institutions, the crime rate has fallen by 11 per cent
since last year.
Let me reiterate that the Government of Kosovo
remains committed to and supports the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force in its investigation of all
allegations contained in the report of Mr. Dick Marty.
Kosovo’s institutions are very determined to support
the full clarification of those allegations in an open,
independent, professional and transparent way. We
welcome adoption by the Parliament of Albania of a
law ensuring full cooperation between Albania and the
EULEX Task Force.
My second point speaks to the situation in the
north of Kosovo. In the past five years, Kosovo has
made important progress in the integration of the Serb
community at the central and local levels of
governance. Today, the Kosovo Serb community takes
part in Parliament. Out of 120 members, 13 are from
the Serb community. Serbs are also represented in the
central Government by a Deputy Prime Minister and
three ministers. Through the decentralization process,
we have established six new municipalities, where
Kosovo Serbs participate in self-governance in the
areas of administration, police, justice, education and
culture.
Kosovo has been built on the principles of
citizenship and multi-ethnicity. Based on our
Constitution and laws, Kosovo citizens enjoy the right
to dual citizenship. Therefore, when the presidential
and parliamentary elections were held in Serbia on
6 May, Serbs living in Kosovo were able to vote in the
elections. In accordance with an agreement reached
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), that organization facilitated the voting
process for Kosovo Serbs. Under the OSCE symbol,
mobile voting centres were opened, Kosovo Serbs
voted and their votes were counted outside the territory
of the Republic of Kosovo.
That was an important step for the State of
Kosovo, because Serbia agreed not to organize any
type of election activities in Kosovo, 13 years after the
end of the war. It is very important to mention that
Serbia did not try to organize local elections in the
three municipalities in the north. That is a good sign

12-33797

that Serbia is beginning to accept the reality of an
independent Kosovo.
We are very concerned about the situation in the
three northern municipalities of Kosovo. Serbia still
maintains illegal police and security structures in that
part of Kosovo, in violation of resolution 1244 (1999).
The stability and security situation is very tense, and
there are still barricades set up by those entities. What
we are facing in that part of Kosovo now is not new to
the region. In the 1990s, barricades in Croatia and
Bosnia were set up by police and security structures
that were led and financed by Serbia in much the same
way that the illegal structures in the north of Kosovo
are controlled, led and financed by Serbia. Serbia’s
agenda in that part of Kosovo is to keep the status quo
and to create conditions for a deadlocked conflict, and
subsequently to territorial partition. Due to that
situation, it has not been possible for our institutions to
integrate the Kosovo Serbs and to implement the
Ahtisaari Plan in that part of our country, as we have
successfully done in the rest of Kosovo.
That is the only corner of Europe where there is
no rule of law and no democratic participation in
institutions. As the report of the Secretary-General
states, the Kosovo Force and EULEX are prevented
from operating there to fulfil their mandates.
Moreover, the entire stability of Kosovo and the
architecture of security in the region hinges on the
situation in the north. Let me give an example. In the
early morning of 8 April, a 38-year-old Kosovo
Albanian father was killed in his apartment and two of
his four children were wounded in an explosion. That
happened in north Mitrovica, and it is not an isolated
act. The city of Mitrovica is divided not by the River
Ibër, but by fear. Through fear and threats, the security
structures are expelling all non-Serb communities from
northern Kosovo.
The position of my Government is very clear. The
violence has to stop, and Serbia has to withdraw its
police and security units from the north of Kosovo.
Kosovo has always been a multi-ethnic society, and it
will forever remain so. As such, we are against any
kind of partition, change of borders or exchange of
territory. For our Government, the integration of the
30,000 Kosovo Serbs in the north is crucial and should
happen in the same way that 100,000 Kosovo Serbs
were integrated in the rest of Kosovo. In that sense, our
Government is determined to pursue an internal
dialogue with Kosovo Serbs in the northern

9

S/PV.6769

municipalities in order to integrate that community into
democratic institutions and help to shape an agenda for
social and economic development.
My third point concerns the technical dialogue
between the Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of
Serbia. I would like to highlight the agreements
reached on regional cooperation and integrated border
management. On 24 February, an agreement was
reached on Kosovo’s regional representation and
cooperation. Based on this agreement, Kosovo will
now participate on its own account and will speak for
itself at all regional forums as an equal partner with
other participating States. This will require Kosovo to
sign new agreements and allow it to apply for
membership in different regional organizations.
Kosovo and Serbia have also reached an integrated
border management agreement, which includes a
technical protocol on its implementation that provides
for a European solution to the issue of an inter-State
border.
There is no doubt that the dialogue has marked
progress in terms of concluding the agreements. These
are bilateral and legal agreements between two
independent countries. However, the credibility of the
whole dialogue process is at stake. Agreements are
worthless if they remain only on paper and are not
implemented on the ground, and most of these have not
been implemented at all. For example, Serbia has not
signed and ratified the technical protocol on the
implementation of the integrated border management
agreement due to the fact that it still believes that the
partition of northern Kosovo is an option. On the other
hand, Serbia has accepted an agreement on Kosovo’s
representation in regional forums, but has boycotted
meetings at which Kosovo has been present and
insisted on obligations not foreseen in that agreement.
Some agreements have been only partially
implemented, such as those on the freedom of
movement and on free trade. These have been directly
impacted by the road blocks in the northern
municipalities and by the systematic arrest of Kosovo
citizens by the Serbian authorities. In the past two
months, more than 10 Kosovo citizens who were
passing through Serbia on the way in or out of Kosovo
were arrested without any reason and then released.
Kosovo has approached the dialogue in good
faith and played a very constructive role in reaching
and implementing agreements. The European Council

10

decided on 2 March to grant Serbia the status of
candidate country as a result of the agreements reached
in the technical dialogue. But we deeply regret that
Serbia has not shown the same good faith approach in
implementing the agreements. Furthermore, Serbia still
maintains illegal security, police and criminal
structures in the territory of Kosovo, which are in gross
violation of the very spirit of the European Union and a
threat to regional and international peace and stability.
Over the past three months, we have seen two faces of
Serbia — the Serbia that behaves as a pro-European
country in relation to Brussels, and the Serbia that
behaves in an anti-European way in relation to Kosovo
and to the region.
My final point today is on Kosovo-European
Union relations. This year began with the visit of
European Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilia
Malmstrõm to Kosovo, marking the beginning of the
visa liberalization dialogue. The road map is expected
soon. Kosovo’s institutions have made significant
progress in fulfilling the criteria for visa-free travel of
our citizens.
In the current reporting period, there was another
very important development for Kosovo’s relations
with the European Union. The European Union has
confirmed that Kosovo has a clear European
perspective. However, agreements reached in the
bilateral talks between Kosovo and Serbia have paved
the way for our country to follow the same European
path as other countries in the Balkans. The European
Commissioner for Enlargement and European
Neighbourhood Policy, Štefan Füle, announced the
launching of a feasibility study for a stabilization and
association agreement between Kosovo and the
European Union during his visit to Kosovo on
27 March.
We are aware that the overall process will require
some time and a lot of reforms in some key areas, such
as the rule of law, public administration, trade and
market economy. However, the launching of the
feasibility study for the stabilization and association
agreement confirms the start of the process of
establishing contractual relations between Kosovo and
the European Union.
Let me conclude by saying that the main goal of
Kosovo’s institutions and its people is integration into
the Euro-Atlantic institutions. We are committed to
good-neighbourly relations, and we are working hard

12-33797

S/PV.6769

to implement the required reforms for membership. We
believe that dialogue is a democratic value. Neither
threats nor violence can solve mutual issues between
Kosovo and Serbia.
We will never compromise the independence,
sovereignty and functionality of our State. We call
upon Serbia to withdraw its illegal police and security
structures, to start implementing fully and in good faith
the agreements reached in the technical dialogue, and
to behave in accordance with the European principles
of cooperation and good-neighbourly relations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for introducing the
Secretary-General’s quarterly report (S/2012/275) on
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I would also like to welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and to thank them for their
briefings.
In February, at a debate on the same item (see
S/PV.6713), Togo welcomed the negotiations that had
begun between the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo.
These negotiations had promoted a thaw in diplomatic
relations between the two parties after a particularly
tense time in northern Kosovo in late 2011, marked by
acts of violence between the Kosovar and Serbian
communities.
Unfortunately, we note that, as the report
indicates, many acts of violence have undermined this
thaw, including arrests on both sides of Serbian and
Kosovar officials, attacks on individuals, and
especially the organization in February of a referendum
and local elections by the Serbian municipalities in
northern Kosovo in the face of the opposition of the
Kosovar authorities and the international community.
Despite these tensions, we note that negotiations
have continued under the auspices of the European
Union, leading to the conclusion of an agreement on
Kosovo’s regional representation and cooperation,
which will allow Kosovo to take part in regional and
international meetings. However, we regret the fact
that divergent interpretations over the footnote of this
agreement has not made it possible for representatives
of the Pristina and Belgrade authorities to take part in

12-33797

the same regional meetings. In that regard, we
welcome the readiness of UNMIK to support both
parties in implementing the agreement. We also
welcome the signing, in the course of the ninth
dialogue session in February, of technical protocol
between both parties, providing an operational
dimension to the agreement on integrated management
of crossing points reached on 2 December 2011.
The report indicates that concrete progress has
been achieved in the areas of the economy and the fight
against corruption, but it also reveals many obstacles
on the path to reconstruction, such as crime and
recurring threats to religious and cultural heritage sites.
We encourage the Kosovar authorities to take the
necessary measures to protect these heritage sites from
theft and vandalism.
Like other States, Togo remains concerned by the
allegations of human organ trafficking, and we await
the conclusion of the investigations. In that respect, we
can only commend the willingness expressed by the
Albanian authorities at the highest level to fully
cooperate with Mr. John Clint Williamson, lead
prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task Force of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
who has been tasked with investigating accusations of
organ trafficking,.
My country believes that the positive signs and
progress we have seen could suddenly be called into
question if we cannot find a definitive settlement to the
question of the status of Kosovo. The ongoing interethnic incidents and violence, the frequency of which
has increased as a result of the electoral process under
way in Serbia and the rejection of peaceful
coexistence, reveal a lack of consensus among the
Serbian and Kosovar authorities regarding the final
status of Kosovo. Togo urges all the parties concerned
to refrain from these actions, which can only
exacerbate tensions among the different communities
and undermine the prospects for reconciliation between
them. We invite the parties to continue dialogue, which
is the only path to a peaceful and lasting resolution of
their differences
In that respect, the constructive approach of the
Serbian and Kosovar authorities was evidenced by the
restraint and spirit of compromise they demonstrated in
allowing the first round of the Serbian general
elections to be held in a calm and peaceful atmosphere
on 6 May in northern Kosovo, with the cooperation of

11

S/PV.6769

the OSCE. That is a sign of their desire to find
solutions to their differences through dialogue.
My country reiterates its warm gratitude to
UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, EULEX, OSCE and all
partner organizations that, in a difficult context,
continue to promote the smooth operation of the
Kosovar institutions, to establish security and the rule
of law, and above all to bring together the different
communities in Kosovo and to strive for a definitive
settlement of its status.
Lastly, my country once again invites the leaders
of Serbia and Kosovo, as well as the Serbian leaders in
northern Kosovo, to continue their dialogue and to
continue to cooperate with all of their partners with a
view to resolving outstanding issues.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Zarif for presenting the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/275) on the work of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the participation in
this meeting of the Minister of Foreign Affairs for
Serbia, Mr. Jeremić. We share his assessments. We
listened carefully to Mr. Hoxhaj’s statement.
The position of Russia in not recognizing the
Kosovo declaration of independence remains
unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains in full
force and binding on all parties as the international
legal basis for a settlement in Kosovo and for ensuring
security in the district. International entities in the
district must act on the basis of status neutrality. Any
question concerning stability and security in Kosovo
must be addressed in accordance with the norms of
international law and the fundamental decisions of the
United Nations.
It is important to prevent any type of forcible
attempt by the Kosovo authorities to gain control of
Serbian municipalities in northern Kosovo. As
demonstrated by events from July to November 2011,
such attempts can seriously destabilize the situation.
The referendum on the question of the legitimacy of
the Kosovar Albanian authorities, held in the Serbian
municipalities of the district on 14 and 15 February,
was an expression of the despair of the Serbian
authorities at the lack of support from the international
agencies in Kosovo.
We still believe that UNMIK, on the basis of the
mandate received from the Security Council, must play

12

a maximally active role in facilitating the process
leading to a settlement in Kosovo. In this context, we
welcome the UNMIK-sponsored coordination meetings
on questions of security, as well as the direct outreach
by the head of UNMIK, aimed at keeping local
channels open for dialogue. We call on UNMIK to
fulfil its obligations regarding the external
representation of Kosovo in international organizations
and mechanisms.
We note signs of desire on the part of some
countries and organizations, as well as the Kosovar
Albanians, to make broad use of the understanding
reached in the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue mediated by
the European Union regarding the representation of
Kosovo in regional Balkan organizations. In particular,
we are seeing the increasing use of the name “Kosovo”
in the documents of the European Union, in the spirit
of the agreements of 24 February. There is also talk of
Pristina’s plans to open a mission to NATO in Brussels,
under the banner of “Kosovo”. We believe that, in
order to ensure stability, it is essential to adhere strictly
to the parties’ agreed parameters, without arbitrary
interpretation.
In equal measure, we call for a full and objective
investigation of crimes in Kosovo, including evidence
of illegal trade in human organs disclosed by the
Special Rapporteur of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe, Mr. Dick Marty. We are
concerned about the slow pace of the investigation
being conducted by the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo into Mr. Marty’s findings of illicit
trading in human organs in Kosovo. These findings
point directly to the involvement of the current leaders
of Kosovo in these crimes. The investigation must be
impartial. All perpetrators must be held responsible. On
the basis of these concerns, we have endorsed the
Serbian proposal that the investigation be handed over
to the United Nations.
The security situation in the district remains
tense. There is still a high level of crime against
national minorities, including instances of vandalism of
Orthodox sanctuaries and the burglarizing of Kosovar
Serbs’ homes. The realities of illicit trade in weapons
and in human beings, as well as drug smuggling,
remain a serious problem for Kosovo. The status of
internally displaced persons returning to Kosovo,
including Serbs, is still unsatisfactory. There are many
reasons for that, including the fact that the returnees
are unsure of their personal safety.

12-33797

S/PV.6769

Recently, we have seen disturbing reports in
various media that the Kosovar authorities are
establishing contacts with representatives of the Syrian
opposition in order, inter alia, to train insurgents in the
district. That would run afoul of the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, supported by the entire international
community. Moreover, turning Kosovo into an
international training centre for insurgents of various
armed groups could be a serious destabilizing factor
beyond the Balkan region. We call on the international
entities operating in the district to curb such
backsliding.
International entities must also focus their
attention on protecting Orthodox sanctuaries and
people of the Orthodox faith. We share the concerns of
the Serbian authorities and the Serbian Orthodox
Church that the Kosovo Force has turned over to the
Kosovo Police the responsibility for ensuring the
security of the most significant Serbian cultural and
religious heritage sites in the district, despite the fact
that, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s report, the
Kosovo Albanian population is unfavourably disposed
to the adoption and implementation of legislation to
protect Serbian cultural and religious artifacts. There is
an obvious divide between the obligations of the
Kosovo authorities and their implementation. Such acts
could give rise to additional security tensions in
Kosovo.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his briefing. We welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj to the Council.
We are pleased to note that the overall situation
in Kosovo has remained stable during the past four
months. We appreciate the efforts of the Special
Representative to reduce tensions associated with the
elections in Serbia. We are, however, concerned that
the overall security situation in northern Kosovo still
remains fragile.
The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo continues to play a vital role in
ensuring stability in Kosovo. All constituents of the
international presence in Kosovo must maintain
neutrality while executing their respective mandates.
We welcome the continuation of the European
Union-mediate dialogue, which, during the current

12-33797

reporting period, has resulted in an agreement on
regional representation and cooperation. Any
differences on the implementation of the agreement
should be resolved through dialogue. Furthermore, the
implementation of the technical protocol on the
integrated management of crossing points would help
address the situation in the north. We also note the
progress made towards the certification of university
diplomas.
Both sides need to avoid actions and rhetoric that
would inflame tensions. In that regard, the holding of a
referendum in northern Kosovo on 14 and 15 February
was a counter-productive exercise. Similarly, the
authorities of Kosovo must also ensure the provision of
security for all segments of society, including
minorities, and guarantee the safety of religious and
cultural sites. There is also a need for better
cooperation between parties in resolving the cases of
missing persons.
The achievement of lasting peace needs a vision
and a demonstration of flexibility by the leaders of
both sides. The leaders also have the responsibility to
prepare their publics to make the necessary
accommodations. We would urge all parties to pursue
the path of dialogue and engagement for the sake of
lasting peace in Kosovo and the region.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to express our thanks to
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing on the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/275) and
the recent developments in the issue of Kosovo.
Morocco regrets that the security situation in
Kosovo did not improve during the period covered by
the Secretary-General’s report. Quite the contrary, it
regressed compared to the previous period, thereby
risking the destabilization of the Balkan region.
Indeed, there are still hotbeds of tension in northern
Kosovo, despite the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and other missions present on the ground, such as the
Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, aimed at easing tensions and
avoiding an escalation of violence among the
communities. This situation, unfortunately, will not
bring the two parties closer or help them to reconcile
their positions on many pending fundamental questions

13

S/PV.6769

that concern both the present and the future of both
countries.

neutral position in the execution of their mandates, in
line with the Council’s previous decisions.

At the political level, we commend the real
prospects for an improvement in relations between the
European Union (EU), on the one hand, and Serbia and
Kosovo, on the other, and we note that the two parties
have reached an agreement on Kosovo’s regional
representation and cooperation, under EU auspices.
This clearly shows that cooperation between Serbia
and Kosovo is possible, even on sensitive issues, when
there is political will. The same goes for the conclusion
of a technical protocol for the implementation of the
agreement on integrated management of crossing
points by Serbian and Kosovo forces, the objective of
which is to provide for better control and security for
all.

My delegation continues to support the dialogue
process facilitated by the European Union between
Belgrade and Pristina, as mandated by the General
Assembly. We have noted the recent agreements that
were reached in Brussels on 24 February on Kosovo’s
regional representation and cooperation, as well as the
agreement regarding the implementation of the
integrated border management deal that was concluded
in December 2011. South Africa encourages all sides to
maintain this dialogue in order to reach agreement on
all outstanding issues.

This human aspect is essential and should
encourage the two parties to avoid rhetoric and prevent
any act threatening the integrity, safety and security of
individuals. In that regard, we commend the efforts of
UNMIK that has contributed to the arrests of those
responsible for organized crime in order to hand them
over to the competent judicial authorities. On the other
hand, we remain concerned by allegations of
trafficking in human organs, and convinced of the
importance of shedding full light on those serious
allegations.
The tension between the communities in Kosovo
could degenerate if the two parties do not make a
steadfast commitment to maintaining dialogue and
working together to strengthen their mutual trust and
interests through the implementation of the parameters
established in resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): South Africa
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing today on the report (S/2012/275) on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome Minister for Foreign
Affairs Jeremić back to the Council and thank him for
his statement. We also welcome Mr. Hoxhaj and thank
him for his statement too.
South Africa reiterates its position that resolution
1244 (1999) remains in force and forms the basis for
the resolution of the situation in Kosovo. It is therefore
incumbent on the international presence in Kosovo,
including the Kosovo Force and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, to maintain a status-

14

Although there have been some positive
developments, tensions between the two sides remain.
We call on all sides to utilize regular direct contact as
an important confidence-building measure to improve
trust and allow the parties to address the outstanding
and contentious issues.
We welcome and commend UNMIK’s mediation
in facilitating a solution to the challenges related to the
Serbian parliamentary, presidential and local elections
that took place on 6 May. Arbitrary arrests by both
sides are provocations aimed at causing instability to
threaten any political will to encourage constructive
dialogue. All parties should exercise restraint and
refrain from taking unnecessary actions that may erode
the fragile trust between the two sides. Violence and
the use of excessive force will only reverse the gains
made by the parties in the dialogue process, ultimately
making reconciliation more difficult to achieve.
We welcome the parties’ commitment on the issue
of missing persons, and we are confident that, with the
assistance of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, much can be achieved. It is unfortunate that
progress on voluntary returns appears to be slow
compared to previous years. It remains the
responsibility of both sides to encourage returns by
ensuring safe conditions on the ground. In that regard,
my delegation urges all parties to show cooperation
and flexibility in finding solutions to this crucial
outstanding issue. Negotiations remain the only
approach to produce a reciprocally beneficial and
sustainable solution.
My delegation remains concerned by the
resistance against legislative measures aimed at
protecting cultural and religious sites in Kosovo. We
are aware that those sites are under security risks, and

12-33797

S/PV.6769

we call on Pristina to strengthen the security measures
in place to guard them. We are appreciative that the
Kosovo authorities have expressed willingness to
employ necessary security measures at the sites. Public
reconciliatory pronouncements from the leaders on
both sides are welcome and remain positive
contributions towards reconciliation.
With regard to the allegations of organ
trafficking, we reiterate our position that a credible,
thorough, impartial and independent inquiry into those
allegations should be conducted.
In conclusion, South Africa once more urges both
sides to refrain from any actions that could undermine
the achievements attained in the dialogue process. We
therefore call on the parties to exercise flexibility to
enhance their engagement in order to resolve
outstanding matters and for reconciliation to prevail. I
would like to express South Africa’s appreciation and
support for the role of UNMIK, under the capable
leadership of Mr. Farid Zarif, in implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing my appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his detailed presentation
on recent events and progress in the development of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would
also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
Colombia recognizes and supports the important
role played by UNMIK, and believes that, in defining
its priorities, it must continue to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo and
the region through cooperation with the parties
involved and regional and international agencies.
Colombia believes that the regional perspective is
decisive in resolving differences and therefore
expresses its support for the guidance of the European
Union in bringing Pristina and Belgrade closer
together, as well as the involvement of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
the process. It is encouraging to see the progress that
Serbia and Kosovo are making with their European
agendas. In March, the European Union voted to grant
candidate status to Serbia, on which we congratulate it.
During the same month, the European Commissioner

12-33797

for Enlargement launched a feasibility study for a
stabilization and association agreement between the
European Union and Kosovo. I think that is a very
positive step.
In order to move towards a peaceful solution, we
have to work based on the agreements already
achieved, which can support the leadership and
political resolve of the parties. In that regard, we are
concerned that, for various reasons, the confrontation
on the ground continues to threaten progress and to
jeopardize prospects for the process to continue to
move towards reconciliation. We therefore once again
urge the parties to take steps to reduce tension and to
avoid situations of arbitrary arrest, passive responses to
acts of intolerance and bellicose rhetoric. It is a
positive development that during the Serbian electoral
process on 6 May, that country’s Government held
consultations with UNMIK on the organization of the
local elections in Kosovo and took into account the
Mission’s views and recommendations.
The report before us notes a decline in the
number of voluntary returns to Kosovo due to the lack
of available land and completed housing units.
However, we should highlight the support that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and its partners and donor States have given
to the difficult task of aiding voluntary returns by
bringing displaced persons together and through
outreach and information campaigns.
Concerning the allegations in the report by
Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty on
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs, we note the work of Mr. John Clint
Williamson, lead prosecutor of the Special
Investigative Task Force of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. We hope that the recent
contacts and visits will contribute to the speedy
finalization of the investigations.
Lastly, I should like to say that Colombia is
optimistic about the progress that has been made in the
dialogue in Brussels, such as concluding a technical
protocol that builds on the previous agreement on the
integrated management of border crossing points,
aimed at restoring full freedom of movement in the
north. Another development that deserves attention is
the agreement reached between Belgrade and Pristina,
thanks to facilitation by the European Union,
concerning regional representation and cooperation.

15

S/PV.6769

Nevertheless, there are differences between the parties
about some aspects of its interpretation. We call on the
parties to continue the dialogue and definitively lay the
groundwork for peaceful coexistence as good
neighbours, according to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing today. I also welcome to the Council His
Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, the Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, the
Foreign Minister of Serbia.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the
Secretary-General’s
comprehensive
report
(S/2012/275). On the political level, there has been
steady progress over the reporting period. The number
of recognitions continues to rise. We have seen both
the launch of the feasibility study by the European
Union (EU) on Kosovo and the announcement of EU
candidate status for Serbia. The engagement of
Belgrade and Pristina in the EU-facilitated dialogue
has been a crucial vehicle for progress for both
countries. I welcome the further expressions of
commitment to that dialogue that we have just heard
from the Foreign Ministers of Kosovo and Serbia.
That dialogue has produced a number of practical
agreements, which the United Kingdom commends.
However, we are concerned that Belgrade has yet to
sign the protocol on integrated border management. We
would also urge both Governments to implement the
agreement facilitating regional cooperation and to
accept the decision of the host in international
meetings concerning the placement of the footnote. It
is absolutely essential that the agreement is
implemented to enable the countries of the Western
Balkans to work together to address the challenges
facing the region.
We encourage Kosovo to engage proactively with
the EU feasibility study. It is a valuable opportunity to
focus on the important reforms required, particularly in
the economic sector, which will be crucial to Kosovo’s
development and the promotion of trade. We welcome
the inauguration of the National Anti-Corruption
Council and hope that it receives full support for its
mandate. The Government of Kosovo also needs to
take ownership of reforms in the areas of the judiciary,
the rule of law and administrative capacity. Driving

16

forward those initiatives using the tools available
through the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) would provide huge benefits to Kosovo.
We share the Secretary-General’s concerns about
the rising tensions in the run-up to Serbia’s elections.
We witnessed an unfortunate series of arrests and
incidents on the ground, accompanied by unhelpful
rhetoric on both sides. We welcome the efforts of
Special Representative Zarif in liaising with the
Government in Belgrade to reach agreement not to
hold or recognize any local elections in Kosovo. The
United Kingdom welcomed the peaceful holding of
Serbian presidential and parliamentary elections for
dual nationals in Kosovo on 6 May. We are grateful to
Secretary-General Zannier and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for their
patience and for the crucial role they played. We
support their continued involvement in the second
round of elections on 20 May. The OSCE agreement
demonstrated how the Governments in Belgrade and
Pristina can work constructively with each other and
the international community to ensure that the rights of
their dual nationals are protected.
The approaching end of supervised independence
will be an important milestone for Kosovo. It is
essential that Kosovo use this historic moment to
demonstrate its continued commitment to the full
implementation of the comprehensive settlement plan,
including respect for the culture and for the
implementation of the rights of minority communities.
That is particularly true for the Kosovan Serb
community in the north. It is now for the Government
of Kosovo to truly engage on this issue, bringing the
rule of law, education and employment to all its
citizens.
The freedom of movement continues to be a
challenge in the north. We welcome the progress made
in opening Gates 1 and 31, but the majority of traffic
continues to use the illegal bypasses. Efforts need to be
made to close them. I encourage all those who exercise
influence in northern Kosovo, including the
Government of Serbia, to work actively to deter
violence and to give consistent backing to both the
Kosovo Force and EULEX in the exercise of their
legitimate mandates to guarantee security and freedom
of movement.
We welcome the thorough work being done the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force looking into

12-33797

S/PV.6769

allegations made in the Marty report. Serious
allegations have been made, and it is inevitable that
any investigation will be complex and lengthy. In that
context, we do not believe it appropriate or warranted
to talk about the slow pace of investigations. We urge
the Government of Kosovo’s continued cooperation
with the investigation. We also note the recent and
welcome enactment of legislation by Albania’s
Parliament that will allow the Task Force to
autonomously conduct investigative activities on
Albanian territory.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom continues to
support Kosovo and Serbia’s irreversible progress
towards joining the European Union. We urge them
both to make the most of the opportunities provided by
the European Union this year to enable them to move
along their respective paths. We also look forward to
the continued constructive engagement of Belgrade and
Pristina in the EU-facilitated dialogue, which provides
a space for both Governments to propose creative
solutions in the development of their relationship.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would first like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Foreign
Minister of Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia. I would also like
to thank Mr. Zarif for his comprehensive briefing.
The past few months have seen important
political developments in Kosovo. I would like to focus
on four issues, namely, elections, Serbia and Kosovo’s
European perspective, the security situation and the
successful work of the Special Investigative Task Force
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).
First, concerning elections, Germany is very
pleased that the Serbian elections, including the voting
in Kosovo, took place in a calm and organized manner.
That is a success for both sides. None of the parties
involved used the elections to escalate tensions. The
United Nations Interim Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) played a crucial part in that positive
outcome. Through their support to Serbian citizens
throughout Kosovo by virtue of supporting the voting
process, they contributed substantially to the peaceful
situation, particularly in northern Kosovo. The
agreements between the OSCE and Kosovo and Serbia
regarding the organizational role of the OSCE in the
elections are clear evidence of the constructive and
flexible approach of all sides involved. The German

12-33797

Foreign Minister himself was strongly and actively
committed to that process.
The
Kosovo
authorities
have
clearly
demonstrated that they take the protection of ethnic
minorities in Kosovo seriously. We welcome the role
played by all international and local actors, in
particular EULEX and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), in
providing security. They have significantly contributed
to maintaining a safe and secure environment in
Kosovo. In early May, for the second time in a year,
the joint German-Austrian reserve force was deployed
in order to be prepared for possible tensions during the
elections. We urge all parties concerned to continue on
that path and to do their utmost to ensure that there are
no incidents during the forthcoming second round of
the Serbian presidential elections.
My second point is on Serbia’s and Kosovo’s
European perspective. Germany fully supports Serbia’s
pro-European stance. In the recent Serbian
parliamentary elections, 75 per cent of the voters
expressed their commitment by voting for parties that
advocate further rapprochement with the European
Union (EU). That is a positive signal for Serbia, the
region and Europe as a whole. We count on any new
Government to continue on that path.
Against that backdrop, it is deplorable that the
implementation record of February’s EU-led dialogue
is still lagging behind expectations. The full and
sustainable implementation of agreements already
concluded should be placed very high on the agenda
for the coming months. We welcome the progress made
during the reporting period on the issue of missing
persons, which would not have been possible without
the direct support of UNMIK. However, further
progress is urgently needed.
My third point is on the current security situation.
In spite of the positive developments during the
elections to date, the situation in northern Kosovo is of
great concern to us. Due to the international presence
and the commitment of local and national authorities,
the situation has remained calm. Yet, the underlying
tensions have not been resolved. Members of the
Council have repeatedly condemned the acts of
violence perpetrated by both sides. During the past few
months, deplorable, but, fortunately, isolated, acts of
violence occurred. In particular, we condemn, in the
strongest terms, the attacks on the Embassy of the

17

S/PV.6769

Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in Pristina on
16 March.
Let me recall that, throughout the recent tensions,
both KFOR and EULEX have acted, and continue to
act, in accordance with their mandate in a statusneutral way that aims to ensure and maintain a safe and
secure environment, including freedom of movement,
and to establish the rule of law.
My fourth point pertains to the allegations raised
in the so-called Marty report. Let me once again stress
that Germany’s primary objective is to see a full and
independent investigation of those allegations. We
therefore very much welcome the further progress
made by the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force
in the past month. We look forward to further updates
being provided in the UNMIK reports.
The investigation is on a very good path.
Ambassador Williamson has further strengthened his
ties with relevant actors and States. Pristina, Belgrade
and Tirana continue to fully cooperate with the Task
Force and its investigations. In particular, Germany
very much welcomes last week’s adoption by the
Albanian Parliament of a new law on cooperation with
the Task Force. That visibly demonstrates that it can
count on the cooperation of States relevant to the
investigation.
Let me conclude by reiterating our appreciation
for the contributions made by UNMIK and to
commend the dedication and service of its staff.
Germany will continue to pay great attention to the
developments in Kosovo. We will also continue to
promote Serbia’s and Kosovo’s joint and shared
European future.
Mr. Kumar (India): I would like to join other
speakers in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Kosovo and the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for his
statement outlining his country’s perspective on the
situation in Kosovo. We also listened carefully to the
statement of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
The Secretary-General’s report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2012/275) for the quarter ending 15 April highlights
in detail the situation on the ground in Kosovo. We

18

would like to congratulate Serbia on obtaining
European Union (EU) candidate-country status in early
March this year. We also note that the European Union
launched a feasibility study for a stabilization and
association agreement with Kosovo in late March.
Those events mark the most positive political
developments during the reporting period arising from
concrete progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina.
We are happy to note that, in February, the parties
reached an agreement on Kosovo’s regional
representation and cooperation in an EU-facilitated
dialogue. We hope that differences in the application of
the footnote concerning Kosovo’s status and its
mutually exclusive interpretations will soon be
resolved by mutual agreement and understanding. The
conclusion by the parties of a technical protocol
providing an operational dimension to the agreement
on the integrated management of crossing points is also
a welcome development.
We are seriously concerned about the overall
security situation in Kosovo, which has been marked
by political tension, as well as criminal incidents,
including the attack on an embassy in Pristina.
Compared to the same period last year, there has also
been an increase in crimes affecting minority
communities. Such crimes, including damage to
Serbian Orthodox churches and household property,
have serious implications for inter-communal relations
in Kosovo. In that connection, we suggest that the
concerns of the Serbian Orthodox Church over the
transfer of security responsibilities at Dević Monastery
should be heeded.
We urge UNMIK to continue to prioritize
adequate protection of Serbian religious and cultural
heritage in Kosovo, particularly in view of the
significant resistance that has been noted in the Kosovo
Albanian population against legislative measures and
their implementation aiming at the protection of Serb
cultural and religious sites and the gap between the
commitments made by the Kosovo authorities in that
area and their implementation.
With respect to the rule of law, UNMIK should
continue to provide document certification services of
a civil nature and to facilitate the interaction of the
Kosovo authorities with INTERPOL and other
organizations. UNMIK should also remain engaged in
the missing persons issue and other confidence-

12-33797

S/PV.6769

building measures between the communities. We also
welcome the adoption of the law by the Albanian
Parliament to facilitate cooperation with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, especially the
agreement on the Special Investigative Task Force, led
by Mr. Williamson, allowing the Task Force to fully
implement its mandate.
In conclusion, we encourage UNMIK to continue
to implement its mandate in a status-neutral manner, in
strict accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and other
relevant decisions of the Security Council. That will
help us to realize the hope of the Secretary-General
that the trend of tension and confrontation that has
become discernible in the past year will gradually
subside and that the positive trends of dialogue will be
strengthened. To that end, leaders on both sides should
exercise their leadership in such a manner as to reduce
tension and promote a climate conducive to dialogue
and mutual understanding.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif for his briefing. I welcome the
presence of His Excellency Foreign Minister Vuk
Jeremić of Serbia at today’s meeting. I also listened
carefully to the statement of Mr. Hoxhaj of Kosovo.
Although the current situation in Kosovo is
generally stable, it nevertheless continues to be
vulnerable and fragile. We express our concern about
the tense relations among the ethnic communities in
Kosovo, and in northern Kosovo in particular. We hope
that the parties concerned will take a cautious approach
and settle their differences through dialogue, refraining
from any action that may further complicate the
situation or escalate tensions. China has always
maintained that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia should be fully respected.
On the question of Kosovo, a settlement plan that
is acceptable to all should be reached within the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and through
dialogue and negotiation between the parties
concerned. Recently, several rounds of dialogue were
conducted between Belgrade and Pristina, and definite
progress has been achieved on certain issues. We hope
that the parties concerned will increase their efforts and
continue to push forward with the dialogue. That is not
only in the interest of the parties concerned; it also
serves the well-being of the people. It is also in the

12-33797

interest of peace and stability in the Balkan region and
all of Europe.
The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has made unremitting
efforts to promote regional peace and stability and
enhance dialogue. China expresses its appreciation in
that regard. We support UNMIK continuing to carry
out its mission in accordance with the mandate of the
Security Council. We hope that UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force will strengthen their coordination and play a
positive and constructive role in promoting the
settlement of the relevant questions.
China expresses its deep concern about the illicit
trafficking in human organs. Any acts that violate the
norms of international law and international
humanitarian law should not be condoned. The
concerns expressed by Serbia in that regard are
justified. We support the United Nations carrying out
investigations into the relevant cases.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Farid Zarif for his briefing, as well as the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo for
their attendance today.
During our meeting last February, my delegation
said that it was cautiously optimistic about
developments in Kosovo (see S/PV.6713). I have been
comforted in that feeling by two developments that
have taken place since then.
First of all, thanks to the agreement reached
among Serbia, Kosovo and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Serbian
voters in Kosovo holding dual nationality were able to
participate peacefully in Serbian legislative and
presidential elections on 6 May. I wish to thank the
Secretary General of the OSCE, his teams and the Irish
presidency of the organization for their efforts.
NATO’s preventive deployment of an additional
battalion and the presence of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) helped to
maintain a safe environment during the election period.
But it is especially the restraint observed in statements
and actions in Belgrade and Pristina that I wish to
welcome. We hope that that attitude will be maintained
beyond 20 May, the date of the second round of the
Serbian presidential election, which we hope will be
just as calm as was the voting on 6 May.

19

S/PV.6769

Secondly, Serbia and Kosovo have progressed
towards European rapprochement. The granting of
candidate status to Serbia and the launching of a
feasibility study for a stabilization and association
agreement for Kosovo are tangible evidence of the
progress that has been made. The first development is
the outcome of efforts made by the Serbian authorities,
particularly in cooperating with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
internal reforms that they have conducted. The granting
of status is also an incentive to follow through. The
second development reflects our determination that
Kosovo advance towards the European Union. The two
events were made possible by progress in the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by the
European Union. We call on the two capitals to work
together to implement all of the agreements that they
have reached and to resume the dialogue as soon as
possible.
The European Union is also strengthening its
commitment in Kosovo, with EULEX being
reconfigured to take into account progress made in
administering Kosovo and to better adapt to the needs
of the country.
France is committed to the existence of a Kosovo
that is sovereign, stable, viable, peaceful, democratic
and multi-ethnic, which requires a long-term solution
to the question of the north of the country. The
Ahtisaari plan provides a solid basis for establishing
broad autonomy for the Serbians in the north,
consolidating the rights of minorities all over Kosovo
and protecting their religious heritage sites. We support
the decision to close the International Civilian Office
and hope that that will also be accompanied by a
commitment to implement all the provisions of the
Ahtisaari plan.
An international presence must be maintained on
the ground as long as the security situation requires it.
That is particularly true in the north, where the free
movement of EULEX and Kosovo Force (KFOR)
personnel must be respected by all parties.
We take seriously the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General about the small number of refugees
choosing to return to Kosovo. We call on the Kosovar
authorities to shed full light on malfeasance and
criminal acts, particularly those against Serbian
religious and cultural sites.

20

The rejection of impunity is also a responsibility
of the international community when it comes to the
most serious crimes. We have full confidence in the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force and in
Prosecutor Williamson to investigate allegations of
disappearances and organ trafficking contained in the
report of Council of Europe Special Rapporteur,
Senator Marty. Considerable financial, technical and
human resources have been mobilized to conduct an
effective and impartial investigation.
The commitment of the Kosovar authorities and
Kosovo’s neighbouring States to fully cooperate with
Prosecutor Williamson is an additional guarantee. We
welcome in particular the decision taken by the
Government of Albania to adopt a law giving EULEX
the same powers as those conferred on the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, including
the possibility of recording testimony outside the
presence of an Albanian magistrate or police officer.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/275)
contains in its annex information on the work of the
Special Investigative Task Force. That effort at
communication must continue so that the Security
Council will be informed, as it has requested, while
respecting investigative secrecy and applicable
elementary rules of confidentiality.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to
welcome Foreign Ministers Vuk Jeremić and Enver
Hoxhaj and to thank them for their statements. I also
thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his
comprehensive briefing.
As the situation in Kosovo over the past few
months — stable yet fragile — has already been
addressed in detail by the Foreign Ministers’
statements and by the Special Representative’s
briefing, I will focus my statement on three specific
aspects.
First, there is the will for compromise showed by
Serbian and Kosovo authorities in arranging for Serbs
in Kosovo to vote in Serbian parliamentary and
presidential elections with facilitation by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), a process that has taken some months to be
finalized and agreed upon. Their cooperative attitude
must be noted and commended, as the event could have
had, and still can have, negative consequences in terms
of security and stability in parts of Kosovo.

12-33797

S/PV.6769

We therefore call on Belgrade and Pristina to
continue to fully cooperate with OSCE and other
international actors, as well as on all parties to avoid
any actions or statements that could increase tensions.
The OSCE’s involvement in the process must be
sincerely applauded. We also welcome the very
positive role played by the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo
Force in that context.
As to Serbian local elections, in spite of
Belgrade’s decision not to hold them in Kosovo, two
municipalities in northern Kosovo nevertheless held
them. We note very positively the Serbian authorities’
statements that the results would not be recognized, as
well as Kosovo authorities’ restraint on the matter.
Secondly, there is a need for clearer and more
effective application of the agreements reached on
different issues through the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue.
As Portugal and others have recurrently advocated, that
dialogue is paramount for the achievement of progress
between Serbia and Kosovo in areas essentially
pertaining to everyday life for thousands of people. Not
only the international community and the European
Union, but also — first and foremost — the two parties
themselves must not allow the momentum to be lost.
We therefore call upon the parties to renew their efforts
to achieve an understanding on the practical aspects of
the implementation of the various agreements. Progress
in this regard can further relations between Serbia and
Kosovo and the European perspectives of each. We
expect the dialogue to be resumed in full after the
Serbian elections.
Thirdly, Portugal deeply regrets and condemns
reported attempts to damage Serbian religious,
historical and cultural heritage in Kosovo. This is not,
as some might be led to believe, a minor issue; it looms
large on the overall situation in Kosovo and can turn
underlying tensions into open clashes. It is incumbent
on the Kosovo authorities to protect such heritage, and
all efforts must be undertaken — supported by
international forces if necessary — for its safeguarding
as the responsibility for their security is transferred to
the Kosovo Police.
Finally, allow me to briefly address the report on
the activities of EULEX, particularly in regard to the
activity of the Special Investigative Task Force. As a
matter of principle, we have always maintained that
opacity and impunity are obstacles to lasting peace. In

12-33797

this sense, Portugal commends the efforts already
undertaken by EULEX, and welcomes the recent
activity of the lead prosecutor and head of the Special
Investigative Task Force. Portugal takes note of the
reported level of willingness to cooperate on the part of
all quarters contacted so far by the lead prosecutor,
notably from the Albanian Government, which has
taken positive steps in offering to cooperate with the
Task Force, the Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor and the
lead prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. Portugal supports the work carried
out by the Task Force and considers that it is through
thorough,
transparent
and
comprehensive
investigations that the truth behind those horrifying
allegations can be fully uncovered. That must be the
wish we all share.
Serbia has been granted candidate status to
European Union accession in early March. Portugal is
proud to have been at the forefront of the promotion of
this step, which we believe is not only deserved by
Serbia, but also necessary for the regional stability and
prosperity that we associate with European integration.
This is, we hope, a decisive step towards the
progressive complete integration of the Western
Balkans into the European Union. As regards Kosovo,
we note positively the recent launch by the European
Commission of a feasibility study for a stabilization
and association agreement between the European
Union and Kosovo, thus opening an important phase in
their relations.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing. I
would like to welcome both Foreign Minister Hoxhaj
and Foreign Minister Jeremić back to the Council, and
thank them for sharing their perspectives with us.
I would like to make four main points today.
First, the United States welcomes the peaceful
participation by dual nationals in Serbian presidential
and parliamentary elections in Kosovo on 6 May. We
look forward to an equally incident-free second round
on 20 May. Kosovo’s and Serbia’s coordination with
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), which allowed dual nationals to
exercise their right to vote without infringing on
Kosovo’s sovereignty, demonstrated how both
countries can effectively work with the international
community to overcome political differences.

21

S/PV.6769

Going forward, this successful cooperation
should serve as a model for future peaceful elections
and promote the development of democratic
institutions in the greater region. We are hopeful that
both Governments will use this practical approach to
discuss ongoing problems in northern Kosovo over the
coming months. We also welcome the fact that Serbian
authorities dismissed as illegitimate local elections in
northern Kosovo.
Secondly, we echo the Secretary-General’s hope
for a “normalization of relations” between Pristina and
Belgrade. It is time for this long-standing problem to
end. The United States continues to reject any action
that would undermine Kosovo’s independence,
sovereignty or territorial integrity. The Government of
Serbia’s ongoing support for illegal parallel structures
and Serbian security forces in northern Kosovo
remains a barrier to progress. We call on Belgrade to
remove its security forces from Kosovo immediately,
and we call for the implementation of all agreements
that the parties have reached thus far in the course of
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU).
We express concern over the difficulties
encountered in implementing the EU regional
representation and cooperation agreement, and hope
that both Governments will use this opportunity to
participate fully in regional forums. We congratulate
Serbia on its selection as an EU candidate nation, and
Kosovo on the feasibility study under way for an EU
stabilization and association agreement. Both nations
are making good progress on the road to European
integration.
Thirdly, we note that, unfortunately, freedom of
movement within Kosovo remains hampered. While we
welcome the news that gates 1 and 31 reopened during
the reporting period, we also note that the EU Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) must continue to
transport Kosovo Police and customs officers by air to
those gates, only because northern Kosovo Serbs
continue to deny EULEX full and unconditional
freedom of movement. The Kosovo Force (KFOR) has
also been denied full freedom of movement. We look to
Serbia to cooperate with KFOR and EULEX to restore
complete freedom of movement for all people and to
support KFOR efforts to restore and maintain a safe
and secure environment. All parties looking to promote
law and order along the border must provide full,
unhindered support.

22

Finally, the United States takes seriously all
allegations of serious crimes committed in the region,
including in connection with the 1999 conflict. We
welcome Albania’s cooperation with the ongoing
EULEX investigation into these allegations, as
underscored by the Albanian Parliament’s adoption of
legislation in this regard last week. We again underline
our full support for the work of EULEX and the
progress made by the Special Investigative Task Force,
under the leadership of Mr. Clint Williamson. Let me
also say that any attempts to politicize the investigation
or duplicate its efforts do a disservice to the alleged
victims and their families, and risk calling into
question the impartiality of any decisions reached.
The United States stands with the international
community in our commitment to long-term peace and
stability for Kosovo and for the entire Balkan region.
Kosovo’s progress towards developing a plan to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security is but one example of how seriously
Kosovo is taking its obligations as a sovereign State
and responsible member of the international
community.
The OSCE facilitation of voting in the 6 May
Serbian presidential and parliamentary elections and
the upcoming second round of presidential elections in
Kosovo on 20 May is yet another example of how
international multilateral institutions are effectively
promoting peace, stability and reconciliation in the
region. We look forward to seeing both Serbia and
Kosovo continue on their paths towards full
cooperation and European and Euro-Atlantic
integration.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), contained in document S/2012/275.
I also welcome and thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his detailed
introduction of the report.
We believe that the United Nations plays a crucial
role in guaranteeing stability and neutrality in Kosovo
and the region. We express our total support for the
Mission and for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and encourage them to continue to
carry out their mandate in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).

12-33797

S/PV.6769

I should like to make a few comments on the
report before us. First, we welcome the new progress
made by Belgrade and Pristina in the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union. However, we also
take seriously the observation that tension and
confrontation on the ground continue to pose tangible
risks to peace and stability in Kosovo and the region.
We are concerned about the growing perception
referred to in the report that it continues to be difficult
to reach a definitive solution to underlying issues of
the conflict. In that regard, we urge the parties to seek
broad and lasting solutions in line with resolution 1244
(1999), especially to resolve the issue of future
elections in Kosovo, reduce tension overall and support
conditions for constructive dialogue.
Secondly, we note that the situation in north
Kosovo continues to be extremely sensitive when it
comes to development of the political situation
between Pristina and Belgrade. We are following the
situation with regard to the expected operationalization
of the agreement on integrated management of the
crossing points, as well as with regard to the
normalization of free movement.
With regard to security in general, we are
concerned about criminal incidents that primarily
affect minority ethnic communities, including incidents
involving intimidation, acts of aggression, robbery,
arson, vandalism and damage to Serbian Orthodox
churches and the looting of private homes. We support
the work done by UNMIK to encourage Kosovo
authorities to take specific preventive measures to
attempt to reverse this trend. We urge Pristina and
Belgrade to take responsibility for reducing tension, as
well as to continue to use positive language in their
communications.
Thirdly, we note that there is a continuing
downward trend in voluntary returns to Kosovo.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, the
number of returns during the first quarter of this year
decreased by 48 per cent as compared to the same
period in 2011. We therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for scaling up political will and attention
in order to reverse this trend.
We also regret that there continues to be a certain
degree of resistance to measures intended to protect
Serb cultural and religious sites in Kosovo. We urge
Kosovo authorities to redouble their efforts to bridge

12-33797

the gap between commitments
undertaken in this regard.

and

activities

Fourthly, we are following with interest the work
of the Special Investigative Task Force to look into
allegations of inhuman treatment of persons and organ
trafficking in Kosovo. The report of the SecretaryGeneral barely touches on this important issue. We are
pleased that the Task Force has enjoyed support and
cooperation to date. Nevertheless, this is a complex
investigation that covers various jurisdictions. We hope
that every allegation will be thoroughly investigated
and that those responsible will be brought to justice.
We therefore continue to believe that it would be
desirable to arrive at an arrangement that could involve
the United Nations in the process of addressing the
allegations.
Lastly, we take note of the report on the work of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission that is
appended to the report of the Secretary-General. We
believe that it is important to consolidate efforts to
promote the rule of law in Kosovo. A passage from that
report drew our attention, namely, the announcement of
a reconfiguration of the Mission in the light of
developments concerning the rule of law. Although the
report states that structural changes will not impact the
Mission’s goals, we would like to have more
information in that regard.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2012/275). We welcome the participation in
today’s meeting by His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.
The position of Azerbaijan with regard to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
non-recognition of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence remains unchanged. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the binding international legal
basis for resolving the Kosovo issue and providing
security in the area. The resolution outlines explicit
guidelines and steps to be taken for a comprehensive
settlement in a political process and through
negotiations.

23

S/PV.6769

Positive trends in dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, as well as progress towards European
integration, were registered during the reporting
period. We welcome the decision of the European
Union (EU) to grant candidacy status to Serbia, which
had been pending since 2009. We also note the
agreement reached by the parties in an EU-mediated
dialogue on Kosovo’s regional representation and
cooperation, with the understanding that such
designation is without prejudice to positions on status
and is inline with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
advisory opinion (see A/64/881) of the International
Court of Justice of 22 July 2010.
At the same time, we cannot but express our deep
concern at the increase in tension and incidents on the
ground during the reporting period that continued to
pose tangible risks to peace and stability. We note the
efforts aimed at de-escalating tension and call upon all
stakeholders to resolve disagreements peacefully.
The report of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and other international presences have
stressed that the public referendum conducted by the
northern Kosovo Serb municipalities in February had
no legal consequences. It is our strong understanding
that, without exception, the same position equally
applies to all unilateral actions taken contrary to
resolution 1244 (1999) and in contravention with the
perspective of achieving a solution based on mutual
understanding and consensus.
The situation with regard to the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons to Kosovo remains a
matter of concern and requires redoubled efforts.
Azerbaijan aligns itself with the call of the SecretaryGeneral for strengthened political will and focus in
order to reverse the continuously declining trend in
voluntary returns.

24

The issue of missing persons continues to be one
of the major obstacles to reconciliation efforts, and
obviously requires strengthened cooperation between
the parties, as well as the engagement of UNMIK and
other international partners.
The protection and restoration of religious and
cultural heritage should remain an UNMIK priority. We
deplore any acts of vandalism against cultural and
religious sites and recall the obligation to comply with
the commitments made by the relevant parties in that
regard.
We take note of the information that the Special
Investigative Task Force of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo continued working to
address reports related to inhuman treatment of people
and illicit trafficking in human organs. Azerbaijan
looks forward to an objective, fair and transparent
investigation of the facts and believes that the
establishment of truth will definitely serve the
principles of justice and the rule of law. At the same
time, we still do not see any obstacles that could
prevent the process from being empowered by, and
accountable to, the Security Council.
In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its efforts and important role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

12-33797
