S/PRST/2014/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 January 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7093rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 January 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning Iraq”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council deplores in the strongest terms the recent events in
the cities of Ramadi and Fallujah in Anbar province in Iraq. The Security
Council condemns the attacks that are being perpetrated by Al-Qaida affiliate,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), against the people of Iraq in an
attempt to destabilize the country and region. The Security Council recognizes
that Iraqi security forces, local police and tribes in Anbar province are showing
great courage as they fight to defeat ISIL in their cities.
“The Security Council urges the people of Iraq, including Iraqi tribes,
local leaders, and Iraqi security forces in Anbar province, to continue, expand
and strengthen their cooperation against violence and terror and it stresses the
critical importance of continued national dialogue and unity. The Security
Council welcomes comments from Grand Ayatollah Sistani welcoming
internally displaced residents of Anbar to Najaf and Karbala, as well as the
commitment of a number of communities — Sunni, Shia and Kurd — to meet
the needs of the displaced.
“The Security Council expresses its strong support for the continued
efforts of the Iraqi Government to help meet the security needs of the entire
population of Iraq. In this regard, the Security Council acknowledges the
efforts of the Iraqi security forces and Iraqi local police, whose members are
also being targeted and killed in ongoing attacks by terrorists. The Security
Council welcomes the commitment of the Government of Iraq in the protection
of the civilian population in Fallujah and elsewhere and to the provision of
humanitarian relief, and encourages the Government of Iraq to continue
working with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and
humanitarian agencies to ensure the delivery of humanitarian relief. The
Security Council expresses concern about the impact of the violence on
civilians, and encourages the safe passage of civilians trapped in conflict areas,
as well as the safe return of internally displaced persons as conditions allow.
“The Security Council stresses the critical importance of continued
national dialogue and unity, an inclusive political process, the holding of free
and fair elections in April 2014, and the right to peaceful protest as guaranteed
14-20491 (E) 100114

*1420491*

S/PRST/2014/1

under the Iraqi Constitution. The Security Council believes that this is vital to
underpin a unified national stance against terrorism, and to ensure Iraq’s longterm security.
“The Security Council reaffirms the need to bring perpetrators,
organizers, financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism to
justice, and urges all States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law and relevant Security Council resolutions, to cooperate
actively with Iraqi authorities in this regard.
“The Security Council reaffirms that ISIL (QE.J.115.04) is subject to the
arms embargo and assets freeze imposed by Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999) and 2083 (2012) and underlines the importance of prompt and effective
implementation of these measures.
“The Security Council reaffirms the need to combat by all means, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts, and that any acts of terrorism are
criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever
and by whomsoever committed. The Security Council reminds States that they
must ensure that measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq. The Security Council
reiterates that no terrorist act can reverse the path towards peace, democracy
and reconstruction in Iraq, which is supported by the people and the
Government of Iraq and the international community.”

2/2

14-20491
