S/2016/211

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 March 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 4 March 2016 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
The present letter is submitted pursuant to paragraph 3 of Security Council
resolution 2261 (2016), in which the Council requested me to initiate preparations
related to the establishment of a political mission in Colombia, including on the
ground. I was also requested to present detailed recommendations, for the
consideration and approval of the Council, regarding the mandate, size and
operational aspects of the mission as soon as possible and then within 30 days of the
signature of the ceasefire agreement between the Government of Colombia and the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s Army (FARC-EP). The
information contained herein is based on the activities that the United Nations
Secretariat has undertaken to prepare for the deployment of th e United Nations
Mission in Colombia. Further details about the precise mandate and activities of the
Mission will be presented once the parties, which continue their negotiations in
Havana, reach an agreement and define the parameters of the laying down o f arms,
as well as the definitive bilateral ceasefire and cessation of hostilities.
1.

Preparations
In keeping with the recommendations of the High -level Independent Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations, the United Nations Secretariat ensured that
strategic analysis and planning were initiated promptly. Accordingly, I issued an
internal planning directive providing my guidance on expected outcomes;
parameters for planning purposes; definition of internal responsibilities; and
coordination and reporting within the United Nations system. In the directive, I
indicated that the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs was the Secretariat
lead for the process and that, as soon as appointed, my Special Representative
would be responsible for leading the planning and preparations for the United
Nations Mission in Colombia, reporting through the Department of Political Affairs.
In addition, relevant departments and offices of the United Nations Secretariat
would constitute a United Nations Headquarters planning team, led by the
Department of Political Affairs. The team would ensure that timely administrative,
budgetary and other support arrangements were in place for the deployment of the
Mission.
In accordance with Security Council resolution 2261 (2016), the United
Nations Mission in Colombia will participate in and coordinate a tripartite
monitoring and verification mechanism that will oversee the definitive bilateral
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. In addition to the United Nations, the

16-03539 (E)

080316

*1603539*

S/2016/211

mechanism shall include representatives of the Government of Colombia and of
FARC-EP. The Mission will also be responsible for monitoring and verifying the
laying down of arms. In order to ensure that the United Nations is in a position to
undertake those roles and to begin monitoring operations within a reasonable time
frame following the signing of a final peace agreement, the Secretariat has already
undertaken a number of activities.
An initial fact-finding team conducted a visit to Bogota from 3 to 6 Febru ary
2016. The team engaged extensively with the United Nations country team, gained
an understanding of the capabilities of the agencies, funds and programmes within
the country team and identified opportunities for country team support to the
establishment of the Mission in a number of administrative, financial and other
areas. Such cooperation would minimize the cost and time required for the start -up
of the Mission.
The Secretariat has also initiated negotiations with the Government on a
status-of-mission agreement. Pending the finalization and entry into force of that
agreement, an exchange of letters has been concluded, which puts in place interim
arrangements regarding the activities of the Mission, including its advance team.
On operational issues, planning provides for a three-phased approach to the
set-up of the Mission, in close cooperation with the other two parties to the
monitoring and verification mechanism. Phase 1 began with the establishment of an
interdepartmental planning team at Headquarters on 10 February 2016. On
24 February 2016, a small advance team was deployed to Bogota to establish the
Mission headquarters and to support planning. The advance team will also assess
conditions at the eight locations identified by the parties for th e establishment of the
mechanism’s regional headquarters. Once adequate information has been gathered
and analysis undertaken of each location, the Mission will start to deploy core teams
to those locations in coordination with the two parties. The regiona l headquarters
will serve as bases from which observers will deploy to local offices (in phases 2
and 3), where monitoring and verification activities will be carried out once the
ceasefire enters into force and the substantive work of the Mission begins.
Accordingly, it is of paramount importance that the regional headquarters be staffed
and equipped on time.
The advance team will not engage in the substantive activities of the Mission.
Consistent with Security Council resolution 2261 (2016), all monitori ng and
verification activities will commence following the signing of the final agreement.
Phase 1 of mission start-up will conclude with the gradual transfer of
administrative, financial and support functions to the Mission headquarters, once
Secretariat systems and processes are in place.
Phase 2 of mission planning will consist of getting the Mission ready to
operate at the local level along with representatives of the Government of Colombia
and FARC-EP. The exact number, size and location of the areas where the ceasefire
and laying down of arms will take place are still under negotiation between the
parties in Havana. Consequently, detailed planning assumptions and requirements
for monitoring and verification will need to be determined in the coming wee ks, in
tandem with decisions taken by the parties. Phase 3 will consist of the deployment
of all United Nations observers and the full operationalization of the tripartite
monitoring and verification mechanism. Such deployment can take place only after
the parties have signed a final peace agreement.

2/4

16-03539

S/2016/211

The two parties are committed to the acceleration of the peace talks in Havana,
including on the achievement of an agreement on the ceasefire, cessation of
hostilities and laying down of arms. My delegate to the peace talks, Jean Arnault,
will continue to engage with the negotiating parties, in particular to help to apply
United Nations best practices with regard to international monitoring and
verification. Close cooperation with the parties and close coordin ation with the talks
in Havana, the work of the advance team of the Mission in Bogota and the United
Nations Headquarters planning team will remain essential to enable the Mission to
start operations in a timely manner.
The proposed initial activities in phase 1 will be funded by my unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses account relating to the maintenance of peace and security. In
addition, a request for commitment authority is in the process of being submitted to
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to cover the
remaining needs of phase 1. Wherever possible, the Mission will take advantage of
opportunities offered by existing United Nations assets and government -provided
infrastructure with a view to minimizing the requirements for extensive investment
in facilities and equipment. The cost implications for phases 2 and 3 will be
considered in a full submission to the General Assembly in due course. In the
coming days I shall communicate with the Council on the appointment of my
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia.
2.

Engagement with the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
In keeping with the parties’ request, States members of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) are expected to contribute observers
to the Mission. On 27 January 2016, at the Fourth CELAC Summit, held in Quito,
the Heads of State of CELAC adopted a special declaration expressing readiness to
contribute to the United Nations Mission in Colombia.
On 8 February 2016, the Permanent Representative of the Dominican Republic
to the United Nations convened a meeting of representatives of CELAC member
States. The Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Jeffrey Feltman, and my
delegate to the Colombia peace talks, Mr. Arnault, briefed participants. The goal of
the meeting was to start a dialogue about the future contributions of CELAC
member States to the Mission. My delegate provided an update on recent activities
related to his engagement with the parties in Havana, particularly the
Subcommission on end-of-conflict issues within the Colombian peace process, and
shared the envisaged planning activities for the Mission. The Department of
Political Affairs has continued to engage with CELAC member States to continue
planning for their contributions.

3.

Conclusion
In the present letter, I have reported on the implementation to date of
resolution 2261 (2016), including the activities conducted and envisaged for the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in Colombia. Once the parties reach a
final peace agreement and define the parameters of the laying down of arms, as well
as the definitive bilateral ceasefire and cessation of hostilities, a detailed proposal
will be submitted to the Council.

16-03539

3/4

S/2016/211

In closing, I should like to extend my sincere gratitude to my delegate,
Mr. Arnault, who has been advising representatives of the Government of Colombia
and of FARC-EP in Havana as they define the parameters for the ceasefire,
cessation of hostilities and laying down of arms. Mr. Arnault has likewise adeptly
led the Headquarters-based planning process and overseen the deployment of the
advance team of the Mission to Bogota. I am confident that, with planning
continuing apace, the Organization will be ready to assume the tasks entrusted by
the parties in a timely fashion.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

4/4

16-03539
