'.

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

i253

COUNCIL,;

rd
MEETING:

24 OCTOBER 1980
-.

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2253) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a......................

1

The situation between Iran and Iraq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.2253

fE
-.

i

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Slrpplejnents of the OjJkiul Records of the Swurity Counril. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolufions md
Decisions c>f the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

2253rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 24 October 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
two countries. Unhappily, that hope has not yet been
fulfilled. There has been no cease-fire. There have
been no negotiations.

Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

4. For five weeks now open warfare has raged
between Iraq and Iran, and it has not been confined to
the border areas but has reached far into the territories
of both countries. There has been extensive loss of
life and suffering for the civilian population on both
sides. Each side has inflicted major damage on the
economic installations of the other: the economies of
both of them will probably take years to recover, even
from the damage they have sustained so far. Moreover, this war is taking place in a part of the world
which is of critical importance to the well-being of us
all. Many countries represented round this table,
incltiding my own, have been innocent sufferers from
this conflict: foreign nationals have been killed or
wounded, merchant ships damaged by gunfire or
immobilized in the area Ofconflict, trade and communications interrupted.

agenda (S/Agenda/2253)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situatiop between Iran and Iraq
The meeting

was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation

5. No country represented on the Cbuncil, indeed no
country in the world, can be happy that this dreadful
conflict should continue. My Government has welcomed the efforts that hnve been made by you and your
predecessor, Mr. President, by the Secretary-General, by the Islamic Conference and by the non-aligned
countries, to urge restraint on the parties and to try
to find some basis on which they can settle their diiferences peacefully. The Council has heard representatives of both sides giving a full exposition of their
respective points of view. It was good that the Council did so. We have learned at first hand how deep
and how wide the differences are between the two
sides. At the same time their statements have given us
the opportunity to try to identify points on which in
due course it may be possible-indeed must be possible--to base a settlement.

between Iran and Iraq

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
In accordance with previous decisions [2247th, 2248rh,
2250th and 2251s~ meetings],
I invite the representatives of Iran and Iraq to take places at the Council
table and I invite the representatives of Cuba and Japan
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Ardakani
(Iran) and Mr. Kittani (Iraq) took places at the Council table and Mr. Ron Kouri (Cuba) and Mr. Nisibori
(Japan) took’ the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

2. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): First,
Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you very
warmly on your assumption of and conduct of the
presidency of the Council this month and, by the same
token, my warmest thanks go to my colleague, Anlbassador Taieb Slim of Tunisia, for the skill with which
he conducted our work last month.

6. As I indicated in my statement on 28 September,
I do not believe that the Council need apologize for
what some allege to be its inaction during the last five
weeks. We continue to seek a peaceful settlement
of this dispute with the consent of both parties.

3. When I addressed the Council on this question on
28 September [2248th meeting], it was to urge the
need for an immediate end to the fighting betwee? Iraq
and Iran and to express the hope that, once the fighting
had ceased, negotiations could start in order to find
a settlement to the complicated dispute between those
_-

7. It is not for me to say whether the two parties to
the present conflict are yet ready to let the Council
help them find a peaceful settlement. I hope that their
representatives will soon be in a position to tell us that
they are ready. But, meanwhile, my delegation believes that if we examine the statements made by the
1

representatives of the two part@ and if we examine
the provisions of the Charter am&of such documents
as the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations, and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, which .was ado- ted by the General
Assembly in 1970 [resolution 26,Q5 (XXV], it is possibie to identify certain eiementsphich must surely be
included in a peaceful settlement.

in congratulating you on your assumption to the presidency of the Council for the month of October. My
delegation is confident that, at a time of crisis such as
this, your vast experience and knowledge of international affairs and of the affairs of the Council will
provide the guidance and leadership that the international community and the Council sorely need at this
time. Thenmatter that is .before us today continues to
bear grave implications for world peace and security.
With your proven diplomatic skills, we feel certain
that the Council can move constructively towards a
solution of the present situation between Iran and
Iraq in keeping with the norms of international law and
the principles of the Charter.

8. First, territory is one of th$points at issue. My
Government has noted with approbation the statements by the President and Foreign Minister of Iraq
that Iraq has no territorial ambitions against Iran. The
border conflict between Iraq and Iran goes back over
four centuries. There have been a number of treaties
in that time. The most recent of them was signed in
1975. We have noted the frustration expressed by the
representatives of Iraq at the delay in implementing
it. Equally, we have noted the complaints by the representatives of Iran that the mechanisms it contains for
the.resoiution of any dispute over its implementation
have not been resorted to. It is not for my delegation
to apportion blame. But we docontinue to urge both
sides to acknowledge the commitments they have
entered into to settle their disputes by peaceful means.

13. At the same time, my delegation wishes to express
its appreciation of the efforts expended by your predecessor, the representative of Tunisia, on the same
problem. It will be recalled that during his incumbency
as President, the Council adopted unanimously resolution 479 (1980) seeking an immediate cessation of
hostilities between Iran and Iraq and urging a peaceful
solution through negotiations of the differences between them. We also recall that the President had
appealed to the two parties, in our behalf,’ to settle
their dispute by the same peaceful means.

9. Finally, there is one further principle which is of
general interest as well as being of direct concern to
the parties to the conflict. I refer to the arrangements
for navigation in the Shatt-Al-Arab, which is a major
waterway vital to international shipping. We are fully
aware of Iraq’s legitimate concern to have unimpeded
accessto the Gulf. We are equally aware that Iran has
major ports on the east bank of the waterway. A settiement of the present conflict should take into account
all these factors. In a broader context, I welcome the
assurances given by both parties regarding freedom
of navigation through the Gulf.

14. Needless to say, we are all highly appreciative
of the unremitting efforts of the Secretary-General to
bring both parties to the negotiating table and to offer
his good oflices in assisting the unfortunate victims
of this conflict, especially non-combatants, and in
ensuring that peaceful commercial navigation in the
area of conflict is not placed in jeopardy.
15. On a matter that seriously threatens the peace
and security not only of two parties but also of the
international community, as the present situation
actually does, the responsibility of the Council is clear
and unambiguous. It cannot and should not take a
secondary role to any other organization or any other
effort; it cannot and should not shirk its responsibility
just because other initiatives are being taken; it cannot
and should not be inactive because of the uncompromising posture of either’ or both parties. It must
now resolutely and decisively address itself to this
crisis. Inasmuch as no progress towards peace is foreseeable at the present time, the United Nations’ must
redouble its efforts to find a common ground on which
’
the parties concerned could begin a serious and positive movement towards a peaceful accommodation.
This common ground, which so far has eluded our
search, must be one which will lead to a solution that
is satisfactory and acceptable to both parties. It must
be one on which a just and durable settlement can be
based, in view of the fact, .of which we are ail aware, .
that the issues involved go back far in time and, unless
resolved, could again create discord in the region.

10. This war is not only about territory. Each side
alleges the use or threat of force and interference by
the other in its internal affairs. My delegation is not in
a position to express a view about the validity of those
allegations. But again we should draw the combatants’
attention to two more of the basic principles of conduct
which arise out of the Charter and international law,
namely, that States should refrain from the threat or
use of force against each other and that,States should
not interfere in each other’s internal affairs. Whatever the rights and wrongs of the past, it is surely on
a mutual commitment to these fundamental principles
that a peaceful settlement must be based.
11. In conclusion, I again urge the Governments of
Iran and Iraq to heed the resolution the Council adopted
on 28 September [resolution 479 (1980)J and to find a
peaceful solution to their conflict. And I pledge again
my Government’s full support for all the efforts which
are being undertaken to mediate between them.

16. This is an issue that constantly threatens to
involve other parties-not only a few, but the entire
region and even much of the international commu-

12. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): Mr. President, on this
occasion, I should like to join the other delegations
2

ment of forces that %re now lo&& in battle and
simultaneously to takk’steps to alleviate the dire& and
indirect effects of ths war, such as the plight of the
refugees and other non-combatants, foreign workers
and merchant seamen; to arrange for the safe passage
of merchant and civil&n vessels through the affected
areas; and to render succour to the innocent civilians
who have fallen victim; to the war.
s_
21. Inasmuch as such a peace formula may at this
juncture aim merely at winding down the war and
repairing its immediate’effects, the project is a practical one which will require nothing more than the
setting up of machine+ on the ground to effect its
implementation. It is our hope and our expectation
that the United Nations will, through the good o&es
of the Secretary-General, play a leading role in setting
up that machinery, not only at United Nations Headquarters but also, and ‘more crucially, in the area ‘of
conflict itself.

nity-with dreadful consequences for the economy of
the world and the safety of all of us. This is not just a
theoretical concern; it is already beginning to happen.
This, we believe, could lead to an expansion and an
escalation of the conflict instead of its reduction or
resolution. It behoves the United Nations to take
explicit measures to resolve the conflict in accordance
with the original purposes for which the Organization
was designed., Indeed, it is very encouraging that after
some .hesitation both parties are now willing to participate in the deliberations of the United Nations and
the Security Council, and have in fact &heady presented their views to the Council at length.
17. This point-that the. United Nations should be
involved in the dispute as a third party-is important
and cannot be over-emphasized. We are all aware of
.how divisive this conflict has become. We therefore
urge all other parties to assist the United Nations in
our search for a common ground as a starting-point
from which both parties could move towards peace..If
third parties continue to abet the conflict, not only will
it threaten to engulf many other parties, the superPowers included, but it will also influence each party
to become less inciined to favour the compromise so
necessary as a starting-point in this matter.

22. We are gratified that a beginning has been made
towards the resolution of this conflict. The fact that
both parties have appeared before the Council and
have stated their case to the international community
cannot but be regarded as a hopeful sign by all of us.
Indeed, we take it as’ the start of the common ground
from which we can proceed. We are gratified at the
appeal to the community of nations that such an act
signifies. More than that, we are gratified at the recognition of the fact that unless certain norms of international law and of the charter pertaining to relations
among States are observed and respected by all States,
man cannot coexist on this planet.

18. Much as we deplore the death and destruction
caused by this war, we are also aware of the violation this war has caused of the universal principles
for which the United Nations stands, on which are
premised good relations among States and our hope
for the future of the community of nations. Those,
we all know, include principles on non-intervention
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States;
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of States; the inadmissibility of the
use of force in the settlement of disputes, and its
corollary, the necessity to resort to peaceful means
in the settlement of disputes among States.

23. The Council has already appealed directly to both
parties-through you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-General-to
begin the peacemaking process
between themselves. We have adopted resolution 479
(1980); we have met unceasingly with the repiesentatives of the parties. If at this juncture our efforts are
not met with complete success, it is not for lack of
trying. But try we must, as often as necessary; seek
we must for that glimmer of rapprochement, no matter
how faint, that may signify that an arrangement that
is mutually acceptable and offers promise of eventual
resolution of the issues in this conflict is near at hand.

19. Apart from the universal yearning for peace and
the desirability of co-operation in relations among
States, those principles could, together with other
elements which we all know both parties share, form
. the basis of the common ground of which we speak,
on which to rebuild a structure of peace in that troubled
region. Between Iran and Iraq, as in any other situation of conflict anywhere in the world, mutual interests
outweigh any differences and should in the end prevail
over all other considerations.

24. As we renew our appeal to both parties, let us
assure them both that our deepest concern embraces
their legitimate national interests as well as the welfare
of their peoples and of their neighbours. It is in no
one’s interest further to prolong this war. In the final
analysis, in such a war there are no winners, only
losers.

20. On such common grounds, both parties can by
themselves or with the assistance of the international
community begin to resolve their differences by means
‘of a peace formula. Such a formula may not at the outset address itself to issues on which there is total disagreement and on which both parties do not for the
moment foresee any compromise. But it can, and it
should, begin with an agreement, inter alia, to cease
all hostilities; to desist from all acts that tend to draw
other parties into the conflict; to effect a’ disengage-

The meeting

rose at 4.40 p.m.

NOTE
’ See Resolutions und Decisions of the Security Council. 1980,
p. 23.

3

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICAI’IONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NAllONS

UNIES

Les publications da Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences d&&aim
du
monde cntier. Informer-vous aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies. Section
ties ventes. New York ou Gentle.
KAK

HOlIYYHTh

%%AaHHK

W3AAHKII

O&WMiH3B~llH

3xnax H arewrcrsax
Bamex
HauxR,

KXII~~~OY

OPrAHH3AII[HW

O6neAHXeHHbl%
~0

xaramne

HaqHf%

OE%EJ&HHKHHIJX
Nd+HO

paRonax sinpa. Haaoftnre

BC~X

xnx

m*uxfe

CeK~KK~o~pox~eHJL(axHR.

KyIIUTb

HAUHK
B Kxx)I(xbIX

cnpamcif 06

*o a~pecy:Opranm3auxK
Hbm-RopKunnH(exesa.

u3namxx

Yam-

B

O6neAIIHeHIiblx

,

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIOhiES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de ias Nacidnes Unidas estan en venta en librrrias y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Con&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Vcntas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

al300

83-6146Z-October i9@-Z.Q50
