A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/149
7 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 114 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/632/Add.3)]
48/149.

Situation of human rights in El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Guided by the international human rights instruments,
Recalling its resolution 47/140 of 18 December 1992 and taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/93 of 10 March 1993 1/ and the
statement of 20 August 1993 by the Chairman of the Subcommission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities 2/ on support for the peace
process in El Salvador, as well as Security Council resolution 888 (1993) of
30 November 1993,
Taking into account the reports of the Secretary-General and the
Director of the Human Rights Division of the United Nations Observer Mission
in El Salvador,
Convinced that full and speedy implementation of the outstanding
commitments of the peace agreements is necessary in order to guarantee full
respect for human rights and the consolidation of the reconciliation and
democratization process under way in El Salvador,

_____________
1/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993,
Supplement No. 3 (E/1993/23), chap. II, sect. A.
2/

See E/CN.4/1994/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1993/45, chap. VIII, para. 245.
/...

A/RES/48/149
Page 2

Welcoming the fact that most of the agreements have already been put
into effect by the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Martí
para la Liberación Nacional,
Concerned none the less that problems persist and that there are
continuing delays in the implementation of several important elements of the
peace agreements, referred to in Security Council resolution 832 (1993) of 27
May 1993, and that there have also been some irregularities in the
implementation of those relating to public security,
Noting with concern the recent acts of violence in El Salvador, which
may indicate renewed activity by illegal armed groups and could, if left
unchecked, negatively affect the peace process in El Salvador, including the
elections scheduled for March 1994,
Noting also with concern the seemingly politically motivated murders of,
and threats against, members of the different political parties, including the
Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional and the Alianza Republicana
Nacionalista,
Welcoming in this regard the efforts of the Secretary-General in
cooperation with the Government of El Salvador towards the establishment of a
mechanism to investigate illegal armed groups and their possible connection
with renewed political violence,
Noting that El Salvador has entered a decisive phase in the peace
process and that political parties have just begun a campaign for the
elections to be held in March 1994, which should take place in a peaceful
environment,
Noting the importance of the fact that reforms of the judicial system
have been adopted, as well as the need for the adoption of both the reforms in
the process of being approved and those recommended by the Commission on the
Truth, 3/ which are designed to contribute to the elimination of the existing
impunity and consequently to the full attainment of the rule of law,
Recalling the role that the Office of the National Counsel for the
Defence of Human Rights is called upon to play in the promotion and protection
of human rights,
Considering that the international community must follow closely and
continue to support all efforts to consolidate peace, ensure full respect for
human rights and undertake the reconstruction of El Salvador,
1.
Commends the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo
Martí para la Liberación Nacional for having fulfilled most of their
commitments and for having overcome a number of obstacles to the
implementation of their agreements;
__________
3/

See S/25500, annex.

/...

A/RES/48/149
Page 3

2.
Expresses its concern that there are important elements of the
peace agreements that have been only partially implemented and therefore calls
upon the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Martí para la
Liberación Nacional to step up their efforts to complete as agreed, by the
proposed dates, the programme for the transfer of land, the reintegration
programme for ex-combatants, the deployment of the National Civil Police and
the phasing out of the National Police, as well as the collection of weapons
issued for the exclusive use of personnel of the armed forces and the adoption
of the Act on Private Security Services;
3.
Condemns the recent acts of violence that may be politically
motivated, which have been repudiated by the various sectors of Salvadorian
society, and considers it inadmissible that such acts, perpetrated by a small
minority, should jeopardize the progress made in implementing the agreements
and hamper the holding of free elections in March 1994;
4.
Supports, in this context, the efforts of the Secretary-General,
in cooperation with the Government of El Salvador, to initiate immediately an
impartial, independent and credible investigation of illegal armed groups, as
recommended by the Commission on the Truth, 3/ and urges all sectors of
society in El Salvador to cooperate with such an investigation;
5.
Notes with satisfaction the statement of 5 November 1993, entitled
"Commitment of the presidential candidates to peace and stability in El
Salvador", in which the candidates, inter alia, solemnly committed themselves
to maintaining the constructive evolution of the peace process and to
implementing all the commitments contained in the peace agreements and
rejected any politically motivated violence or intimidation;
6.
Calls upon all Governments to contribute to the consolidation of
peace and the attainment of full respect for human rights in El Salvador by
supporting full compliance with the peace agreements;
7.
Reiterates its gratitude for the important work being carried out
by the Secretary-General and his representative and by the United Nations
Observer Mission in El Salvador, and extends to them its support so that they
can continue to take all necessary steps to contribute to the successful
implementation of the peace agreements;
8.
Acknowledges with satisfaction the continuing efforts of the
Governments of Colombia, Mexico, Spain and Venezuela, which make up the Group
of Friends of the Secretary-General, as well as the Government of the United
States of America, in support of the steps being taken by the SecretaryGeneral to consolidate the peace process in El Salvador;
9.
Notes that, as has been pointed out by the Secretary-General, the
human rights situation in El Salvador continues to evolve in a somewhat
ambivalent fashion, since, on the one hand, there continue to be signs of
improvement and, on the other, violations persist, particularly as regards the
right to life, and the capacity of the judicial system to clarify and punish
such violations continues to be unsatisfactory;

/...

A/RES/48/149
Page 4

10.
Urges all States, as well as the international financial and
development institutions, promptly and generously to provide financial
contributions to support the fulfilment of all aspects of the peace
agreements, including the National Reconstruction Plan;
11.
Urges the Government of El Salvador and all other institutions
involved in the electoral process to adopt the necessary measures to create an
atmosphere conducive to ensuring that the elections scheduled for March 1994
are free, representative and authentic, since they are a key element in the
consolidation of the peace process.
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993
