S/2015/914

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central
Africa and the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request contained in the
statement of the President of the Security Council dated 11 June 2015
(S/PRST/2015/12), in which the Council requested me to keep it informed about the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA). It provides an assessment of the major political and
security developments in the Central African subregion, since my previous report,
dated 14 May 2015 (S/2015/339), offers an update on progress in the
implementation of the mandate of UNOCA, and reports on efforts t o implement the
United Nations regional strategy to address the threat and impact of the activities of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) (see S/2012/481).

II. Major developments in the Central Africa subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
Since my last report, the political environment in the subregion has continued
to be dominated by preparations for elections and national dialogues, the impact of
the crisis in the Central African Republic and the threat posed by Boko Haram, as
well as cross-cutting and security issues.
3.
On 25 May, the sixteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
took place in N’Djaména. The Assembly elected President Ali Bongo Ondimba of
Gabon as the Community’s new chair and successor to President Idriss Déby Itno of
Chad. Rwanda was readmitted as a member State of ECCAS.
Elections and national dialogues
4.
At the third Emergency Summit of Heads of State held in Dar es Sala am on
6 July, the East African Community (EAC) issued a communiqué recommending the
designation of President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda as facilitator for the
inter-Burundian dialogue, the postponement of the presidential election in Burundi,

15-20633 (E)

011215

*1520633*

S/2015/914

the formation of a government of national unity and the commitment of all parties to
respect the Arusha Agreement and refrain from amending the constitution.
5.
The municipal and legislative elections held on 29 June and the presidential
election held on 21 July in Burundi took place in a very tense and polarized
environment that was not conducive to an inclusive, free and credible electoral
process, despite the adequate logistical preparations by the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante. The ruling party, the National Council for the Defence of
Democracy — Forces for the Defence of Democracy, won 77 out of 100
parliamentary seats. President Nkurunziza was re-elected. On 1 August, opposition
parties, with the exception of the Amizero y’Abarundi coalition, led by Agathon
Rwasa, met in Addis Ababa and established the Conseil national pour le respect de
l’Accord d’Arusha pour la paix et la réconciliation au Burundi et de la restauration de
l’état de droit. On 24 August, a new Government was formed, which included five
members of Amizero y’Abarundi. Mr. Rwasa, who had been opposed to President
Nkurunziza’s third term, was elected Deputy Speaker of Parliament.
6.
A number of political assassinations targeting high-profile members of the
ruling party, the opposition, Burundian defence and security forces and civil society
took place during the reporting period, which exacerbated political divisions in the
country and made the prospect of a dialogue increasingly elusive. The Government of
Burundi established a National Commission for Inter-Burundian Dialogue in October;
however, the Commission has done little to relieve tensions. On 17 October, the
African Union Peace and Security Council expressed its deep concern over the
continuing political impasse in Burundi and urged the resumption of President
Museveni’s facilitation on behalf of EAC. There has been no progress on the holding
of a national dialogue, and while a Government was formed, many key oppositi on
politicians remain in exile. In the meantime, the situation remains highly volatile.
7.
On 2 October, President Paul Biya of Cameroon reshuffled the Government
while retaining Prime Minister Philemon Yang, a move that had been widely
anticipated following the local and legislative elections held in 2013 and the
deterioration of the economic and security situations. Seventeen new Ministers,
including three women, were appointed.
8.
In Chad, the Government reshuffled the cabinet on 24 August, and split th e
Ministry of Interior and Public Service. The Government took a number of
initiatives aimed at fostering dialogue with political actors, in particular within the
Cadre national de dialogue politique (CNDP). On 12 September, some 30 political
parties issued a joint statement to protest against repeated summons of opposition
leaders by the police. On 26 October, biometric voter registration started throughout
Chad and will cover nearly 6 million voters in 8,092 centres until 9 December.
9.
In the Republic of the Congo, President Denis Sassou Nguesso convened a
national dialogue, from 13 to 17 July, on the revision of the 2002 constitution.
Opposition parties under the umbrella of the Front républicain pour le respect de
l’ordre constitutionnel et l’alternance démocratique and the Initiative pour la
démocratie congolaise refused to participate. From 26 to 29 July, an alternative
dialogue bringing together nearly 600 participants, mainly from opposition parties,
opposed any constitutional amendment. On 10 August, a reshuffle of the government
resulted in the departure of two ministers opposed to a constitutional amendment. On
22 September, President Sassou Nguesso announced his intention to convene a
referendum on a new constitution, which took place on 25 Octob er. On 6 November,

2/18

15-20633

S/2015/914

President Sassou Nguesso promulgated the new constitution after the Constitutional
Court confirmed that the voter turnout rate was 71.2 per cent, with 94.3 per cent in
favour of the new constitution. On 7 November, the opposition coalitions rejected
the new constitution and called for civil disobedience. They also called on the
international community, including the United Nations, to facilitate dialogue with the
Government.
10. On 20 October, the opposition had planned rallies in Brazzaville and Dolisie.
Hours before the rallies were due to begin, the President’s office issued a broadcast
message on radio and television, calling for people to return to work and banning
public gatherings. Mobile Internet services, text messages and the Radio France
International channel were shut down in Brazzaville until 3 November. The
Government confirmed that there were four deaths as a result of clashes between the
protestors and security forces, as well as several injuries, some serious. On
21 October, some opposition leaders were briefly detained, then kept under de facto
house arrest until 3 November.
11. On 9 November, President Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo announced the holding of a national dialogue by the end of November.
Opposition leaders agreed on the principle of a dialogue only if it does not lead to a
“glissement” for the November 2016 legislative and presidential elections. Some
opposition leaders have also indicated that they would take part in the dialogue onl y
if it was facilitated by an international mediator. President Kabila has indicated that
his preferred option would be for Congolese stakeholders to reach consensus among
themselves without the involvement of any external actor; he noted, however, that th e
question of international facilitation remained open for discussion. On 8 September, a
ruling from the Constitutional Court urged the Government to take exceptional
measures to establish transitional leadership for the newly created provinces and the
National Independent Electoral Commission to organize the election of governors
before any other voting. On 29 October, President Kabila, acting on the ruling of the
Court appointed Special Commissioners to administer 21 of the 26 new provinces, a
move that was criticized by the opposition, as the executive branch of the provinces
should have emanated from gubernatorial elections, for which no dates have yet been
set. A new bureau of the Electoral Commission is being established, following the
resignation of the Commission’s president and vice-president. The group of seven, a
group of seven opposition parties that were members of the presidential majority, was
expelled from the majority on 16 September following a letter the group sent to
President Kabila calling for the respect of the constitution and the electoral calendar.
12. In Equatorial Guinea, the Government closed the country’s land borders from
4 to 6 November in the run-up to the third Extraordinary Congress of the ruling
Partido Democrático de Guinea Ecuatorial (PDGE) in Bata from 10 to 12 November.
PDGE nominated President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo as its candidate for the 2016
presidential elections.
13. In Gabon, on 27 June, members of the ruling Parti démocratique gabonais
(PDG), including 20 members of Parliament and former Ministers, launched a new
movement called Héritage et modernité, and called for an extraordinary congress to
hold a dialogue within PDG. The main opposition coalition, the Front union de
l’opposition pour l’alternance, experienced internal tensions over the nomination of a
sole candidate for the 2016 presidential elections. The reactivated Conseil national de
la démocratie, an advisory body tasked with providing institutional space for political

15-20633

3/18

S/2015/914

dialogue, held its first and second plenary sessions from 29 July to 6 August, and
from 29 October to 7 November, respectively. The Front union de l ’opposition pour
l’alternance coalition boycotted the proceedings of the established dialogue
mechanism. Recommendations submitted to the Parliament and the Government
included the reinstatement of presidential term limits, two -round presidential and
legislative elections and an age limit of 80 years for presidential candidates; the
holding of an inclusive national dialogue; and the establishment of the Conseil
national de la démocratie as a constitutionally mandated institution.
14. On 8 August, by-elections for legislative and senatorial seats were held in
three constituencies in Gabon. PDG won one senatorial seat, while the opposition
Union nationale won one senatorial and one legislative seat. On 11 September,
President Bongo Ondimba reshuffled the Government, while retaining Prime
Minister Daniel Ona Ondo in office. The revision of the electoral roll for the 2016
presidential election commenced on 30 October and will last until 13 December.
15. In Rwanda, the Lower House of Parliament unanimously approved the draft
revised constitution, which shortens presidential terms from seven to five years and
maintains term limits, but removes existing ones for the serving President. The vote
followed a nationwide popular consultation in favour of the reforms. On 5 June, in
an attempt to block Parliament’s move, the opposition Democratic Green Party filed
a lawsuit in the Supreme Court, which was rejected on 8 October. The Senate will
review the draft constitution before submission to a referendum.
Central African Republic
16. In the Central African Republic, violence broke out again on 26 September in
Bangui, resulting in 77 dead and 414 injured, according to government sources.
Attacks also targeted the personnel and premises of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in that country (MINUSCA), as
well as humanitarian personnel. Members of the Central African armed for ces were
allegedly involved in the escape of 689 prisoners from the Ngaragba prison on
28 September. The international community widely condemned this latest attempt to
destabilize the country, vowing to provide support to the Transitional Authority and
warning that robust action would be taken against potential spoilers and that they
would be brought to justice. Despite the resignations of the Vice -President and the
President of the National Electoral Authority, preparations for the constitutional
referendum and combined presidential and legislative elections progressed under the
leadership of a new National Electoral Authority bureau, which was designated on
28 October. By 16 November, when voter registration closed, more than 1,980,000
voters, representing approximately 95 per cent of the estimated electorate, were
registered; however, the out-of-country voter registration of Central African refugees
and diaspora progressed slowly, with approximately 47,700 refugees, or
24 per cent of the estimated refugee electorate of 198,000 registered, raising
concerns about the inclusiveness of the electoral process. On 9 November, the new
electoral calendar was released, announcing the holding of the constitutional
referendum on 13 December, the first round of Presidential elections on
27 December and the second round on 31 January 2016.
17. The international mediation, composed of the Republic of the Congo, the
African Union and the United Nations, has continued to support national authorities
in their efforts to restore constitutional order.

4/18

15-20633

S/2015/914

18. On 25 November, an Extraordinary Summit of ECCAS Heads of State and
Government took place in Libreville. Regional leaders endorsed the revised
electoral calendar.
Boko Haram
19. During the reporting period, the Boko Haram terrorist group perpetrated a series
of deadly attacks in Cameroon and Chad. On 15 June, two suicide bombers attacked
the police headquarters and the police academy in N’Djaména, killing 34 people and
wounding over 100 others. On 11 July, a suicide bomber killed 15 people and
wounded over 80 others at the central market in N’Djaména. In July, a series of
suicide bombings in the towns of Fotokol and Maroua in the Far North Region of
Cameroon killed at least 40 people and injured more than 100. In Sep tember, the
towns of Kerawa, Kolofata and Mora suffered a number of suicide bombings, which
killed at least 40 people and injured over 150. On 10 October, five suicide bombers
killed at least 36 people and wounded nearly 50 in the town of Baga Sola in the Lake
Chad area. Several other attacks occurred in the Far North Region of Cameroon, in
particular close to the border with Nigeria, as well as in the Lake Chad area of Chad,
particularly on isolated villages.
20. In response, the authorities in both countries took measures to prevent suicide
bombings. The Cameroonian and Chadian security forces frequently clashed with
Boko Haram elements, resulting in fatalities and casualties on both sides. On
20 May, the Parliament of Chad voted to extend indefinitely the mandate of the
Chadian troops conducting counter-Boko Haram operations in Cameroon and
Nigeria. On 9 November, the Government of Chad declared a state of emergency in
the Lake Chad region, with immediate effect, granting the authorities the ability to
search and monitor residents in the region.
21. On 25 May, the Headquarters of the Multinational Joint Task Force was
officially inaugurated in N’Djaména. My Special Representatives for Central and
West Africa attended the ceremony.
22. On 4 June, President Muhamad Buhari of Nigeria met with President Déby
Itno in Chad. President Buhari also travelled to Cameroon from 29 to 30 July to
meet with President Biya. The leaders discussed ways to strengthen cooperation
against Boko Haram. On 11 June, President Déby Itno and the Minister of Defence
of Cameroon attended a summit of Heads of State of the member States of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and Benin in Abuja. The summit approved the concept of
operations for the Multinational Joint Task Force; authorized th e immediate
deployment of funds for the Task Force headquarters; approved the deployment of
national contingents under the operational command of the Task Force Commander;
requested the African Union to provide operational support to the Task Force and
mobilize resources; and adopted an emergency development plan for the Lake Chad
Basin. In addition, the summit agreed that Nigeria would designate a Commander
for the regional force for the entire duration of the mission, while Cameroon would
designate a rotating Deputy Force Commander and Chad would designate a rotating
Chief of Staff. On 22 August, the Chief of Staff of the armed forces of the member
States of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin finalized in N ’Djaména the
deployment plan of the Task Force. The joint summit of Heads of State of ECCAS
and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), originally

15-20633

5/18

S/2015/914

scheduled to have taken place in Malabo on 15 October to discuss Boko Haram, has
been postponed sine die.
23. On 12 October, approximately 90 military personnel of the United States of
America began deploying to Cameroon with the consent of the Government to
conduct airborne intelligence gathering, surveillance and reconnaissance operations
in the region. The total number of military personnel of the United States to be
deployed to Cameroon is anticipated to be up to approximately 300.
Lord’s Resistance Army
24. LRA continued to pose a regional security threat, in particular in the eastern
part of the Central African Republic and the north-eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The group survived by exploiting the absence of State
authority, poor infrastructure, porous borders and lack of inter -state coordination, as
well as by engaging in opportunistic alliances with other armed groups and illicit
trade, including in ivory, diamonds and gold.
25. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in the
first half of 2015, LRA was responsible for 131 attacks, 19 deaths and 317
abductions. Overall, while the number of attacks and deaths has remained constant
since the launch of the United Nations regional strategy in 2012, the number of
abductions, usually short-term, continues to increase steadily.
26. In the eastern part of the Central African Republic, LRA reportedly
concentrated its operations along the border between the Haute -Kotto and Mbomou
prefectures, where attacks have increased at mining sites in the vicinities of Yalinga
and Nzako towns. Sporadic attacks continued in the Haut Mbomou prefectur es near
the border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo while LRA activity was also
reported around Sam Ouandja, close to the border with the Sudan. In the north eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, attacks were carried out on
the Dungu-Duru, Dungu-Bangadi, Bangadi-Niangara, Bangadi-Doruma, DunguFaradje and Ango-Banda axes, as well as in the Azande hunting domain in Garamba
National Park in the Haut and Bas-Uélé districts of the Orientale Province.
27. On 18 May, the African Union Peace and Security Council renewed the mandate
of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of LRA for another year.
Notably, the Peace and Security Council: (a) urged the members of the Initiative to
remain committed to it, including by enhancing logistical support to their respective
contingents; (b) stressed the need for closer operational coordination between the
African Union Regional Task Force and relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations; and (c) urged the Security Council to take the necessary measures,
including adjusting the mandates of the relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations, to facilitate the provision by these operations, within capabilities, of
effective support to the Initiative. The Peace and Security Council also called for
regular meetings of the Joint Coordination Mechanism, the oversight body of the
Regional Task Force, which has not met since March 2014.
28. On 10 September, Pre-Trial Chamber II of the International Criminal Court
terminated proceedings against former LRA commander Okot Odhiambo, following
confirmation of his death. Odhiambo was reportedly killed in the Central African
Republic during a battle with the Uganda People’s Defence Force. On 20 March, a
body was exhumed from a burial site alleged to be that of Odhiambo and

6/18

15-20633

S/2015/914

transported to Kampala. In June, following DNA tests, the Office of the Prosecutor
conclusively confirmed that the body exhumed was that of Odhiambo. The leader of
LRA, Joseph Kony, and his deputy, Vincent Otti, are still at large.
29. From 12 to 15 September, the African Union Special Envoy for LRA Issues,
Lt. General (Rtd.) Jackson Tuwei, visited Khartoum pursuant to an invitation by the
Government of the Sudan to the African Union Commission and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, which was reported to the Security Council on 14 May
2014 (S/2014/345). He held discussions with senior Sudanese officials, including on
the reported presence of LRA in Kafia Kingi.
30. On 23 October, the President of the United States of America, Barack Obama,
reauthorized for an additional year Operation Observant Compass, which supports
the Regional Task Force.
31. On 28 October, following consultations with the Ugandan authorities, the
Presidency of the International Criminal Court decided that the confirmation of
charges hearing in the case concerning LRA commander Dominic Ongwen,
scheduled for 21 January 2016, would be held at the seat of the Court at The Hague,
Netherlands.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
32. During the reporting period, seven incidents of piracy and armed robbery at
sea in the Gulf of Guinea were reported by the International Maritime Organization.
Little progress was achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the June 2013
Yaoundé summit, including the operationalization of the Interregional Coordination
Centre. The lack of logistical and financial resources to implement the agreed
roadmap remained a challenge.
33. From 7 to 9 October, the International Conference on Maritime and Energy
Security in the Gulf of Guinea was held in Luanda, bringing together some 300
public and private representatives from the maritime and energy sectors from over
50 countries. It aimed at sharing international best practices in order to improve
regional security coordination, strengthen public-private security partnerships, and
protect the marine and maritime economy in the Gulf of Guinea. The conference
was co-organized by the Governments of Angola, Italy and the United States.
34. The African Union Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government
on Maritime Security and Development for Africa, scheduled to be held in Lomé,
from 2 to 7 November, was postponed.
Poaching and the illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources
35. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), in partnership with
the Central African Forest Commission, organized the first Regional Workshop of
Central African States on strengthening border controls to address illici t wildlife and
forest crime, in Brazzaville, from 31 August to 2 September. The workshop brought
together representatives and experts from law enforcement forces and judiciary of
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Republic of the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Gabon, as well as ECCAS, the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the World Customs Organization and
non-governmental organizations. The workshop built on the African Strategy on
Combating Illegal Exploitation and Illegal Trade in Wild Fauna and Flora in Africa,

15-20633

7/18

S/2015/914

which was adopted in Brazzaville on 30 April. It was organized in line with General
Assembly resolution 69/314 of 30 July 2015 on “Tackling Illicit Trafficking in
Wildlife”.

B.

Humanitarian developments
36. As of November, Boko Haram-related violence in the Lake Chad Basin region
had displaced over 2.5 million people, including 1.5 million children. In Chad ’s
southern Lake region, 60,000 people were internally displaced, while 7,000 Nigerians
sought refuge. The humanitarian community expressed concern about the
Government’s plan to relocate some of the internally displaced and all of the refugees
to an unknown location. The United Nations humanitarian country team advocated for
the relocation to be voluntary and close to host communities so that the displaced
communities would benefit from protection and access to essential services. Chad
also hosted hundreds of thousands of other refugees as well as returnees from
neighbouring countries. Cameroon hosted 62,000 Nigerian refugees and some 92,000
people were displaced internally in the Far North Region. Cameroon also hosted
another 250,000 refugees, mostly from the Central African Republic. While countries
of the region hosted significant populations of refugees and internally displaced
persons, concerns were also raised about the treatment of refugees and internally
displaced persons, with reported cases of denial of access or deportations by host
countries.
37. In the Far North Region of Cameroon, food insecurity has increased sharply in
recent months, as of November 2015 affecting 2 million people, up from 900,000
earlier this year. Malnutrition rates crossed the emergency threshold with severe acute
malnutrition at 2.2 per cent. A cholera outbreak in the Far North and North Regions in
July affected 23 people, with two deaths. The livelihoods of populations in the Lake
Chad region were significantly affected by Boko Haram violence over the last six
months. Two thirds of the population in the region suffered either displacement, loss
of employment, insecurity and violence, border closure, inflation or the unavailability
of food in markets. The majority of households had poor or limited food
consumption, with many resorting to survival strategies to access food. Cameroon
hosted 256,000 refugees from the Central African Republic and 62,000 from Nigeria,
but did not commensurate support from the international community with regional
refugee plans for the Central African Republic and Nigeria and remain ing
underfunded at less than 40 per cent.
38. The political crisis in Burundi had significant humanitarian consequences. As
of November, 213,429 Burundian refugees had fled to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. The
Inter-Agency Regional Refugee Response Plan for Burundian refugees remained
underfunded at 34 per cent. The impact of the crisis is also expected to become
more visible inside Burundi, given the deteriorating socioeconomic situation. There
are already concerns over protection, food security, health and nutrition in some
parts of the country.
39. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, humanitarian needs remained acute. A
total of 7 million people were in need of humanitarian assistance, including
2.7 million internally displaced persons. The country hosted 249,000 refugees from
Rwanda, the Central African Republic and Burundi, while there were over 551,000

8/18

15-20633

S/2015/914

Congolese refugees living in protracted exile in Angola, Burundi, the Central A frican
Republic, Kenya, the Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
40. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, by the
end of October, over 180,000 people remained internally displaced in LRA-affected
areas, including 162,000 persons in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
18,000 in the Central African Republic. In addition, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan hosted 9,200 and 10,200 refugees, respectively, from
neighbouring countries in LRA-affected areas.

C.

Human rights trends
41. The human rights situation in the region has greatly deteriorated as a result of
the activities of armed groups, including the anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka in the
Central African Republic, as well as Boko Haram in Cameroon and Chad. The
recent elections in Burundi also triggered serious human rights violations.
42. Boko Haram continued to kill and maim civilians, primarily in suicide attacks,
to abduct children and women and to loot and burn villages in Cameroon and Chad.
On 29 August, 10 Boko Haram fighters were executed by firing squad, one day after
being sentenced to death by the Criminal Court of N’Djaména over their role in the
twin attacks in the capital in June. The three-day trial, the first concerning Boko
Haram in Chad, was expedited and moved to a secret location due to security reasons.
Chad reinstated the death penalty for cases related to terrorism on 5 August, six
months after it had been abolished.
43. Concerns were also raised over alleged human rights violations committed by
security forces from Cameroon and Chad during counter -insurgency operations
against Boko Haram. Those violations include the arbitrary arrest and detention of
Boko Haram suspects, enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
issued a report on violations and abuses committed by Boko Haram and the impact
on human rights in the affected countries (A/HRC/30/67) and stressed
accountability for all violations by all parties.
44. As of 23 October, OHCHR registered 198 killings, nearly 100 cases of torture,
and hundreds of cases of arbitrary arrest and detention in Burundi. In many cases,
people were released after a few days; in others they were held in pretrial detention
for months, far beyond the maximum duration allowed by national and international
law. Several human rights defenders and media professionals suffered threats and
intimidation, and many fled the country.
45. The recent upsurge of violence in the Central African Republic led to a rise of
acts of intercommunal violence, targeted killings of civilians and the displacement
of thousands. Many houses were burned, and at least two churches and one mosque
were vandalized and destroyed.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
46. On 17 July, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the annual discussions on Common Policies and Challenges of Member

15-20633

9/18

S/2015/914

Countries with the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC).
In its press release, IMF assessed that annual growth in 2015 was projected to slow
down to 2.8 per cent from 4.7 per cent in 2014, mostly because of l ower public
investment. The regional fiscal deficit was projected to deteriorate to 5.7 per cent in
2015 from 5 per cent in 2014. The current account deficit was expected to widen
from 3.8 per cent of gross domestic product to 5.8 per cent in 2015, as oil exports
were expected to decline and investment-related imports to remain significant.
47. IMF further noted that CEMAC countries had reacted differently to the new
economic context, marked by a sharp fall in oil prices and Boko Haram -related trade
and economic disruption and increased spending on security, with most countries
scaling back their spending plans by reducing public investment and limiting current
expenditure. All countries had also sought advances from the regional central bank.
As a result of these and other debt-related developments, regional public debt was
rising. Oil production was projected to start falling after 2017, putting the burden of
ensuring macroeconomic sustainability on boosting non-oil revenue, prudent public
spending and improving the competitiveness of the non-oil economy.
48. For its part, the Executive Board of the Bank of Central African States, which
met in Yaoundé on 28 September, revised its growth forecast for the CEMAC area
to 2.5 per cent (from 2.8 per cent) owing to decreasing oil prices and increasing
security costs. The Board recommended rationalizing budgetary spending,
diversifying economic activities and deepening regional integration.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
49. During the reporting period, my Special Representative, Abdoulaye Bathily,
remained engaged with key stakeholders in order to help prevent conflict and
promote regional peace and security. He also undertook a number of countryspecific visits.
Burundi
50. On 21 June, I dispatched Mr. Bathily to Bujumbura to facilitate dialogue with
a view to ensuring that the conditions for the holding of peaceful, inclusive, free and
fair elections were met prior to the holding of elections.
51. The Joint International Facilitation Team held meetings from 23 to 26 June with
Burundian stakeholders. The Government attended one session of the inter -Burundian
dialogue, while the National Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the
Defence of Democracy and other allied parties did not attend the meetings. On
25 June, the Facilitation Team proposed that the local, legislative and presidential
elections should be postponed by a month. While the proposal was approved by the
opposition parties, the Government rejected the principle of postponing the elections.
52. On 6 July in Dar es Salaam, my Special Representative participated in the
third Emergency Meeting of the Ministers of the EAC on the situation in Burundi.
He also held consultations with the EAC Chair, President Ja kaya Kikwete of the
United Republic of Tanzania, to emphasize the need for dialogue as a precondition
for the holding of credible and peaceful elections in Burundi. He travelled to Kigali

10/18

15-20633

S/2015/914

from 4 to 7 August and from 4 to 6 September to meet with President Paul Kagamé
and senior government officials. He also extended United Nations support to the
EAC high-level facilitator on the Burundi crisis, during a meeting with his Minister
of Defence in Kampala on 3 September.
Central African Republic
53. My Special Representative continued his role as the United Nations
representative in the international mediation on the crisis in the Central African
Republic, in close collaboration with my Special Representative for the Central
African Republic and Head of MINUSCA.
54. On the margins of the annual meetings of the African Development Bank, held
in Abidjan from 27 to 30 May, my Special Representative held bilateral
consultations with a number of potential donors. He stressed that funding for the
timely conclusion of the transition was urgently needed. On 27 July, he attended the
eighth International Contact Group meeting on the Central African Republic, which
took place in Addis Ababa, where he highlighted that the Bangui Forum for National
Reconciliation was a significant milestone in the peace process and called for the
implementation of the Forum’s recommendations. He underscored the urgent need
to mobilize resources for the effective implementation of the outstanding elements
in the peace process, namely disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform and elections. On 1 October, on the margins of the seventieth
session of the General Assembly, I convened a high-level summit on the situation in
the Central African Republic to garner financial, technical and political support for
the implementation of the most critical priority outcomes of the Bangui Forum.
55. My Special Representative maintained regular contacts with regional leaders
in order to keep them engaged in the peace process in the Central African Republic.
In particular, he held regular consultations with President Sassou Nguesso, the
ECCAS-appointed international mediator on the crisis in the Central African
Republic. He also held regular meetings with the former and current Chai rpersons
of ECCAS.
56. During the reporting period, my Special Representative visited the Central
African Republic three times to engage with all relevant stakeholders. My Special
Representative has contributed to putting the electoral process on the fast track and
to reducing tensions around contentious matters.
Chad
57. From 13 to 15 August in N’Djaména, my Special Representative exchanged
views with political stakeholders, including President Déby Itno and opposition
leader Saleh Kebzabo to discuss the situation in the country in the context of the
upcoming elections and Chad’s military engagement against Boko Haram. He
reiterated my calls to them to refrain from violence and engage in an inclusive and
constructive political dialogue and urged them to take the necessary measures to
preserve peace and stability in the country. He also met with CNDP to examine
preparations for the elections and the need for dialogue. From 18 October to
1 November, the Department of Political Affairs and UNOCA dispatch ed a highlevel consultant to N’Djaména to identify entry points and recommendations for the
facilitation and promotion of a useful and preventative political dialogue process.

15-20633

11/18

S/2015/914

Gabon
58. My Special Representative continued his efforts to defuse electi on-related
tensions by encouraging Gabonese political actors to engage in constructive
dialogue, as I have done, particularly following the political tensions that arose in
the aftermath of the death of the opposition leader, André Mba Obame, and social
tensions triggered by the fall in oil prices. In that regard, he maintained regular
contacts with key government officials as well as members of the ruling party and
the opposition. He also maintained contact with civil society and the diplomatic
community.
Republic of the Congo
59. During the reporting period, my Special Representative travelled to the
Republic of the Congo five times — before, during and after the constitutional
referendum — to meet with President Sassou Nguesso and other stakeholders,
including leaders of the opposition.
60. Following the sudden rise of tensions ahead of the referendum, my Special
Representative dispatched his chief political affairs officer to Brazzaville t o monitor
developments on the ground, establish communication channels with all
stakeholders and ensure that Headquarters was constantly updated. My Special
Representative himself returned to the country and pursued consultations,
advocating in particular for the release of the detained opposition leaders and
building consensus around issues of common concern, such as electoral governance
and dialogue. This has greatly contributed to defuse tensions and led the parties to
show restraint. On 7 November, my Special Representative travelled back to the
Republic of the Congo on a follow-up visit, during which he met with President
Sassou Nguesso, the opposition parties and civil society organi zations to pave the
way towards a political dialogue on electoral governance.
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
61. UNOCA, in its capacity as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC), organized
the fortieth ministerial meeting of the Committee, held in Luanda from 1 to 5 June.
The Committee reviewed the overall political and security situation in Central Africa,
including the impact of Boko Haram on Cameroon and Chad, the transition in the
Central African Republic, the situation in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the activities of armed groups, as well as the humanitarian situation
resulting from the above-mentioned crises. The Committee examined ongoing
initiatives related to disarmament, poaching and the illicit wildlife trade, the
development of the integrated strategy on counter-terrorism and non-proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, efforts to combat drug trafficking and organized crime,
and human rights issues.
62. The Committee adopted two declarations, expressing its solidarity regarding the
resolution of the crises in Burundi and the Central African Republic. The Committee
welcomed the proposal of the Government of Gabon to host the forty-first meeting of
the Committee, scheduled to take place in Libreville from 23 to 27 November.

12/18

15-20633

S/2015/914

Elections
63. From 7 to 9 September, UNOCA, in collaboration with MINUSCA and the
United Nations Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa,
organized in Bangui a workshop on the role of media in the conduct and promotion
of peaceful electoral processes. Central African journalists endorsed the “Code of
Conduct for media and journalists during the electoral period in Central Africa ”,
which had been adopted during a regional workshop held in Douala, Cameroon,
from 6 to 8 May. My Special Representative, who chaired the closing ceremony,
welcomed this commitment and stressed that civic responsibility was useful in
building democracy and peace.

B.

Support to the United Nations, regional and subregional initiatives
on peace and security
Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
64. My Special Representative attended the twenty-fifth summit of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union in Johannesburg, South Africa,
which took place from 13 to 15 June. He participated in high-level meetings in the
subregion relevant to the mandate of UNOCA, including the above -mentioned
ECCAS Summit of Heads of State and Government and the high-level retreat of
Special Envoys and Mediators, which took place in Windhoek on 20 and 21 October.
My Special Representative met with the ECCAS Secretary-General regularly to
discuss the situation in the region and UNOCA support to ECCAS.
65. On 28 August and 25 September, my Special Representative met with the
Secretary-General of the International Organisation La Francophonie (OIF) and
briefed her on the mandate of UNOCA and the ongoing challenges in the subregion.
Mediation
66. With operational expertise provided by the Mediation Support Unit of the
Department of Political Affairs, UNOCA continued its collaboration with ECCAS,
which proposed, in a workshop held in Yaoundé from 21 to 23 July, a set of options
for the creation of a “Committee of the Wise” on institutional, legal, financial and
operational issues.
Boko Haram
67. From 3 to 5 June, UNOCA participated, as an observer, in an extraordinary
meeting of the ECCAS Defence and Security Commission in Yaoundé, to streamline
support to Chad and Cameroon in their fight against Boko Haram through the
development of an action plan pursuant to the Yaoundé Declaration of 16 February
2015 of the Council for Peace and Security of Central Africa.
68. From 11 to 13 August, my Special Representative held meetings in Yaoundé
with Cameroonian authorities on Boko Haram. From 13 to 15 August, in N ’Djaména,
he met with President Déby Itno and the Minister of Defence of Chad. He encouraged
a holistic approach to the threat posed by Boko Haram, including by addressing the
conditions conducive to its activities and in compliance with international human
rights, humanitarian and refugee law.

15-20633

13/18

S/2015/914

Integrated subregional strategy on counter-terrorism and small arms
69. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, UNOCA and the Government of Gabon
organized two workshops in Libreville: one on the financing of terrorism in Central
Africa from 19 to 21 May and another on criminal justice responses to terrorism and
on the validation of a draft regional strategy and plan of action on counter -terrorism
and the non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa, from
29 September to 2 October. The latter was the last in a series of wor kshops that had
emerged from the implementation of the road map on counter -terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons that was adopted in Bangui at the
thirty-third ministerial meeting of UNSAC in December 2011. The workshop
concluded with the adoption, at the expert level, of a draft subregional strategy and
draft plan of action on counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of small arms and
light weapons in Central Africa. It is expected that the strategy and plan of action
will be endorsed at the ministerial level during the forty-first meeting of UNSAC.
Coordination of the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army
70. My Special Representative and the African Union Special Envoy for LRA Issues
opened the biannual meeting of LRA focal points, held on 8 and 9 September in
Entebbe, Uganda. The meeting was attended by focal points from the African Union,
ECCAS, United Nations entities, bilateral government partners, non-governmental
organizations, and civil society from LRA-affected areas. For the first time, the
countries contributing troops to the Regional Task Force participated in the meeting.
Discussions centred on a number of key long-standing issues, including the
sustainability of the Task Force and United Nations support thereto, and the structural
lack of funding for reintegration and early recovery programming in LRA -affected
areas. Many participants noted that the strategy could benefit from a review in light
of changing circumstances, competing priorities and dwindling resources.
71. From 18 to 19 November, my Special Representative and the African Union
Special Envoy on LRA conducted a joint diplomatic mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
(a)

Operationalization of the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army
72. My Special Representative continued to advocate for increased support to the
Regional Task Force with African Union officials as well as with relevant partners.
He also continued to engage troop-contributing countries to encourage them to
remain committed to the Task Force. On 3 September, my Special Representative
met in Kampala with the Minister of Defence of Uganda, who pointed out that
country’s resource constraints and called for increased international support to the
Regional Task Force. On 8 September in Entebbe, my Special Representative, the
African Union Special Envoy for LRA Issues and my Deputy Special Representative
for Operations and Rule of Law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, met with
General Bahingwa of the Forces Armées de la République Démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) to discuss the contribution of the FARDC to the Task Force as well as
cooperation between the FARDC contingent of the Regional Task Force and
MONUSCO in keeping with Security Council resolution 2211 (2015).

14/18

15-20633

S/2015/914

73. On 22 May, MONUSCO established the Northern Sector covering Haut and
Bas-Uélé districts with the view to improving coordination and cooperation between
MONUSCO and the FARDC contingent of the Regional Task Force. The Northern
Sector’s headquarters is based in Dungu. Two Mobile Operational Bases were
established in Nagero, Garamba National Park, from 10 to 25 July and 14 to
17 September.
74. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) continued to provide
logistical support, including access to United Nations flights, information
technology assistance, vehicle maintenance and medical support, to staff of the
headquarters of the Regional Task Force in Yambio. UNMISS also regularly
exchanged information with the Task Force. In line with Security Council resolution
2217 (2015), MINUSCA began enhancing its operational coordination with the
Regional Task Force, including through the deployment of 30 troops to Obo.
(b)

Protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance
75. During the reporting period, MINUSCA began to patrol LRA-affected areas,
including Obo, Zemio, Rafai, Bangassou and Yalinga. Early warning systems have
been playing a critical role in empowering communities to better protect themselves
in the absence of adequate State authority in LRA -affected areas in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In those areas,
humanitarian assistance continued to decrease as donor attention shifted to other
parts of both countries.

(c)

Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
76. The Regional Task Force, supported by the United States Special Forces of
Operation Observant Compass, as well as MONUSCO and non-governmental
organizations, continued to actively encourage LRA defections. LRA activity in
vast, unpopulated and hard-to-access areas had an adverse impact on the
effectiveness of defection messaging. According to LRA Crisis Tracker, th ere have
been only 10 long-term (at least six months) returnees during the reporting period.
LRA elements face challenges in defecting, including fear of reprisal stemming
from Joseph Kony’s propaganda and the alleged lack of clarity in Uganda’s amnesty
laws. During the reporting period, MONUSCO processed 48 LRA returnees,
including six fighters.
77. During the last meeting of LRA focal points, participants agreed on the need to
update and harmonize the relevant disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration Standard Operating Procedures. Reintegration
programming for LRA returnees, including vocational training and psychosocial
support, as well as host communities continued to be severely underfunded, owing
in part to the low number of LRA returnees.

(d)

Long-term development and peacebuilding support
78. The stabilization and rehabilitation of LRA-affected areas remains a daunting
task. Those areas, in addition to other areas in LRA-affected countries, have
historically experienced underdevelopment and conflict. Within existing frameworks
and faced with dwindling resources and competing priorities, United Nations entities
continued activities to facilitate the establishment of State authority and the rule of

15-20633

15/18

S/2015/914

law, the promotion and protection of human rights, the rehabilitation of key
infrastructure, in particular roads and bridges and the improvement of livelihoods.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
79. From 17 to 18 May, UNOCA hosted the third meeting of United Nations
presences in Central Africa. My Special Representative for the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Resident Coordinators/United Nations Development
Programme country directors from six Central African countries, representatives
from the Office of the Special Envoy for the Sahel, the United Nations Office to the
African Union, UNODC, the World Health Organization and the Department of
Political Affairs undertook a collective analysis and developed a shared
understanding of regional peace and security challenges in Central Africa. A one day special session was devoted to electoral processes and the prevention of
election-related violence. Participants adopted a set of recommendations for
promoting stability and democracy in Central Africa and increasing coherence and
coordination of the United Nations in this regard.
80. On 16 and 17 November, in Durban, South Africa, my Special Representative
participated in the meeting organized jointly by the Peacebuilding Suppo rt Office
and ACCORD on the theme “Enhancing the inclusivity and accountability of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund support”.

IV. Observations and recommendations
81. I remain deeply concerned about the continuing attacks by Boko Haram and
their destabilizing impact on the Lake Chad Basin region, including reported
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law by the group. Efforts
by regional and subregional actors to address this threat should be in full compliance
with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. Following the
establishment of the Multinational Joint Task Force headquarters in N ’Djaména, I call
on the international community to support its full operationalisation through the
mobilization of requisite political, logistical, and financial support and the provision
of necessary expertise. I encourage the concerned governments to address t he root
causes of the Boko Haram insurgency in a holistic and integrated manner, including
with regard to human rights. In this connection, I encourage ECCAS and ECOWAS to
hold the planned Summit of Heads of State without further delay. My Special
Representatives to Central and West Africa, as well as the United Nations country
teams in the region, stand ready to support those efforts.
82. The continuing political crisis and instances of politically motivated violence in
Burundi give rise to serious concern, particularly because of their human rights
implications and significant humanitarian consequences. I urge the Government of
Burundi to expedite investigations and judicial proceedings against individuals
responsible for human rights violations. I also call for the resumption of an inclusive
political dialogue without further delay. The United Nations will continue to support
the search for a peaceful solution to the challenges facing Burundi.

16/18

15-20633

S/2015/914

83. Growing political tensions and violence in a number of countries in Central
Africa is a stark reminder that the question of constitutions and elections, notably
presidential elections, continues to represent an important challenge to peace and
stability in the subregion. My Special Representative will conti nue to work with all
stakeholders to defuse tensions early and prevent the escalation of violence.
84. The situation in the Central African Republic is worrying. The latest cycle of
violence, which began on 26 September, has resulted in further hardship fo r the
population and additional delays in the electoral calendar. It is critical that the
individuals responsible for the most recent violence, and their sponsors, are brought
to justice. I remain concerned about the slow pace of implementation of the
recommendations of the Bangui Forum for National Reconciliation. It is important
that the efforts of the Transitional Authorities are supported by the international
community to ensure that critical aspects are implemented expeditiously. I also
commend the region for its continued engagement in support of the Transitional
Authorities to restore constitutional order and fight impunity in the Central African
Republic.
85. I commend the efforts of the Governments in the subregion, United Nations
entities, national and international non-governmental organizations and other
partners to address the humanitarian impact of the crises in the Central African
Republic on neighbouring countries. In that regard, I reiterate my call for the
international community to urgently provide the requisite financial support to the
inter-agency Central African Republic regional response plan.
86. I remain concerned about maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea. I reiterate
my call on States in the region and international partners to provide the necessary
resources to ensure the adequate functioning of the Interregional Coordination
Centre and to operationalize the Regional Centre for Maritime Security in Central
Africa and the Regional Centre for Maritime Security in West Africa. UNOC A, in
collaboration with UNOWA, will continue to provide assistance in the region and
mobilize support in order to achieve these objectives.
87. Considering the growing links between illicit wildlife trade and armed groups
in the subregion, including the Lord’s Resistance Army, I reiterate my call on
Central African Governments and ECCAS to work together on a subregional
strategy to address this phenomenon. In collaboration with UNODC, UNOCA will
continue to support the subregional efforts to identify colla borative approaches to
address this issue.
88. The LRA has been severely weakened, thanks to the collective efforts of LRA affected countries and partners, including the African Union, the United Nations, the
United States, the European Union and other stakeholders. The LRA continues,
however, to have a disproportionate impact on the civilian population. It is critical
that the troop-contributing countries to the African Union Regional Task Force
remain committed and closely cooperate with each other. It is equally critical that
international partners sustain their support to the Regional Task Force.
89. Safe havens and illicit trafficking networks are the lifelines of the LRA. I
welcome the visit of the African Union Special Envoy for LRA issues to the Sudan.
It is my hope that the Government of the Sudan will continue to demonstrate a
similar spirit of cooperation to verify allegations of LRA presence in Kafia Kingi. I
am mindful that the humanitarian and development challenges facing LRA -affected

15-20633

17/18

S/2015/914

areas are formidable. I call on the donor community to stay the course, in particular
for the reintegration of LRA returnees and the protection of children.
90. I would like, once again, to express my appreciation to the Governments of
Central African countries, ECCAS, CEMAC, the African Union, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region and other
regional and subregional institutions for their continued collaboration with
UNOCA. I also express my gratitude to the African Union Regional Task Force, the
Multinational Joint Task Force and troop-contributing countries for their dedication
and commitment to the service of peace. My appreciation also goes to the
Government and the people of Gabon for their hospitality and constan t assistance to
UNOCA. I thank the various entities of the United Nations system working in
Central Africa, including the heads of United Nations peace operations, regional
offices, country teams and other relevant entities, for their support and cooperati on
with UNOCA.
91. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing efforts to advance the cause of
peace and security in Central Africa.

18/18

15-20633
