Resolution■ adopted without reference to a Main Committee

increased. Partial, sporadic and half-hearted measures
will not suffice. On the occasion of this anniversary,
we have proclaimed the 1970s to be the Second
United Nations Development Decade, which coincides with and is linked to the Disarmament Decade,
and have adopted the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade.G We urge all Governments to give
their full support to its most complete and effective
implementation in order to realize the fundamental
obJectives of the Charter.
10. The new frontiers of science and technology
demand Feater international co-operation. We reaffirm our mtention to make full use, inter alia, through
the United Nations, of the unprecedented opportunities created by advances in science and technology for the benefit of peoples everywhere in such
fields as outer s9ace, the peaceful uses of the seabed beyond national jurisdiction and the improvement of the quality of the environment, so that the
developed and developing countries can share equitably scientific and technical advances, thus contributing to the acceleration of economic development
throughout the world.
11. The great increase in the membership of the
Organization since 1945 testifies to its vitality; however, universality in terms of membership in the
Organization has not yet been achieved. We express
the hope that in the near future all other peaceloving States which accept and, in the judgement
of the Organization, are able and willing to carry
out the obligations of the Charter will become
Members. It is furthermore desirable to find ways
and means to strengthen the Organization's effectiveness in dealing with the growing volume and
complexity of its work in all areas of its activities,
and notably those relating to the strengthening of
international peace and security, including a more
rational division and co-ordination of work among
the various agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system.
12. Mankind is confronted today by a critical and
urgent choice: either increased peaceful cooperation and progress or disunity and conflict, even
annihilation. We, the representatives of the States
Members of the United Nations, solemnly observing
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
reaffirm our determination to do our utmost to ensure
a lasting peace on earth and to observe the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter, and
express full confidence that the actions of the United
Nations will be conducive to the advancement of
mankind along the road to peace, justice and pro-

gress.
1883rd plenary meeting,
24 October 1970.

s

Deploring the continued occupation of the Arab
territories since 5 June 1967,
Seriously concerned that Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which was unanimously adopted and which provides for a peaceful
settlement of the situation in the Middle East, has
not yet been implemented,
Having constdered the item entitled "The situation
in the Middle East",
1. Reaffirms that the acquisition of territories by
force is inadmissible and that, consequently, territories
thus occupied must be restored;
2. Reaffirms that the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East should include the
application of both the following principles:
(a) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict;
( b) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the
sovereignty, terntorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area and its right to live in
peace within secure and recognized boundaries free
from threats or acts of force;
3. Recognizes that respect for the rights of the
Palestinians is an indispensable element in the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East;
4. Urges the speedy implementation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), which provides for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the Middle
East, in all its parts;
5. Calls upon the parties directly concerned to
instruct their representatives to resume contact with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Middle East in order to enable him to carry
out, at the earliest possible date, his mandate for the
implementation of the Security Council resolution in
all its parts;
6. Recommends to the parties that they extend the
cease-fire for a J?Criod of three months in. order that
they may enter into talks under the auspices of the
Special Representative with a view to giving effect
to Security Council resolution 242 (1967);
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council within a period of two months, and to
the General Assembly as appropriate, on the efforts of
the Special Representative and on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 242 ( 1967) ;
8. Requests the Security Council to consider, if
necessary, making arrangements, under the relevant
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure
the implementation of its resolution.
1896th plenary meeting,
4 November 1970.

2628 (XXV). The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Seriously concerned that the continuation of the
present grave and deteriorating situation in the Middle
East constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security,
Reaffirming that no territorial acquisition resulting
from the threat or use of force shall be recognized,
G Resolution

2626 (XXV).

2632 (XXV). Rationalization of the proc~,dures
and organization of the General Asseml,ly

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the growth of its responsibilities
and membership makes desirabk a rev;cw of its pn1cedures and the organization of us work,
Conscious of the fact that the United Nations is
being increasingly called upon to meet new challenges
and undertake new initiatives,
