Commission of Investigation to the President of the
Security Council II asking whether the Council desired
that the Commission as a body should appear in New
York to present its report, and decided to inform the
Chairman that the reply to his cablegram was in the
affirmative, on the understanding that if a member of
the Commission was unable to come to New York he
would have the option of sending a substitute.

Conseil de securite par le President de la Commission
d'cnquete 5 demandant si le Conseil souhaitait que la
Commission comparaisse devant lui a New Yt,rk, en
tant qu'organe constitue, pour presenter son rapport,
et il a decide d'informer le President de la Commission
que la reponse a son cablogramme ctait affirmative.
etant entcndu que, si un membrc de la Commissi,)n
etait empeche de se rendre i.t New York, ii aurait la
faculte de se faire remplaecr par un supplbnt

Adopted by 8 votes to
none, with 3 abstentio11s
(Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Adorr.'c par 8 ,.,,,., , orirn
z,:ro, avec 3 ah,ll'nt1orzs
(Polo?ne, Syrie, Union dl's
Republiqucs soc:a/1.,11·.1· sovietiques l.

28 (1947). Resolution of 6 August 1947

28 (1947). Resolution du 6 aout 1947

The Security Council
Resolves to appoint a sub-committee of the representatives of the delegations which have submitted
proposals on the Greek question and amendments
thereto, in order to ascertain the possibility of formulating a new draft resolution which the sub-committee can
recommend for the approval of the Council. The subcommittee is requested to report its conclusions on
11 August 1947.

Le Conseil de securitc
Decide de nommer un sous-comite compose des
representants des delegations qui ont soumis de~ propositions sur la question grecque et des amendements
y relatifs, qui sera charge de recherchcr la possibilite
de formuler un nouveau projct de resolution quc le
sous-comite pourra rccommander a l'approbauon du
Conseil. Le sous-comite est pric de soumcttre ses
conclusions le !l aout 1947.

Adopted at the 177th meeting by JO votes to none,
with 1 abstention (Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics).

Adoptfr u !« 177• searu:e
par JO ,·oix con,rc 1.ho,
avec u1u: a/,stention <l ',1:✓ :n
des Repu/,/iqw's socialisr1:,

sovietiques).

34 (1947). Resolution of 15 September 1947

34 (1947). Resolution du 15 septemhrc 1947

[S/555]

[S/555 l

The Security Council
(a) Resolves that the dispute between Greece, on
the one hand, and Albania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria,
on the other, be taken off the list of matters of which
the Council is seized ; and
(b) Requests that the Secretary-General be instructed to place all records and documents in the case at
the disposal of the General Assembly.

Le Conseil de securite
a) Decide que le differend entre la Grecc, d'unc

part, et l'Albanie, la Yougoslavie et la Bulgarir, d'autrc
part, soit retire de la liste des questions dont le Conseil
est saisi ; et
b) Demande que le Secretaire general soit prie de
mettre a la disposition de J'Assemblee gencralc tlHIS
les comptes rendus et documents conccrnant cettc
affaire.

Adcpted at the 202nd meeting by 9 votes to 2 (Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Adoptee d la 20.~· starzff
par 9 voix con/rt· 2 (P,,logne, Union dt's Republiques svcia/isre., sovihiqucs).

11 Official Records of the Security Council, Second Year,
Supplement No. 11, annex 29.

5 l'roces-,·erbaux officiels du Conser/ de .<ecuritc, tteuxiemt·
annee, Supplement n• JI, annexe 29.

5
