S/PV.7673

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7673rd meeting

Monday, 18 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. McCully
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-10775 (E)
*1610775*

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

In just a few days, the Jewish people will celebrate
one of Judaism’s most important holidays, Passover.
I extend my best wishes to my Jewish friends and
colleagues for a happy and peaceful holiday.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Maldives, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
It is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Wilfried I. Emvula, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in the Middle East.
2/34

18/04/2016

Allow me to begin with my visit to Lebanon, Iraq,
Jordan and Tunisia three weeks ago with the President
of the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong Kim. Our trip
sought to highlight the need to increase development
assistance through innovative financing mechanisms
for countries, like Lebanon and Jordan, that are
disproportionately impacted by the conflict in Syria.
Last Friday, together with the Presidents of the World
Bank and the Islamic Development Bank, I co-chaired
a ministerial-level conference to garner the financial
support for that initiative. I am pleased to inform
members that we had an encouraging response. Eight
countries and the European Union generously pledged
$1 billion for a concessional loan facility, $141 million
in grants and $500 million for a guarantee facility. In
addition, many other countries expressed support for
this innovative initiative and their intention to provide
financial support. I hope that donors will continue to
respond to this effort to invest in peace and stability in
the region.
For over six months, Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory have been gripped by a surge
in violence, triggered by individual terrorist attacks
by Palestinians. Approximately 30 Israelis and
200 Palestinians have been killed, with most of the
Palestinians killed while reportedly carrying out knife,
gun or car-ramming attacks. I condemn all such attacks
unreservedly. There can never be any justification for
stabbings, vehicle attacks, shootings, incitement to
violence or the glorification of killers.
I welcome the joint Palestinian-Israeli efforts that
have contributed to a reduction of tensions in recent
weeks. However, these latest killings have only deepened
the divisiveness, hatred and grief. I also welcome
the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian security discussions
on Area A. I urge all sides to recognize the risks of
failing to reach a lasting understanding on this pressing
matter. I acknowledge the recent public statements
by President Abbas rejecting violence and terror and
firmly supporting continued security coordination with
Israel. President Abbas and I discussed the importance
of those and other issues in Amman on 27 March. I
encourage more such statements, backed by concrete
actions. Israelis and Palestinians need their leaders to
elevate public discourse above mutual accusations and
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to engage in a constructive dialogue that can rebuild the
trust that has all but evaporated.
The Middle East Quartet is moving forward on
a report that will review the situation on the ground
and the threats to a two-State solution and provide
recommendations on how to advance peace. The report
is intended to help inform international discussions
to advance the two-State solution: a sovereign and
independent State of Palestine living side by side in
peace and security with the State of Israel. Tragically,
that solution seems more distant than it has for many
decades. A 20-year-old Palestinian living under
occupation has seen no political progress at all during
his or her lifetime. Impatience and despair at that fact
is one of the root causes of the violence that blights
Israeli and Palestinian communities, prevents economic
development and growth and denies the human potential
of millions of people. It is incumbent upon all of us to
do everything in our power to secure lasting peace.
Our collective efforts face dynamics in Israel and
Palestine that call into question the willingness of the
parties to overcome the hurdles to peace. Israel continues
to demolish Palestinian structures in the occupied
West Bank at an alarming rate. The total number of
demolitions in 2015 was exceeded in early April of this
year. More than 840 people have been displaced. Most
of the structures concerned are deemed illegal by Israel
because they were built without permits; yet Israel
makes it almost impossible for Palestinians to acquire
permits. These acts raise concerns that Israel intends to
implement over 11,000 outstanding demolition orders
in Area C of the West Bank.
I am also concerned by the continued punitive
demolitions of homes belonging to families of
alleged Palestinian perpetrators of attacks against
Israelis. Punitive demolitions are a form of collective
punishment, which is prohibited under international law.
They are unproven as a deterrent and they fuel tensions
by exacerbating feelings of injustice and hatred.
Meanwhile, settlement plans and retroactive
legalizations continue to advance in almost untraceable
steps through the complicated planning process. Those
steps, together with last month’s declaration of “State
land” — the first in over 18 months — signal that
Israel’s strategic settlement enterprise continues to
expand on land intended for a future Palestinian State.
I once again reiterate that settlements are illegal under
international law and undermine the two-State solution.

S/PV.7673

The creation of new facts on the ground through
demolitions and settlement-building raises questions
about whether Israel’s ultimate goal is in fact to drive
Palestinians out of certain parts of the West Bank,
thereby undermining any prospect for a transition to a
viable Palestinian State.
On the Palestinian political front, I regret the
continued failure of intra-Palestinian discussions to
achieve genuine unity on the basis of non-violence,
democracy and the Palestine Liberation Organization
principles. I reiterate my call on Palestinian factions
to demonstrate their commitment to reconciliation,
which is integral to reaching the goal of Palestinian
statehood and to securing a just and lasting resolution
to the conflict. It is imperative for all factions to
ensure that both Gaza and the West Bank are returned
to the control of a single, democratic and legitimate
Palestinian Authority.
I am extremely concerned by today’s announcement
on the uncovering of a tunnel crossing from Gaza into
Israel — the first such discovery since the 2014 Gaza
conflict. I strongly condemn the construction of attack
tunnels as dangerous and provocative moves that not
only threaten the lives of Israelis and Palestinians, but
also undermine efforts to rebuild Gaza. Furthermore,
three rockets were fired from Gaza towards Israel on
14 April, all of which landed short of Israel. No injuries
were reported. I call upon all parties to refrain from
any actions that could lead to renewed conflict in Gaza.
The Palestinian Government has laid out an
ambitious $3.8 billion agenda for stabilizing Gaza,
repairing damage from the 2014 conflict and getting
a recovery under way. Economic development and
rebuilding critical electricity and water infrastructure
are essential. On 8 April, the Gaza power plant shut
down, meaning that residents of Gaza are now supplied
with electricity for just four to six hours per day. More
than a year and a half after the conflict in Gaza, those
conditions are intolerable. I strongly encourage all
Member States to fulfil their commitments to support
the reconstruction and development of Gaza.
More positively, on 3 April, Israel expanded the
Gaza fishing zone from six to nine nautical miles. I
welcome that development and encourage Israel to
expedite further easing measures to support the longsuffering people of Gaza.
Turning briefly to Lebanon, I had an opportunity
to address political and security issues with Lebanese

16-107753/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

leaders in Beirut on 24 and 25 March, consistent
with the concerns of the Council. These include the
importance of preserving Lebanon’s model of pluralism
and coexistence from regional tensions; the urgency
of electing a president without further delay; the need
for all parties to work with Prime Minister Tammam
Salam to enable the Government to function effectively
and to continue to engage in political dialogue; the
importance of sustained international support for the
Lebanese Armed Forces; and the expectation that both
Lebanon and Israel will work to consolidate stability
along the Blue Line and advance the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
I also discussed the importance of actively
supporting the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
particularly in the light of the recent buildup of tensions
in Palestinian camps, including a car bomb on 12 April
that killed a camp official near Ein el Hilweh.
Turning to the Golan, I note the statements made
yesterday by Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel.
This is a long-standing issue that all parties have a
responsibility to help resolve. I remind Israel of its
obligation to implement Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 497 (1981) in all of their parts.
The path out of the current political deadlock
requires commitment, compromise, mutual respect
and leadership on both sides. It also requires the
acceptance — demonstrated by deeds as well as
words — that the two-State solution is the only road
to peace that meets the national aspirations of both
peoples: Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace, security and mutual recognition.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I wish to
express the State of Palestine’s congratulations to China
on its skilled leadership in the presidency of the Security
Council this month and also express appreciation for
the convening of today’s important open debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his briefing on the current situation and
for his continuous efforts to address this long-standing
issue on the United Nations agenda in the interest of
peace and justice.
4/34

18/04/2016

Since our last debate in January, we have
addressed the Security Council on a near-weekly basis
regarding the critical situation in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, as a result of Israel’s
illegal and destructive policies and measures. In each
communication to the Council, we have tried to draw
urgent attention to the grave breaches of international
humanitarian law and human rights violations being
systematically committed by the occupying Power,
including its occupying forces and terrorist settlers. We
have equally appealed for urgent action, in line with
international law, to compel Israel to halt its crimes and
violations, which are inflicting widespread suffering on
the Palestinian civilian population, further inflaming
tensions and destabilizing the situation, destroying the
two-State solution and sabotaging the chances for a
peaceful solution.
Regrettably, this has all been to no avail. The
Security Council remains paralysed, failing to
uphold its obligations in accordance with its Charter
duties, international law and its own resolutions. It
continues — debate after debate, consultation after
consultation and letter after letter — to disregard
the global calls to act seriously to stanch this open,
bleeding wound in the international body by upholding
international law and fulfilling its duty to advance a
solution to the conflict that would assist the Palestinian
people to finally realize the freedom, rights and
justice they have been unjustly denied and to achieve
Palestinian-Israeli peace, security and coexistence.
Indeed, those are the principal objectives at the
core of every appeal we have made to the Council,
week after week, month after month, year after year,
decade after decade. Our appeals have all been made
in full accordance with international law, not founded
on some baseless claim or desire. Nothing that we
come to this Chamber to ask for is beyond the realm of
legality, beyond the parameters of justice or beyond the
imperatives of peace.
And yet, every time we approach the Security
Council, we are chided by a Council member and told
that it is either not the right time or not the appropriate
venue to address the matter, or, ironically, that the peace
process will somehow be undermined by our seeking
rights and peace, or that the doors of the Council are
totally closed, period.
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

When will it ever be the right time to approach the
Council? At what point of crisis will the Council be
galvanized to finally act?
After years of restraint — years of a dramatic
decline in the situation to dangerous levels; years of
unquantifiable loss and suffering for the Palestinian
people; years of destruction of the two-State solution
and obstruction of the prospects for peace; and years of
immense damage to the Security Council’s credibility
and the rule of international law — we can no longer
wait and can no longer accept excuses and pretexts,
domestic or otherwise, that permit violations of the law
and of our people’s rights by the occupying Power, with
total impunity.
On the ground, the corrosive attrition of the twoState solution by Israel’s illegal settlement activities
has been unrelenting. The confiscation and de facto
annexation of land, settlement construction, wall
construction, the demolition of Palestinian homes
and property, and the forced transfer of Palestinian
civilians continue unabated, all with utter contempt
for and in grave breach of international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Security
Council’s resolutions, and in blatant mockery of the
international community’s demands for an end to all
Israeli settlement activities.
During the 26 January open debate (see S/PV.7610),
we heard loud and clear the reaffirmations of the
illegality of Israel’s settlement activities and the
unanimous calls for a halt to all such policies and
measures. What we have witnessed instead is the
intensification of this illegal behaviour, further
fragmenting the contiguity of our State’s territory and
gravely undermining the viability of the two-State
solution on the pre-1967 borders.
Thousands more dunums of Palestinian land have
been confiscated by Israel in the West Bank, with more
than 2,300 dunums slated for expropriation south of
Jericho and more than 1,200 dunums south of Nablus
in the span of one week alone. Home demolitions by
the occupying Power have also alarmingly spiked,
as reported by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
with more than 586 homes or structures demolished
and more than 700 Palestinians forcibly displaced and
rendered homeless since the start of the year.

S/PV.7673

Bedouin Palestine refugees have been especially
affected by the demolitions, and entire communities are
threatened with forced transfer. Of course, the recent
period has also witnessed the advancement of plans for
the construction of hundreds of additional settlement
units, including in the past week, when the occupying
Power decided to proceed with the construction of at
least 250 settlement units, which will end up housing
thousands more Israeli settlers, adding to the over
650,000 settlers already illegally transferred to the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
The stark reality is that, as reported by the Israeli
organization Peace Now, plans for the construction of
Israeli settlements increased by 250 per cent in the first
quarter of 2016, as compared to the same period last
year. We are therefore compelled to ask the Council:
does that not seriously call into question, once again,
the credibility of Israel’s professed commitment to the
two-State solution, or of ever ending its occupation of
our land? How can those facts in any way be reconciled
with the Council’s clear demands for an end to Israel’s
settlement activities and to all attempts to alter the
demography, character and status of the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, according to its own resolutions? When will
the Council hold Israel accountable for those violations
and insist on compliance, the minimum, most essential
requirement for upholding the law, overcoming that
major obstacle to peace and preserving the possibility
of the two-State solution?
In tandem with Israel’s colonization of our land,
it continues its aggression against our people, with
Palestinian casualties mounting as a result of daily
military raids by Israeli occupying forces and violence
and terror attacks by extremist Israeli settlers, in no
small part fuelled by the incitement and inflammatory
rhetoric of Israeli Government officials, including by
the Israeli Prime Minister and members of his Cabinet,
and by extremist religious figures.
Since the current unrest began, in October 2015,
more than 200 Palestinian men, women and children
have been killed, with the bodies of many of those
killed withheld by the occupying Power, even denying
them dignity in death. As they did in the war on Gaza
in 2014, the occupying forces have also continued to
use excessive force, injuring more than 16,000 people,
including thousands of children and women, in the past
six months. That same period has also witnessed the
detention of more than 4,000 Palestinians, adding to

16-107755/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the ranks of over 7,000 Palestinians, among them 450
children, now imprisoned or detained by Israel.
Our children and youth are being especially
targeted and traumatized by this cruel occupation as
Israeli occupying forces operate on a blatant shootto-kill policy, with children as young as 13 years of
age shot and killed without consequences. The stories
of Palestinian children and youth killed in broad
daylight, including those extrajudicially murdered
by the occupying forces, have become too numerous
to recount. Nevertheless, in our weekly letters to the
Council, we have tried to draw attention to those brutal
murders and to share the names of the innocent human
lives so violently taken and so tragically lost.
Faced with such relentless aggression by the
occupation, Palestinian children, one generation after
another, are being permanently scarred and the present
and future fabric of our society is being destroyed.
And yet the Security Council remains silent and the
Palestinian people continue to be denied the protection
they are in dire need of, and entitled to, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. The reality is that
a defenceless civilian population is being left to the
merciless brutality of this military occupation, which
has lasted almost half a century, an occupation whose
forces are armed to the teeth with the most lethal and
sophisticated military weaponry.
Our appeals for protection have been met with
sympathy at best and indifference at worst. We have
been repeatedly told to be reasonable about what the
Council can or cannot do, in spite of the Council’s
own legislation, including resolutions 605 (1987)
and 904 (1994), which clearly call the for protection
of the Palestinian people, and in spite of the study of
precedents shared by the Secretary-General with the
Council in October 2015, which has not been the subject
of one serious discussion. The failure to protect, as in
all other cases in history, will only foster greater Israeli
impunity and disregard for Palestinian life, endangering
even more innocent civilians. The Security Council has
not even held a discussion on the issue of protection.
How shameful of an act is that on the shoulders of the
members of the Security Council.
At a time when the situation is reaching boiling
point, the passivity and silence of the Security Council
is truly shocking. Stopping the deterioration of the
situation and salvaging the prospects for peace require
responsible action without delay. While we have heard
6/34

18/04/2016

repeatedly how unsustainable the status quo is, in fact
there is no status quo and the situation, far from being
static, is worsening every single day, inching towards
an implosion.
The Council cannot stand idly by waiting for the
next full-blown crisis. It is illogical and unacceptable
to continue appeasing Israel’s intransigence and
arrogant, reckless flouting of the law. Israel must be
held accountable for its crimes and violations of an
entire people’s rights, including to self-determination
and freedom, once and for all. We have said it before in
the Chamber and we must repeat it again: the crisis is
existential and we can no longer wait.
We will therefore act responsibly to uphold our
duties to the Palestinian people and will continue
to do whatever we can in the international arena,
foremost here at the United Nations and fully based
on international law, using all diplomatic, political,
legal and non-violent means, to redress the plight of
our people, alleviate their suffering and advance the
realization of their rights, justice and peace.
We have therefore begun our efforts and continue
our appeals for the Council to act through the adoption
of a clear and firm draft resolution to address the
immediate issues before us, including, inter alia, the
illegality of the Israeli settlement campaign and its
destructive impact on the two-State solution; the
increasing extremism and violence of Israeli settlers
against Palestinian civilians and the need for their
protection; and the urgency of international and
regional efforts, particularly within the context of the
Arab Peace Initiative, to create a credible political
horizon and support the parties to de-escalate the
volatile situation, rebuild trust and uphold their legal
obligations and commitments towards resolving all
final status issues and achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.
Consultations are under way with Egypt, as the
Arab representative in the Security Council, along with
our other partners in the Arab Ministerial Committee,
for a decision on when to formally proceed. We
welcome the support of all concerned parties in regard
to that effort and the calls for the Council to uphold
its duties towards the question of Palestine before the
situation further unravels, more innocent lives are lost
and the two-State solution is relegated to the archives
of history.
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In that regard, we also commend the efforts
being undertaken by the Quartet, as well as by the
Government of France. We note that the French
initiative in particular emphasizes the urgency of the
matter — a matter that cannot be shelved or placed
on a backburner until all other crises in the Middle
East are resolved and one that, if left unattended, will
only foster greater Israeli impunity and create a more
fertile ground for radicalization on both sides — and
also significantly emphasizes the need for a collective
process, with the serious engagement and support of
international and regional partners, including a role for
the Security Council, to help the parties resolve all final
status issues and finally bring an end to the occupation
and the conflict as whole.
It is time to stop managing the conflict. This
conflict is not intractable. Its solution has long been
known and firmly rooted in United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
international community must move beyond slogans
and professing its commitment to human rights, justice
and the two-State solution in theory, and actually
mobilize the political will to resolve the conflict. The
alleviation of the humanitarian crisis in Palestine can
never replace a just solution as the ultimate objective.
It is surreal to witness the collective hand-wringing
of the international community at the deplorable
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, as if it were
caused by an uncontrollable natural disaster rather
than the man-made disaster that it really is, wantonly
inflicted by the Israeli war machine and the illegal Israeli
blockade — by air, land and sea — that has isolated,
impoverished, traumatized and dehumanized the entire
Palestinian civilian population of Gaza. Despite the
deeply regrettable political divide in Palestine and the
prolonged efforts to achieve reconciliation and unity
as a matter of national urgency, the failure to bridge
that divide cannot be used as an excuse to continue
imprisoning 1.8 million people and forcing them to live
in the ruins of war and in mass deprivation.
Faced with that reality, in addition to Israel’s
relentless onslaught against the Palestinian civilian
population and colonization in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, how can it be expected that
our people, especially our youth, maintain any belief
in international law and the international community’s
promises to uphold it? How can they maintain any hope
that this injustice will end? And, in the absence of hope
and belief, how is it possible to stave off despair and

S/PV.7673

push back against the tide of radicalism and extremism
plaguing our world?
The time is long overdue for ending the
suffering of the Palestinian people under this illegal
foreign occupation and ensuring the realization of
their inalienable human rights, including to selfdetermination and freedom in their independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and a
just solution to the Palestine plight, the most protracted
refugee crisis in the world. If reason, responsibility
and legal obligations fail to move the Council, perhaps
reflecting on the immense human suffering caused by
this inhumane occupation might create compassion and
invoke moral responsibility to act.
There are too many compelling human stories to
tell, but I wish to conclude with one today. On a recent
visit to the Aida refugee camp in the West Bank, an
Australian Premier, Michael Baird, met with a group of
young Palestinian children and asked one of the boys
what he dreamed of becoming when he was older. The
boy’s response was,
“It’s hard to have dreams when you know they can’t
come true.”
When children feel they cannot even dream, we must
acknowledge the depths of despair and hopelessness
and human devastation that this occupation and conflict
have wrought. We must also acknowledge the depths of
our failure. We can no longer ignore or postpone the
urgency to act. Reviving their hope, rectifying this
historic injustice, making peace a reality and saving
the future generations of both Palestinian and Israeli
children depend upon it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Once again we have gathered
to discuss the Middle East, Israel and the Palestinians.
Time and time again we meet in this Chamber for this
debate. We hear very long discussions about the nature
of the conflict and new proposals to solve it. But the
root of the conflict is not very hard to understand, and
the solution is clear.
For 67 years, Israel has been pursuing peace.
Despite decades of war and rejection, we never gave
up on that goal. Israel finally achieved peace when two
brave Arab leaders, President Sadat and King Hussein,
chose to lay down their arms. They chose the path of
cooperation and partnership over the misery of war and

16-107757/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conflict. That was the key to peace with Egypt in 1981.
That was the key to peace with Jordan in 1994. And it is
the key to peace with the Palestinians today.
The Palestinian people deserve peace. They deserve
a brighter, better future. Therefore, let me be clear. On
the day the Palestinian leadership rejects terror and
violence, on the day they embrace coexistence and
cooperation, that is the day there will be peace. But is
that what the Palestinian leadership really wants? Do
they really want peace? If those gathered here believe
that to be true, then they will have to explain a few
inconvenient facts.
Fact number one is that the Palestinian leadership
refuses to condemn the murder of Israeli men, women
and children. Let me ask everyone in the Chamber: do
not Israeli lives matter?
Fact number two is that the Palestinian Authority
glorifies terrorism and terrorists. They name squares
after suicide bombers and hang posters of them on school
walls. Tell me, when did terrorism become heroism?
Fact number three is that Mahmoud Abbas,
President of the Palestinian Authority, refuses to even
sit down with Prime Minister Netanyahu. How can we
make peace if we cannot even talk? Just recently, the
Palestinian Foreign Minister, Riyad Al-Maliki, said
loudly and clearly,
“We will never go back and sit again in a direct
Israeli-Palestinian negotiation.”
We understand that members of the Council may
not have answers to those questions. What we do not
understand is why we do not demand answers.
The State of Israel and the people of Israel do not
have any more time to wait for answers. For decades
we have been facing Palestinian terrorism. In just the
last few months, Israelis have faced a wave of non-stop
daily attacks by Palestinian terrorists: over 300 separate
attacks in 176 days. That means two terror attacks
per day, every day, for half a year. That is the reality.
Thirty-four people have been killed, and hundreds
have been injured. How has the Palestinian leadership
responded? Have they stopped the daily calls for
violence that are fuelling the bloodshed? Has there been
a clear condemnation by the Palestinian leadership?
The answer is no. Instead of condemning those attacks,
they encourage them. They reward terrorists and their
families with monthly salaries. The more horrific the
attack, the more horrific the crime, the higher the
8/34

18/04/2016

payment. In Palestinian society, terrorists are treated
like heroes.
This year, we all participated in the sixtieth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women.
On International Women’s Day, official Palestinian
Authority television called Dalal Mughrabi a role
model for Palestinian women. For those who may not
know or who may not remember, Dalal Mughrabi was
a terrorist. In 1978, she hijacked an Israeli bus and
murdered 38 innocent people, including 13 children.
This is the woman the Palestinians have turned into a
national symbol.
These are facts we never seem to hear in this
Chamber. Instead, some are all too eager to offer
justification for Palestinian terror and excuses for
violence. Many find it convenient to ignore the
basic truth: the endless incitement and the ongoing
glorification of violence is directly responsible for the
murder of innocent Israelis.
For many Palestinians, incitement is a daily reality.
Children go to school and listen to tales of terrorists.
Teenagers turn on the television and see a constant
flow of images of hate and violence. Young adults go
to mosques and hear sermons demonizing Israel and
calling for its destruction, 24 hours a day, seven days
a week.
This reality has deadly consequences. On
17 January, a young Israeli mother was painting the
door of her house when she was brutally attacked by
a 16-year-old Palestinian terrorist. She was repeatedly
stabbed at the entrance to her home. Knowing her
children were inside, a few metres away, she heroically
fought the terrorist. Even as she was bleeding to death,
she stopped him from pulling the knife from her body.
With her last ounce of strength, she made sure that the
terrorist could not use the knife again to attack her
six children.
That woman’s name was Dafna Meir. Dafna was a
hospital nurse from Otniel, a loving wife and a mother
of six. At her funeral, Dafna’s husband, Natan, said,
“You left me six treasures, I will keep them safe for
you. My Dafna is one in a million. My Dafna, thank
you for every moment I had with you.”
One of those treasures, Dafna’s eldest daughter,
Renana, said,
16-10775

18/04/2016

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

“I didn’t just lose a mother, but also my best friend.
It’s hard for me to think we will not laugh together
or fight anymore, that you won’t accompany me
down the aisle and to the maternity ward.”
Today, Natan and Renana are here with us in the
Chamber, sitting behind me. They lost a wife and a
mother. They paid the most painful price.
We have to ask ourselves why that happened.
What drives a 16-year-old boy to stab another human
being to death? The Palestinian teenager — he was
arrested — gave us the answer in his confession. He
said that what made him want to kill a Jew, any Jew,
was a television show on Palestinian television. The
Palestinian culture of hate and constant brainwashing
is responsible for the loss of too many Israelis, and it is
directly responsible for the murder of Dafna Meir.
It is time for real answers, it is time for the truth.
Since no one else will ask the hard questions, I will.
In the name of the people of Israel, in the name of the
Israeli victims, and in the name of the family of Dafna
Meir, let me ask the Palestinian observer here with us
today. Mr. Mansour, will you condemn Palestinians
who commit terror attacks against Israelis?
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): [Inaudible]
Mr. Danon (Israel): We are saying it all the time.
You should say it in Arabic, not in English. You should
teach it in your schools. You should stop the hatred.
You should stop naming streets after terrorists. Look at
the squares in Ramallah. Look at the streets in Jenin.
You are naming streets after terrorists.

Mr. Danon (Israel):
glorifying terrorism.

Shame

on

you

for

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Shame on you for killing
thousands of Palestinian children.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Shame on you for not saying,
“We condemn all acts of terror, period.” That is what
we are saying. We condemn all acts of terror. That is
what I want you to say, Mr. Mansour. You are being
translated into five languages. You can say it right now.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I ask the
representative of Israel to continue with his statement.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Silence can be deafening, but
in our region silence kills. It is time for the Palestinian
leadership to end its silence and to start acting as
leaders. Mr. Mansour, you cannot condemn terrorism,
you cannot say it here: “I condemn all acts of terror.”
You cannot say it here. People are looking to you,
Palestinian children are looking to you right now and
you cannot say, “I condemn all acts of terrorism.” One
sentence you cannot say. One sentence you cannot say.
Shame on you for that. Shame on you for not being able
to say it.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): You are oppressing us.
You are sitting on our lives. Leave us alone. Let my
people be free.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Shame on you.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Shame on you. You are
the occupier. You are a colonizer.

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): [...] against incitement.
Are you willing to come and attend these meetings in
the presence of the Americans?

Mr. Danon (Israel): We have heard your excuses,
but we have not heard any condemnation.

Mr. Danon (Israel): We condemn all terrorism — in
Hebrew, in English, in Arabic.

Mr. Danon (Israel): All of us, or maybe all of us,
around this table know what it takes to be a leader.
Leaders assume responsibility. Leaders speak out.
Leaders educate. For the sake of the next generation,
this is the lesson the Palestinians must learn. On the
day Palestinian leaders, like Mr. Mansour, publicly
condemn terror against Israelis — publicly — on the
day they end their campaign of hate and violence, on the
day respect for all — all — human beings is taught in
Palestinian schools, on that day they will find a partner
ready to work with them for the promise of peace. The
State of Israel and the people of Israel continue to hope
that that day will come soon.

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We condemn the killing
of all innocent civilians, including Palestinian civilians.
Do you do the same?
Mr. Danon (Israel): You are paying them. You are
paying the families of terrorists.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Do you do the same?
Mr. Danon (Israel): You are glorifying terrorism.
Shame on you for doing that.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We do not. We do not.

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Leave us alone.

16-107759/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now give
the floor to members of the Security Council.
I call on Mr. Murray McCully, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of New Zealand.
Mr. McCully (New Zealand): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and realistic briefing.
Next Saturday, it will be two years since negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinians were suspended. In
the meantime, violence has escalated, the settlements
have continued and trust between the two parties has
been further eroded. And the Council has been largely
a spectator.
It has been accepted wisdom in the Council, and
in the eyes of the international community, that a twoState solution is the only path forward for resolving
this matter. Yet today it is becoming increasingly
apparent that such a solution may be moving beyond
reach and that, if matters continue as they have for the
past two years without action from the Council and
others, the two-State solution will be dead. Against
that background it is difficult to understand why the
Security Council has not adopted a single resolution
on this question in more than seven years, and that
it could be a silent witness to the demise of the twoState solution.
What does the international community therefore
expect of the Security Council in the difficult
circumstances of today? First, it expects the Council to
reassert a two-State solution as the only pathway to a
secure and lasting peace. And it undoubtedly expects it
to condemn the violence on both sides and the ongoing
settlements programme as unacceptable obstacles to
such a solution. Secondly, they expect the Council to
support and give momentum to the work taking place
outside the Council in the Quartet, among the members
of the Arab League, and through the proposed French
international conference. That work is necessary
to rebuild confidence and trust and to prepare the
parties for negotiations. And, thirdly, at the right
time, they expect the Council to endorse a pathway
back to negotiations, potentially through a resolution
on parameters.
Opinions differ as to how some of those elements
should be sequenced. In particular, there is debate as
to whether a Council resolution focused on preserving
a two-State solution, ending the violence and rhetoric
10/34

18/04/2016

and halting the settlements might best precede the
proposed French conference or whether it might follow
it. But I believe there is broad agreement on the content
of those three phases.
When New Zealand proposed a draft text last year,
in the absence of any alternatives, we were persuaded
through the process of consultation that there was
not enough support for it to succeed and that other
processes in play might have been affected if the
Council had acted at that time. However, the situation
has deteriorated further and the threat to a two-State
solution has become greater. Over the coming weeks,
therefore, New Zealand will resume the conversation
about the sequencing and content of a focused draft
resolution as the views of the French representatives
and the Quartet take greater shape. The efforts of
those parties are vital, but they are not sufficient, and
they cannot absolve the Council of its responsibility
to lead. It is our absolute conviction that a Council
resolution is an essential ingredient in the steps that lie
ahead. The only issue is its timing and relationship to
external processes. New Zealand would find it hard to
understand how a draft text with the limited purpose
and focus I have outlined could be too strong to be
acceptable to other Council members.
Conversely, some others may be underwhelmed and
want a more wide-ranging resolution. However, based
on the careful soundings we have taken, our conclusion
is that, in the current dire circumstances, maximalist
positions would almost certainly fail and would serve
only to consign the Council to continuing to preside in
silence over the demise of the two-State solution. Our
immediate task must be to preserve that ultimate goal
and put the Council’s weight behind the first steps on
the path. I know that there are those who would rather
the Council played no role and others who will assert
that there are risks around a resolution at this time.
But the greater risk by far is that the Council might
do nothing at all as a two-State solution is pronounced
dead and buried. New Zealand is therefore committed
to seeing the Council decide on a clear plan over the
coming weeks.
Between the work of the Quartet, the Arab League,
the French initiative and others, there is a vitally
important role for the Security Council. We will work
with others to determine whether a draft resolution can
best support the work of the Quartet, the French and the
Arab ministers by being finalized before or after the
other initiatives that are under way. However, whether
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a Council initiative is concluded imminently or a little
later in the year, we believe it will be useful to start
discussions as soon as possible on a draft text and on
synchronizing the Council’s consideration with other
parties and external initiatives.
We hope that by the time of the next Middle East
debate in the Council, there will be greater clarity and
unity about a way forward.
Mr. Danon (Israel): If I may, we just heard about
a terror attack in Jerusalem in which a bus exploded
and dozens of people are being evacuated. We expect
to hear condemnation of that during today’s discussion.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Today we
are holding a very solemn meeting of the Security
Council, and I therefore urge everyone to abide by all
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure and keep
order in the Chamber so as to reflect the seriousness
of the question we are discussing. I expect all members
present to observe that.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
The commitment of the United States to peace in
the Middle East and to advancing the vision of two
States, living by side by side in peace, is unwavering.
Many are rightly frustrated with the lack of progress,
and we are too. We will continue to be steadfast in our
support of efforts that will advance dialogue, peace and
progress, and to oppose those that do not. Progress will
be born out of hard choices made by both leaders with
the aim of advancing the cause of peace over parochial
politics. As such, we remain very concerned about the
recent wave of terrorism and violence and about the
utter lack of progress the parties have made towards
a two-State solution. It is important that both sides
demonstrate, through concrete policies and action, a
genuine commitment to achieving a two-State solution
in order to reduce tensions and restore hope in the
possibility of peace.
What we have seen on the ground, and what
people such as the Meir family present here today have
experienced first-hand, is absolutely unconscionable.
The recent spate of violence that has been going on for
more than six months has included stabbings, shootings
and vehicular attacks, including, as the Israeli
Ambassador just noted, reports of a bus exploding
in Jerusalem. Acts of terrorism have taken too many

S/PV.7673

lives, including those of Americans. The victims have
included soldiers and civilians, pregnant women and
mothers, Israelis and Palestinians. That must come to
an end. Let us be clear and unequivocal. There is no
justification or rationalization for terrorism. Terrorism
is terrorism. It is wrong, it is bloody and it must stop.
Anyone who aspires to achieve a viable and independent
Palestinian State must understand that engaging in
incitement to violence serves only to undermine that
goal. Only a political outcome, without violence, will
enable that goal to be realized.
The United States continues to call on the
Palestinian leadership, publicly and privately, to do
everything possible to combat all forms of incitement
and to explicitly condemn terrorist attacks. All
perpetrators of violence should be brought to justice,
and justice should be blind, fair and equal. We remain
deeply concerned about the shooting on 24 March in
Hebron of a Palestinian assailant by a member of the
Israeli security forces, and we are closely following
the legal proceedings against the accused perpetrator.
We note that just today charges of manslaughter were
brought against the soldier. It is critical that every
possible effort be made to show restraint, guard against
the unnecessary loss of life and de-escalate tensions. In
cases where anyone from either side acts outside of the
law, they must be held accountable.
As we have stated repeatedly, the United States
strongly opposes settlement activity. It is incompatible
with, and calls into question the Israeli Government’s
commitment to, two States. That is why we are deeply
troubled that, since 1 January, there have been a
number of Israeli declarations of State land in the West
Bank, including expropriating approximately 600 acres
south of Jericho and 250 acres south of Bethlehem.
Just last week, the Government of Israel advanced the
construction of hundreds of housing units in West Bank
settlements in various stages of the planning process.
Many of those units are located beyond the separation
barrier deep within the West Bank. Those actions — the
process of land expropriations, settlement expansions
and the legalization of outposts — are wrong and
fundamentally undermine the prospects for a twoState solution. Similarly, we are deeply troubled by
the demolitions and evictions undertaken by the Israeli
authorities in several locations throughout the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. As we have repeatedly made
clear, we continue to look to both sides to demonstrate

16-1077511/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with actions and policies a genuine commitment to a
two-State solution.
Nowhere are Palestinians suffering more than in
Gaza, where the slow pace of reconstruction remains
concerning. The stranglehold that Hamas wields over
the population in Gaza forces the pace of reconstruction
to stall further, as the taxes it levies and its diversion
of construction materials leave Palestinians in Gaza
with much less than they would otherwise have to
rebuild their homes, communities and infrastructure.
It was announced just today that the Israeli military
discovered a tunnel extending into Israeli territory
from Gaza 10 days ago. We all have an obligation to
ensure that reconstruction materials are used for their
intended purpose. We remain deeply concerned by the
humanitarian conditions in Gaza. The United States
provided an initial contribution of $43.4 million to the
$403 million emergency appeal of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, for its operations in the West Bank and
Gaza, and we thank those in the Council and within the
international community who have made contributions.
But far too few have stepped up with resources. We
ask others to join the United States in meeting those
vast needs. We note that the Government of Israel has
expanded the Palestinian fishing zone off of Gaza’s
coast from six to nine nautical miles, which we hope
will somewhat improve the livelihoods of Palestinian
fishermen in Gaza.
Turning briefly to the political process, as the
Quartet principals jointly stated in Munich in February,
the status quo is unsustainable, and significant steps
are urgently needed to stabilize the situation and
reverse negative trends on the ground. Both sides must
demonstrate through policies and actions a genuine
commitment to a two-State solution in order to rebuild
trust and avoid a cycle of escalation. We believe that
the Quartet’s upcoming report will help to inform
international discussions on the best way to advance a
two-State solution.
Turning now to the ongoing horrific situation
in Syria, we welcome the third round of intra-Syrian
talks, which resumed in Geneva last week, and thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his efforts. As
resolution 2254 (2015) states, the only sustainable
solution to the current crisis in Syria is through an
inclusive and Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, including
through the establishment of an inclusive transitional
12/34

18/04/2016

governing body with full executive powers, which
shall be formed on the basis of mutual consent while
ensuring continuity of governmental institutions.
That is the heart of the effort undertaken by the
International Syria Support Group and the process
that Special Envoy De Mistura aims to move forward
in Geneva. We are acutely aware that the Geneva talks
and the situation on the ground in Syria are deeply
interwoven. Success or failure in one area intimately
affects the others. The stakes are enormous. And
certainly with regard to both the cessation of hostilities
and improving humanitarian access, more can and
must be done. The cessation of hostilities is holding in
parts of the country and has improved the day-to-day
reality of numerous Syrians’ lives in those areas, but
violations continue. We remain particularly disturbed
by the regime’s ongoing attacks on parties to the
cessation of hostilities. Those violations not only harm
and kill Syrian civilians, but also place great strain on
other parties to the cessation of hostilities, many of
whom have made great efforts to show restraint. The
regime’s behaviour will only strengthen the position
of groups like Jabhat Al-Nusra that consistently try to
undermine the cessation of hostilities. We continue to
press the opposition to resist being drawn into violence
as a result of Jabhat Al-Nusra and regime actions. We
have urged the opposition to maintain compliance with
the cessation of hostilities. There must be a halt in
the escalating violence in Aleppo and in other areas,
including Latakia, Hama and the suburbs of Damascus,
where recent events pose a serious threat to the
durability of the agreement.
To understand the human dimensions of violations
to the cessation of hostilities, I want to say just a word
about Dr. Hassan Al-Araj, a respected cardiologist
in the norther part of Hama, who was killed in an air
strike last week. As of today, there are very few doctors
left in Hama, and there are no cardiologists. Hearts that
need care will have no one.
Once again, the Syrian regime needs to end the
killing and the violence, and it needs to do much
more with regard to humanitarian access in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. Of the 4.1 million Syrians in
hard-to-reach locations, the United Nations has been
permitted to reach just 249,000 this year — 249,000 out
of 4.1 million, or little more than 6 per cent of those in
hard-to-reach areas. The main reason for that is clear: the
deliberate obstruction by the Syrian regime, including
disputing the United Nations population figures as a
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

new mechanism to prohibit aid from reaching starving
populations. The regime deployed that new strategy in
the Damascus suburbs of Arbeen, Zamalka and Zabadin,
as all three regions had been approved for assistance
delivery but were stalled as the United Nations had to
renegotiate with the Syrian regime exactly how many
people were in need of assistance. Instead of feeding
people, the United Nations is forced to negotiate and
renegotiate exactly how many starving people will be
fed. For those trapped within the besieged areas, where
people are intentionally starved and maliciously denied
access to international assistance, of the 486,000 people
in 18 besieged locations the United Nations has been
allowed to reach only 12 locales and 152,500 people.
We must do better, and we must do so quickly because
people are literally starving to death.
As such, we commend the United Nations efforts
in the recent successful airlift of food supplies for the
approximately 4,000 residents in Deir ez-Zor besieged
by Da’esh, while noting the remaining challenge to
address the needs of all 200,000 in the city. We also
hope that the recent United Nations trip to Darayya
will lead to the immediate delivery of assistance to its
people, who have not received one crumb of aid since
2012. The world is witnessing an intentional massive
starvation campaign in real time. All actors, including
the regime, need to allow food to reach people who are
literally dying for it.
We once again call on the Syrian regime to comply
with international law, including resolution 2254 (2015)
and the demands of the international community, to
allow assistance to reach all Syrians in need. The next
steps in Syria are as urgent as they are clear. There
must be a permanent cessation of hostilities, full
humanitarian access and an end to the violence, and
all Member States must support the political transition
in Syria.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and for his commitment.
The Oslo Accords, signed in 1994, at a time of
great hope, made the establishment of a Palestinian
State living side by side in peace and security with
Israel the key to the resolution of that historic conflict.
Nevertheless, let us be frank. More than 20 years after
those agreements, the creation of a Palestinian State
has never been as remote. The daily progression of
Israeli settlement activity, which parcels up Palestinian

S/PV.7673

territory so as to reduce it to a small portion, calls into
question the viability of a future State.
Violence structures relations between Israelis and
Palestinians, whether in acts of terrorism, individual
attacks or simply the weight of occupation. The wave of
violence with increasing intensity that has persisted for
six months has led to hundreds of deaths and thousands
of wounded. The rift between the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples is unprecedented. It fuels the radicalization of
public opinion; people seem to no longer believe in the
possibility of the peaceful coexistence of two States.
That is one of the most worrisome aspects. We must
make no mistake against that backdrop. The status quo is
an illusion; the status quo is mechanically a regression,
that daily takes us farther and farther away from the
possibility of one day seeing a two-State solution
emerge. We must look squarely at the harsh reality on
the ground. If nothing is done, the tenuous prospects
for a two-State solution will disappear and the risk of
generalized violence will once again be reinforced.
Given that undeniable observation, France’s
message for several months now can be summarized
in a single sentence: there is crucial need to create a
credible political horizon to save the two-State solution,
as that solution is the only one that responds to the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians for a State and
Israel for security.
As demonstrated by the ongoing implacable nature
of the conflict, we know there can be no easy solutions.
However, the choice of not dealing with the matter,
or searching for ways to act to manage or contain the
conflict, is not that of my country. France believes that
we must all undertake our responsibility to act and,
when the time is right, to do so through the Security
Council. Given the scope of the challenge, we think that
collective mobilization of the international community
is today the only way to move forward. Under the
leadership of President of the Republic and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, France has decided to launch an
initiative to provide a credible political horizon for
the peace process. It is a cooperative, inclusive and
progressive approach.
First, it is cooperative. To that end, the Special
Envoy of France, Ambassador Pierre Vimont, conducted
broad, in-depth consultations with the parties and the
international and regional stakeholders to formulate
proposals. The approach, then, was inclusive, as I
noted. The initiative is complementary to the actions

16-1077513/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conducted by the Quartet, the United Nations and the
United States. Given the difficult task before us, we will
indeed need the commitment of all stakeholders if we
hope to succeed. Finally, the initiative is progressive.
Given the rift between the parties, it would be illusory
to think there would be an immediate resumption of
negotiations. Our goal is therefore based on the priority
of halting the negative spiral and taking the necessary
decisions so as to safeguard the two-State solution, to
recreate on that basis a positive political dynamic.
As was announced by the President of the Republic
in Cairo, France itself proposes to organize in Paris in
early June a ministerial meeting, notably by gathering
the members of the Quartet, the permanent members of
the Security Council and the Arab League, as well as
other regional and European stakeholders. The meeting
would have three objectives.
First, as I mentioned, it would be to reaffirm the
support of the international community to the two-State
solution and the major principles of conflict resolution.
We will be guided by the Quartet’s report, which will
provide one of the foundations of our actions.
Secondly, an objective would be to focus on
garnering specific commitments by the international
community. To implement those ends, we will establish
working groups so as to produce a comprehensive
package of incentives that could decidedly engender
a special European partnership, the reaffirmation of
the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as economic and
security guarantees.
Thirdly, the objective would be to define a timetable
with specific goals as well as the methodology for
an international conference, which we would like to
convene in the fall. The objective of the conference
would be to provide a foundation for relaunching
the process of credible negotiations within an
internationally agreed upon framework.
Since resolution 181 (II), adopted by the General
Assembly in 1947, the two-State solution has been the
shared guideline for the Organization. France is aware
of the difficulty of the challenge; it is a conflict where
so much goodwill has failed. We, however, believe that
is our collective responsibility not to give up. We must
never give up. Our ambition is not claiming that we alone
are able succeed where others have failed. No, France’s
idea is to be a link and to make available our experience
and relationships with the parties in the region so as to
energize the emergence of a consensual approach. That
14/34

18/04/2016

method is demanding, but at the same time we believe it
is the best way to make solid progress and to create the
conditions conducive to forging credible negotiations.
With regard to the situation in Syria, France
welcomed the resumption of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva
on 13 April under the aegis of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General. Mr. Staffan de Mistura enjoys our
full support in his ongoing mediation efforts. We also
welcome the constructive approach of the opposition,
which is engaged in the Geneva negotiations despite
provocations from the regime.
We welcome the stated objective of the resumption
of talks concerning the decisive question, among
others, of the political transition and negotiations with
the regime. The high negotiating committee should lead
to the terms of a compromise for the implementation
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2013/522, annex), in
particular a transition authority within the next six
months, paving the way for the drafting of a new
Constitution by the Syrian people and the holding of
elections in free and fair conditions within 18 months.
Half measures or unilateral arrangements, which the
regime might announce, following fake elections would
have no value, as they would not be the outcome of an
agreement with the opposition, pursuant to resolution
2254 (2015).
We deplore the worsening situation in the Syrian
territory in recent weeks with the observed increase in
attacks by the regime. Those practices demonstrate that
the regime continues those atrocities and violates the
cessation of hostilities, thereby seeking to undermine
the efforts of the international community for a political
solution. Without a political solution, we know there
can be no sustainable peace in Syria.
Finally, hand in hand with the cessation of hostilities,
France believes that the full, safe and unhindered
access, without any preconditions, to humanitarian
assistance to those in the population impacted is a top
priority. The Syrian regime and Da’esh bear significant
responsibility in the matter. Again, strengthened and
effective pressure should be exerted on the regime.
Those actions of the Syrian regime that undermine the
Geneva negotiations must cease.
Allow me say a few words about Yemen, to express
our hope that the delegations will soon meet around
the negotiations table for the resumption of talks
scheduled to resume today, Monday, 18 April. The
resumption of negotiations could give rise to genuine
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

hope. We hope that the Security Council can rapidly
send a clear message to the parties to support this new
dynamic and to provide full support to the work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The hope for
the future of Yemen needs especially to be encouraged
and supported, given the fact that the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate. Furthermore, the
terrorist threat in Yemen is increasing every day. The
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula group and Da’esh
are taking advantage of the instability to spread their
influence across the country. A good-faith commitment
on the part of the parties to the conflict to a political
settlement in Yemen and a clear commitment by the
Security Council are therefore all the more urgent.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Sometimes we hear that, given the numerous
other crises, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has lost
its significance in the context of efforts to maintain
international peace and security. We categorically
disagree with that point of view. Efforts aimed at
solving the Palestinian-Israeli issue should be bolstered.
We believe that the primary task today is to create
conditions conducive to the revival of the negotiations.
The situation on the ground remains tense and
fraught with new spates of violence. Since October
2015, there have been more than 200 Palestinian
victims and more than 30 Israeli victims of the
confrontations. Against that worrisome backdrop, the
Israeli Government has continued its policy of faits
accomplis, building settlements, confiscating land,
demolishing Palestinian homes and jeopardizing the
two-State solution.
In that context, it is more important than ever that
the international community send a clear message
to prevent the unleashing of new spirals of violence
and to underscore the need for a swift resumption
of the negotiations. The leading role in guiding the
situation back to the political-diplomatic front should
be played by the international mediators of the Middle
East Quartet.
The ministerial meetings of the Quartet held in
Vienna in October 2015 and in Munich in February
2016, which were convened upon Russia’s initiative,
were aimed at bringing the parties back to constructive
actions so as to normalize the situation and make
progress in the achievement of sustainable and
mutually acceptable agreements based on well-known
international law. We hope that the upcoming report

S/PV.7673

of the Quartet will provide an objective analysis of the
situation on the ground and recommendations to the
parties. We also hope that it will help to defuse tensions
and provide a political horizon for a settlement.
Neither can we forget about Gaza. The humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip remains exceedingly difficult,
and at any time it could slide into another dangerous
crisis. If progress cannot be achieved in resolving the
problems in the Gaza Strip, overcoming the embargo
and rebuilding the infrastructure destroyed by Israel in
the summer of 2014, repeat clashes cannot be ruled out.
The issue of achieving Palestinian unity is
particularly important in reviving the peace process.
We welcome the meetings among representatives of
Fatah and Hamas held in Doha and Cairo in February
and March to discuss the formation of a Government
of national unity and the holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections. Despite the difficulties
in the negotiations between Fatah and Hamas, we
continue to lend our assistance in overcoming the
inter-Palestinian split.
We appreciate the efforts of all members of
the international community aimed at achieving
a comprehensive, fair and lasting solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. However, such steps and
initiatives must be clearly calibrated and aimed at
specific results. The primary criterion for assessing the
usefulness of such efforts to restart the negotiations is a
clear understanding of their added value.
We share the deep discomfort of most members
of the Security Council with regard to the Council’s
inaction in our efforts to settle the crisis between Israel
and Palestine. Indeed, the most recent Security Council
document on that issue was presidential statement
S/PRST/2009/14, adopted upon Russia’s initiative in
2009. In 2011, there was a veto by the United States on
the draft resolution contained in document S/2011/24,
on the issue of settlements, and, in 2014, there was
an abstention — or hidden veto — on the draft
resolution contained in document S/2014/916. On the
latter occasion, there were two votes against and five
abstentions, but essentially what happened was that
everything was done to block the draft resolution and
to not allow the Security Council’s view on that topic to
be heard. In each of those cases, the Russian Federation
voted in favour. Of course, that is not a very impressive
result in the Council’s work. The Council must do
more, including to implement Russia’s initiative on the

16-1077515/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

organization of a Security Council visit to the Middle
East.
With regard to Syria, we believe it is necessary to
use the cessation of hostilities in the country and the
inter-Syrian dialogue in Geneva under United Nations
auspices to reach a lasting political settlement. In that
context, we are pleased with the launching of a second
round of talks, mediated by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
We will continue to provide assistance to the Syrian
armed forces in countering international armed
terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front. We attach great
importance to the activities of the International Syria
Support Group (ISSG) task forces on the ceasefire and
humanitarian access.
We believe the statement delivered today on this
matter by the representative of the United States was
unbalanced, unobjective and counterproductive.
We believe that success can be achieved through
an ongoing and productive inter-Syrian dialogue,
in accordance with the provisions of the Geneva
communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), the decisions
of the ISSG and resolution 2254 (2015). All sectors of
Syrian society who have not dirtied their hands with
terrorist activities, including Kurds, should participate
in the dialogue. We once again underscore the need for
the delegation of the opposition in Geneva to be truly
representative and not to base its participation in the
negotiations on preconditions. We believe that there
should be a comprehensive, objective and de-politicized
approach to humanitarian issues. That is the only way
they can be solved in an effective and lasting manner.
We call for the establishment of a comprehensive
ceasefire in Yemen among all the parties to the conflict.
We think that the new round of negotiations should begin
without unjustified delays. We consider it important
to ensure unhindered humanitarian access and to lift
embargoes of any type. The swift normalization of the
situation with regard to entry points for commercial
cargo, first and foremost carrying food, water and
medicine, will significantly alleviate the suffering of
the Yemeni people.
The situation in Libya remains complex and
uncertain. Efforts to restore unity, based on the Skhirat
political agreement, are moving too slowly. That is
no surprise, recalling that foreign intervention clearly
dealt a hard blow to Libya’s statehood. Meanwhile,
16/34

18/04/2016

terrorists are expanding into strategically important
regions of the country, and the socioeconomic
and humanitarian problems are becoming worse.
Nonetheless, the solution can only be Libyan-led. That
requires the continuation of the patient work carried
out under the auspices of the United Nations to garner
the participation in the dialogue of all influential forces
from all regions of the country. That is why we were
puzzled by the recent decision of the European Union to
include on its sanctions list some key participants in the
political process. That approach could further entrench
inter-Libyan antagonisms.
In order to effectively assist Libyans, including in
countering the burgeoning threat of terrorism, there
is a need for due coordination of initiatives with the
full participation of regional players. However, some
information suggests that certain international partners
might have a hidden agenda in Libya. There is a need
to help, but only within the framework of international
law, so that in the years to come we do not have to regret
the mistakes made.
The difficult situation in the Middle East and North
Africa, political and military turbulence, deep social
and economic strains, as well as the widening sphere of
influence of terrorist groups and worsening standards
of living for the masses, require calibrated collective
work to be carried out in order to stabilize the region.
The Security Council should play the most important
role in those efforts.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by the Secretary-General on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Our delegation aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The Middle East continues to be affected by a
complex political reality — the product of war, foreign
interference and terrorism — all of which are the direct
result of military interventionism and the lack of a
political agreement to resolve the region’s conflicts.
The deadlock in the peace process between Israel
and Palestine represents the primary obstacle to the
stability of the region. For that reason, we will focus
our remarks on that issue.
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the complex scenario of the region, the solution
of the issue of Israel’s occupation of Palestine remains
deadlocked in terms of the political process, while at
the same time the occupying Power is deepening its
colonization of Palestinian land. Such actions continue
apace in the light of the apathy of the Security Council,
which is making no effort to demand that Israel cease
its acts of violence against the Palestinian population
and end its illegal expansionist and settlement policies
on Palestinian land. There can be no doubt that this
inactivity on the part of the Council is fuelling the
impunity with which Israel acts, as it continues to
commit a whole range of acts of aggression against
Palestinian men, women and children.
We would like to highlight some of the major
serious obstacles to the two-State solution to the IsraelPalestine conflict. The prolonged Israeli occupation has
been exploited to consolidate the settlement policy on
Palestinian territory. By way of illustration, look no
further than the support of the Israeli Government for
the settlers, which increased in 2015 compared with the
figures for previous years. It is noteworthy that during
the first three months of 2016, settlement construction
increased 250 per cent compared with the same period
of the previous year. All of this is reflected in the
expansion of the illegal occupation of the territory:
today there are more than 650,000 settlers living in
more than 260 settlements in the West Bank, including
neighbourhoods in East Jerusalem. To this we would
add the seizure of Palestinian land, which is carried out
by the simple proclamation by the Israeli authorities
declaring such land State land or State property.
In addition to the settlement policy, let me stress
that the Israelis are continuing to demolish houses,
in some cases on the baseless excuse of the lack of a
building permit by the Palestinians. In other instances,
the Israelis use the pretext of applying collective
punishment to Palestinian families for crimes alleged
to have been committed by certain members of
those families.
As a result of these abusive practices, between
January and April 2016 the Israeli authorities
demolished 586 houses or structures of other kinds in
vulnerable communities in the region, particularly in
the area known as Area C. Their actions left more than
700 individuals homeless. The occupying Power does
not seem to care that many of the buildings destroyed
were constructed thanks to international support and
seems indifferent to the fact that many demolitions are

S/PV.7673

carried out in areas where Palestinian families live in
poverty, and that being left homeless means that they
have no choice but to swell the ranks of refugees.
Israeli settlements are illegal, and the Security Council
should be able to muster the political unity necessary to
condemn them, as the entire international community
hopes to see it do.
The situation of violence in the country is also
extremely sad, and it is sad to hear the victims’ personal
stories of violence. But we have to make sure to put
the situation in the proper context. We could fill this
Chamber with the victims of violence in Palestine. We
could fill the General Assembly Hall. This is just to
try to give the Council an idea of what is happening in
Palestine and of its scale and magnitude.
The origin of all this suffering is the illegal
occupation by Israel. The situation of violence in the
occupied territories is worrisome owing to the ongoing
criminal actions of the occupying Power against the
inhabitants of Palestine, under the pretext of the need
to increase security to respond to the acts committed
by Palestinians targeting Israelis. Our country
unequivocally condemns such acts. However, because
we understand that the root cause of the violence
is the Israeli occupation of Palestine, and given the
differences in strength between Israel and Palestine, we
denounce with even greater vigour the disproportionate
response, including administrative detention, collective
punishment and extrajudicial executions, of the
occupying Power against the Palestinian population.
In a similar vein, we denounce administrative
detentions, which violate human rights and which
have been increasing to include even minors. Reports
indicate that 78 per cent of the Palestinians held in Israeli
detention facilities, that is, almost 5,400 individuals,
including 264 minors, are considered to be prisoners
for security reasons and thus suffer conditions that are
harsher than those of the prison population in general.
Arbitrary arrests of Palestinians by Israel are often
linked to torture and abuse by the occupying Power.
A recently published report indicates that of the 149
Palestinians murdered by the Israeli Defence Forces
in 2015, 77 were killed during incidents related to
attacks against Israel, whereas the other 72 died as the
result of disproportionate action and aggression by the
occupying Power at checkpoints, while it was cracking
down on protests or carrying out routine operations. In
many of these cases, the victims did not pose any threat

16-1077517/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

whatsoever to the security or the well-being of the
repressive authorities. We urge that all those involved
in such crimes targeting innocent and defenceless
citizens stand trial and hope that the day will come
when impunity ends and Israel will be held accountable.
Faced with this pattern of systemic violence
targeting the Palestinians, we urge the Council to
take account of the call to establish an international
protection system for the Palestinian population
in the occupied territories, in line with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and resolution 904 (1994). In that
framework, and as we have previously suggested in
this body, we could consider contemplating a presence
by the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations
system that are already deployed in Palestine. Within
the limits of their specific competencies, they could
play a protection-of-civilians role.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to be
delicate, as a result of the blockade and siege to which
the population has been subjected since 2007. This latter
step exacerbates the military aggression perpetrated
by Israel during Operation Defensive Shield in 2014,
which took the lives of 2,251 Palestinians, including
1,462 civilians and 551 children.
International efforts for the reconstruction of Gaza
have been hampered by lack of cooperation on the part
of Israel and the continued blockade. The repair and
rebuilding of houses, schools, hospitals and service
infrastructures are seriously undermined by Israeli
restrictions on the entry and exit of goods and materials
to and from Gaza, as well as the threat of fresh attacks
and destruction by Israel. Israel must lift the inhumane
blockade to which it is subjecting the people of Palestine
and Gaza, which is a clear violation of international
humanitarian law.
We believe that the Palestinian question is one of
the most egregious failures of the Security Council. The
Council has deceived the millions of Palestinians who,
for more than 60 years, have trusted it to take action
as the guarantor of international peace and security in
the quest for a solution to the conflict. Nonetheless, the
occupation and the settlement process in the Palestinian
territory not only persists but continues to expand,
taking many lives and causing unremitting violence in
the region.
Palestine is the victim of one of the most serious
tragedies and injustices in modern history. Certain
members of the Council are directly responsible for the
18/34

18/04/2016

inaction of this body in the face of this tragedy. We are
wondering how long the Palestinian people must wait.
Why does the Security Council sit by silently and allow
the mass violation of human rights and international
humanitarian law by Israel? Why does the Security
Council maintain double standards on this matter?
How many more Palestinian children must die before
the Council reacts?
This issue can be resolved only on the political
track, and we therefore welcome all of the efforts
currently under way on various fronts to breathe new
life into the peace process, which has been moribund
for more than 20 years now. We will consider in
good faith and in a constructive spirit any initiative
that would allow us to make headway in negotiations
conducive to rekindling peace negotiations on an equal
footing between Palestinians and Israelis and based on
a political, negotiated and inclusive solution that would
bring a definitive end to the conflict in the framework of
the two-State solution, with full acceptance of the right
of the Palestinian people to live within internationally
recognized borders, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. All of
these represent the key elements in the negotiations.
They cannot be changed. We must avoid any action on
the ground that could threaten the two-State solution.
We believe that all the initiatives, such as that of the
Quartet, the Arab League Initiative and the French
initiative, must adhere to those principles in order to
achieve a positive outcome.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by conveying the condolences of
Spain to the Permanent Missions of Japan and Ecuador
in the light of the very high number of victims resulting
from the earthquakes that struck both countries over
the weekend. We would also like to begin this statement
by condemning all acts of terrorism wherever they
take place.
I will begin by referring to the Palestinian issue,
and subsequently will turn to the latest events in
Yemen, Syria and in Lebanon. I will try to abide by the
five-minute rule.
A few months ago, in October, we held an
open debate on the situation in the Middle East (see
S/PV.7540) under Spain’s presidency of the Security
Council. That was at the beginning of the terrible wave
of violence, which has continued all this time. In recent
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

weeks the violence seemed to have attenuated, even if
today the news is not that good.
A point that we have made on many occasions is one
that we think needs repeating now: setting a political
timeline of hope is the only way to put a permanent
end to the violence and move towards a solution to the
conflict. It is the only way whereby we can ensure the
security of Israel on a sustained basis. Setting a timeline
that will bring hope in its wake is essential and urgent,
because the viability of the two-State solution is at risk.
In last October’s open debate, Spain made the
point that the international community must be fully
involved in the solution to the conflict, and that we
could do that through an international conference
that would relaunch the peace process and prevent the
demise of the two-State solution. We therefore support
the efforts currently being made by France to convene
an international conference on the peace process. We
believe that that needs to be the priority at this juncture,
including here in the Security Council.
We also agree with the point that the Security
Council has a key role to play in defending the twoState solution. We bear a responsibility for that. But
we have to tread very carefully in deciding how we
are going to fulfil that responsibility, and make sure
that we prioritize a course of action that holds out a
genuine possibility of making headway at the present
time towards breathing new life into the peace process.
Moreover, as I have just indicated, we believe that that
means choosing a particular course of action, namely,
the holding of an international conference. Such action
is fully complementary to the work of the Quartet,
particularly to its initiative of drafting a report about
the situation on the ground and about the viability of
the two-State solution.
We trust that once that report has been submitted,
it will serve to provide guidance for the subsequent
action on the part of the Security Council to address
the issue and find such a solution, one that the entire
international community yearns for and that will
uphold the two-State solution. The involvement of the
international community does not mean in any way
that the parties to the conflict cannot be involved. If
they truly yearn for peace, they must work to foster the
appropriate conditions on the ground for a return to
negotiations. They therefore must avoid any action that
could imperil the two-State solution.

S/PV.7673

The construction of settlements in the occupied
territories is the most blatant example of such an action.
It is illegal under international law and constitutes
one of the main threats to the feasibility of the twoState solution going forward. The Security Council
has repeatedly spoken of the illegal nature of the
settlements. It is a point that we have expressed loud
and clear on various occasions, including in resolutions
446 (1979) and 465 (1980).
Secondly, Israel must put an immediate halt to
the demolitions, the forced evictions of people and the
seizure of land. Israel must also adopt transformative
measures to rebuild the necessary climate of trust in
order to preserve the two-State solution.
Thirdly, irrespective of all that I have just said on
those points, I think it is also worth underscoring once
again our robust and unequivocal rejection of violence,
echoing a point that I made at the beginning of this
statement: such violence can never be justified. In
particular, acts of terrorism must be condemned once
again by all of us robustly and categorically — such
acts constitute terrorism, in any situation, under any
circumstances, anywhere. Both parties must refrain
from any incitement to violence and must refrain from
the disproportionate use of force.
Finally, I think it would be remiss of me not to
make the point that intra-Palestinian reconciliation is
also key if we are to move forward in the peace process.
We hope that the talks held in Doha between Hamas
and Fatah will provide an opportunity for both parties
to abide by previous agreements, thus ensuring that we
can restore the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority
over Gaza and set a course for elections.
I will now turn to the matter of Yemen. The parties
to the conflict have finally agreed to a ceasefire, which
we hope will last and become permanent. That will then
mean that we have a window of opportunity to mitigate
the terrible humanitarian suffering in that country.
Direct negotiations were scheduled to commence
today. However, we have learned that they have been
postponed, but we hope that such a delay will not be
repeated in the future. We would like to reiterate our
support for the efforts of the United Nations Special
Envoy for Yemen in ensuring that the talks go ahead
and that they lead to an inclusive solution that will
guarantee the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Yemen.

16-1077519/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Turning to Syria, seven weeks have now gone
by since the cessation of hostilities came into effect.
We have just begun the second round of the so-called
proximity talks in Geneva. Nonetheless, we are
seeing — and we are worried about this — an escalation
of clashes, which is threatening to derail resolution
2268 (2016). The lack of progress on the humanitarian
track is also an indication of the fragility of the process.
For that reason, we urge all the parties to the conflict to
immediately halt attacks targeting all those forces that
have agreed to the cessation of hostilities agreement.
We call for a robust commitment to the negotiation
process to lead us towards a political transition in
the talks taking place in Geneva. Finally, we call for
full respect for international humanitarian law by all
parties. In particular, we call on the Government of
Syria to urgently review its policy on the provision of
medical equipment to the besieged areas.
Finally, with regard to Lebanon, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for the information that
he has made available to us and his commitment to
Lebanon, which was made abundantly clear during
his recent trip to that country. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute once again to the people of
Lebanon, who have demonstrated an understanding of
their responsibility and the need for social solidarity,
which serve as an example and a model. They have
provided their hospitality to an extraordinary number
of refugees.
At the same, I must express our concern about
the institutional deadlock that has racked that country
for too long now. It is of the utmost importance that
the political forces in Lebanon arrive, as quickly as
possible, at an agreement that will allow for the election
of a new President.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this open debate.
On behalf of the people and the Government of
Malaysia, I would like to take this opportunity to convey
our deepest condolences to the families and loved ones
of victims of the earthquakes that struck Ecuador and
Japan over the weekend. We wish godspeed to the
recovery and assistance efforts.
Like Spain and Venezuela, we too condemn all acts
of violence.
My delegation warmly welcomes the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Murray McCully, Minister for
20/34

18/04/2016

Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, and His Excelelncy
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, at this meeting.
We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing,
which we listened to very carefully. We completely
agree with the message conveyed by the SecretaryGeneral and by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
New Zealand. The current situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is not sustainable and requires
urgent action by the Council.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Organization of Islamic Conference, respectively.
For the purpose of today’s open debate, my
delegation wishes to focus solely on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. There are two main reasons for
that. First, of the issues pertaining to the Middle East,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been on the United
Nations agenda for the longest period. It is as old as the
United Nations itself. And, whether we wish to admit it
or not, the protracted Palestinian question is the nucleus
that has triggered various other threats to international
peace and security.
Secondly, unlike all other Middle East conflicts,
there is no recent Council action on the question of
Palestine. The last time a Council resolution was
adopted was more than seven years ago, which belies
the worsening situation on the ground and the rising
threats to the two-State solution. Worst of all, there is
simply no political will by the Council to act to bring
an end to Israel’s illegal occupation and to salvage the
two-State solution, in accordance with international
law, the values and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international human rights
standards. There is also a clear lack of appetite by the
Council to use the tools at its disposal on the issue of
Palestine, unlike with regard to Syria, Lebanon and
Yemen. Therefore, Malaysia is of the view that this
issue deserves our undivided attention at this meeting.
Malaysia strongly condemns the extrajudicial
killings perpetrated by Israeli forces against
Palestinians, including children and women. The coldblooded murder of a Palestinian youth by an Israeli
soldier in Hebron — the youth was shot in the head
as he lay injured on the ground — is a clear instance
of Israel’s shoot-to-kill policy. Tragically, if not for the
fact that the incident was captured on video, it would
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

have been treated as another act of self-defence by the
Israeli army, and the perpetrator would have gotten
away with murder. Even if the incident is investigated
by the Israeli authorities, we remain sceptical as to
whether justice will be served, as only 3 per cent of
criminal investigations into violence committed by the
Israeli forces and settlers have resulted in indictments.
The facts on the ground surrounding the murder
proved that it was not an isolated incident. If it had
been an isolated incident, the Israeli forces would not
have reacted by storming the family home of the person
who had filmed the incident in order to harass and
intimidate him. Israeli settlers would not have reacted
by gathering outside that same house to threaten him.
The Israeli medical staff present at the scene would not
have remained indifferent to the injured Palestinian,
even when he was shot in the head right in front of them.
And the Israeli soldier who pulled the trigger would not
have received the support of over half of Israelis, as
recorded by an opinion poll.
That incident reflects the culmination of a longstanding systematic policy that dehumanizes the
Palestinians, one perpetuated by an unconstrained
culture of impunity. It is an ideology of violent
extremism, sanctioned by the occupying Power and
institutionalized in Israeli society and its political,
military and judicial institutions. In other words,
this is what we sow by our inaction. This is what the
Palestinians reap in a tragically horrifying manner.
Another unfortunate consequence of our inaction
and the prevailing impunity is the rapid expansion of
illegal Israeli settlements. This year, Israel continued
with its settlement construction, land confiscations
and forced evictions, depriving Palestinians of their
property and shelter and rendering hundreds of
Palestinians — including children — homeless. As
reported by the Israeli non-governmental organization
Peace Now, the building of illegal Israeli settlements
increased by 250 per cent in the first quarter of this
year, as compared to the same period last year. Over
the years, Israeli authorities have taken over more
than 85 per cent of the total area of the historical land
of Palestine.
The construction of the apartheid wall also continues
unabated, against the decision of the International
Court of Justice in 2004. The latest construction in
Bethlehem’s Cremisan Valley will severely restrict
the access of nearly 60 Palestinian families to their

S/PV.7673

agricultural land and devastate their livelihood.
Slowly but surely, the illegal settlement activities and
the apartheid wall are undermining and fragmenting
the contiguity and territorial integrity of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, and physically threaten the
viability of and prospects for the two-State solution.
On the situation in Gaza, as mentioned by the
Secretary-General, we are deeply concerned about
Israel’s latest ban on building materials to reconstruct
thousands of damaged and destroyed homes and
infrastructure. Two years after Israel’s military
offensive in Gaza, as many as 75,000 Palestinians
remain homeless. The international community must
act to end the illegal and inhumane blockade of Gaza,
as it constitutes the main obstacle to reconstruction and
a form of collective punishment that grossly violates
international standards of human rights.
Malaysia reiterates the need for the Council to
use all tools at its disposal on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, just as in the case of Syria, Lebanon and
Yemen. We must end the impunity with which Israel
acts by increasing the price to maintain the status quo
in occupied Palestine. The end of apartheid in South
Africa did not come about through the international
community merely standing by and doing nothing.
Instead, the international community chose to take
effective action by increasing the political, economic
and social costs, thereby opposing discriminatory and
unjust policies that violated the international standard
of human rights. The situation in occupied Palestine is
much worse.
The most burning issues that require our urgent
action are the illegal settlements, the blockade of
Gaza, and the need for international protection for the
occupied Palestinian people, in line with international
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. As
mentioned in the latest report (A/HRC/31/73) of the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, a
protective presence for Palestinians is needed against
the effects of Israeli policies and practices related to
the occupation.
For seven years, the Council debated and produced
nothing. For seven years, it bore witness to the many
atrocities. For seven years, the Council procrastinated,
with disastrous consequences. Meanwhile, during those
seven years, more blood has been shed, more walls of

16-1077521/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

hatred have been built, more hopes have been dashed
and society has been dehumanized.
We speak today to clear our conscience — doing
nothing is not right. We have no quarrel with Israel, the
Jewish State or its right to exist. We never have. Our
prayer is for Israel to live up to the commandment to
love thy neighbour, and stop the atrocities. However,
we are left with no choice but to urge the Council to
begin to bear witness to good tidings, to use the tools
at its disposal, salvage the two-State solution and bring
justice and peace to these troubled lands.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): First of all, we would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, a deeply destabilized
region where conflicts rage and where finding solutions
to the conflicts has been a tragic, failed endeavour.
We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully, and thank him for his
thoughtful insights.
We endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
As Security Council members and States Members
of the United Nations meet once again for this statutory
quarterly debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, the overall political
climate in the region has shown some signs of progress,
however weak or elusive. The deal closed in 2015 with
the adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
on the Iranian nuclear programme was undeniably a
landmark in a region where diplomacy has been unable
to score any meaningful success in the last quarter of
a century. The glimpse of hope that we now witness in
the region, with some apparent progress in the search of
political solutions to the conflicts in Syria and Yemen,
is, we hope, more than a residual by-product of the
agreement reached with Iran and the understanding
among great and regional Powers in solving that
extremely complex issue.
Political will and determination were instrumental
to reaching a solution. It is our view that now great
and regional Powers must build on the agreement with
Iran and make it a real game-changer. In particular, the
regional Powers should set aside their rivalries, stop
fuelling conflicts in the region and take into account
the wake-up call of terrorism at their very doorstep.
We furthermore think that it is incumbent upon world
and regional Powers to share responsibility and use
22/34

18/04/2016

their leverage to solve the outstanding conflicts in the
Middle East, which are a major source of international
friction and human suffering on an unbearable scale
and an affront to any moral standards.
The Middle East has been a breeding ground for
terrorism. In last week’s open debate (see S/PV.7670)
on threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts a consensus was reiterated that terrorism
and violent extremism are global threats that transcend
cultures and geographical boundaries. In order to
effectively counter this rising threat, we must base our
actions on the shared values embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and international human rights law and
humanitarian law. Unfortunately, these basic principles
are violated time and time again, resulting in failure
to build a world order based on the rule of law and the
peaceful coexistence among nations and peoples.
This state of affairs hampers the capacity to
effectively address such drivers of violent extremism
as the lack of proactive and just engagement with
key communities focusing on conflict prevention
and resolving long-standing grievances in conflict
situations. One such long-standing conflict, which is an
unfortunate example of the international community’s
shared incapacity to find a just and lasting solution, is
the conflict in Palestine.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has become a
most painful and divisive issue since the prospects
of reaching a solution seem to be further and further
away. The heavy-handed and discriminatory strategies
employed by the Israeli Government have been
revealed to be counterproductive by further alienating
the two communities and fuelling radical and extremist
elements on both sides. We note with concern that the
reconciliation talks held recently between Fatah, Hamas
and other Palestinian factions reached no consensus on
the Palestinian issue. We regret the Palestinian divide,
as it hampers the ability of the Palestinians to engage
constructively in a search for peace, while the rhetoric
of incitement to violence becomes an additional element
detrimental to the prospects for peace.
However, the reality is that Israel is the occupying
Power, and its tactics continuously undermine the
possibility of a two-State solution that meets the
international community consensus as the most realistic
and appropriate way to find a just and long-lasting
solution to the conflict. The unreasonable way that
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Israeli Defence Forces deal with the Palestinians,
including arbitrary arrests and detentions, the targeting
of civilian social infrastructure, collective punishment
action through home demolitions, rendering Palestinian
families homeless and destitute and, most damaging
of all, the continuing settlement expansion, are clear
demonstrations of a systematic unwillingness to
facilitate the return to negotiations and the resolution
of the conflict based on two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security.
The report recently issued by the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process underscores that the demolition of Palestinian
homes and livelihood structures more than doubled
in the reporting period, and that the demolitions as of
mid-April already exceed the total of the previous year.
On numerous occasions, Security Council members
have stressed the illegality of settlement activity and
expansion while agreeing that they constitute the single
most damaging factor to a viable Palestinian State.
Despite such judgments, some relevant members of
the Security Council, while expressing condemnation
of such practices, do not use their leverage upon Israel
to stop the settlement expansion, which is in flagrant
violation of international standards of human rights and
international law.
Since we joined the Security Council in 2015,
there have been a number of initiatives, namely, the
revitalization of the Middle East Quartet, proposals
addressing the issue, including consultations with
both sides, the convening of an international support
group, the French initiative to hold an international
conference to restart talks, considering the option of
international protection for the Palestinian people,
and pursuing legal, diplomatic and economic means to
make it too costly for Israel to continue with its illegal
settlement policies. However, none of these proposals
were accepted or followed through upon.
This systematic lack of direct and unified action
by the international community and by the Security
Council deliberately sidelines the issue and has
continually diminished prospects for a solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We call upon the Security
Council to uphold international law, fulfil its duties
to advance a solution for the conflict and assist the
Palestinian people to finally realize the freedom, rights
and justice they have been unjustly denied and achieve
Israeli-Palestinian peace, security and coexistence.

S/PV.7673

In conclusion, we will continue insisting on the
need for consensus and decisive action on clear and
sustained policies for resolving this protracted conflict.
The current situation in the Middle East and North
Africa makes it imperative that the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular, demonstrates unity
of purpose and act accordingly. We have the collective
responsibility to deploy all efforts to see that policies
favouring the resumption of negotiations are applied
and that Israelis and Palestinians reach tangible results
in agreeing to a two-State settlement, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
briefing. For all the excitement there was last week
around the hearings of the candidates for the position of
the next Secretary-General, we are pleased to have the
current Secretary-General still working very closely
with us for many months to come.
Looking back on last week’s hearings, it was
heartening to hear all nine of the declared candidates
committing to achieving a two-State solution,
underscoring just how united opinion is on the issue.
And yet the violence in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories continues. The risk of a sudden
deterioration is all too possible. The fundamental
causes of the violence — incitement and the effects of
the occupation — remain. The United Kingdom will
continue to strongly condemn all acts of violence and
terrorism. Both sides must do all they can to calm
the situation. That is particularly important during
Passover, since the recent past has shown how quickly
clashes at Jerusalem’s holy sites can escalate and spread.
There is a way out. We all have to work to advance
improvements on the ground and re-establish hope that
a two-State solution is still achievable. Without that,
continued conflict and suffering are inevitable. First
and foremost, progress has to come from the parties
themselves. We have heard on many occasions that they
remain committed to a two-State solution, but too often
that commitment has not been matched by action. Israel
must reverse its damaging settlement policy and cease
demolitions of Palestinian property. The sharp increase
in demolitions this year continues to cause terrible
suffering. Together with the ongoing expansion of
illegal settlements and annexations of land, the physical
viability of a two-State solution is being undermined,
as the Secretary-General reminded us today. If the

16-1077523/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli Government really is committed to a two-State
solution, it must reverse its policy.
The Palestinians must also take the necessary steps
to reunite the West Bank and Gaza. The continued
split between the two territories seriously damages the
chances of peace. Reports of large-scale diversions of
reconstruction materials to Hamas are worrying, and
today’s report of a tunnel dug from Gaza into Israel
is extremely concerning. We hope that the suspension
of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism will soon
be resolved so as to enable the safe entry of muchneeded construction material. Both parties must work
to improve conditions on the ground and take steps in
line with past agreements to bring a two-State solution
closer. We will continue to support that process and
look forward to contributing to further progress at the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in Brussels.
The continued development of the Palestinian economy
and institutions is vital.
While a return to meaningful negotiations appears
difficult at present, the international community,
including the Security Council, must do what it can to
preserve the viability of a two-State solution and get
the parties back to a position where political progress
is possible. The United Kingdom, as ever, stands ready
to support that effort. To that end, we look forward to
the Quartet’s report and welcome further details of the
French initiative. Carefully coordinated international
efforts over the coming months could help to build
consensus on the key threats to a two-State solution
and encourage action to address them and re-establish
a genuine political horizon.
I would now like to turn briefly to Syria. We
welcomed the briefing last week by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, as well as his resumption of
proximity negotiations with the Syrian Government
and the opposition’s high negotiations committee in
Geneva. We hope they can build a basis for face-to-face
negotiations following the framework of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015). However, we remain concerned about reports of
ongoing violations of the cessation of hostilities. Regime
offensives seem intent on encircling Aleppo. Their
obstruction of humanitarian aid, especially to Darayya
and other areas of rural Damascus, is worsening the
suffering, and the failure to agree on mechanisms
for the release of arbitrarily detained people is only
prolonging horror for a great many individuals, as
some of us heard at a powerful event last Thursday.
24/34

18/04/2016

When the Council adopted resolution 2268 (2016), we
demanded that the parties fulfil their commitment to
the cessation of hostilities, including by accelerating
humanitarian delivery and taking confidence-building
measures. Such steps were meant to advance a political
process. The failure to deliver on those points only
undermines that process and erodes the confidence of
the Syrian people.
I would like to conclude by calling on those with
influence on the parties, and especially on the Syrian
Government. We have to leave the regime in no doubt
that it must live up to its commitments, show restraint
and engage honestly with the political process. Until we
see progress on those points, it is right that the Council
should receive regular updates from the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy in a public forum. Those
who challenge or obstruct peace must be heard by all.
There should be no place for them to hide.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important meeting.
Before addressing today’s topic, on behalf of the
people and the Government of Japan, I would like to
express my sincere gratitude for the messages from the
Secretary-General and the leaders of many Member
States, including a number of my colleagues here
in the Council, expressing their sympathy for and
solidarity with the people of Japan in the wake of the
major earthquakes that struck the Kumamoto region in
western Japan. They have taken the lives of more than
40 people and injured more than 1,000, while more than
1,000 are now living anxiously in evacuation centres.
Our Self-Defence Forces, police, fire deparments and
medical units are working around the clock. We are
grateful for the offers of assistance made by many
countries and organizations. On 16 April, a major
earthquake also struck Ecuador. On behalf of the people
and the Government of Japan, I would like to express
our solidarity with the people of Ecuador.
In order to save time, I will limit my statement to
its salient points and circulate the full text later.
The region of Middle East and North Africa is
facing outbreaks of conflict, social unrest and violent
extremism. Since January, when Japan became a
member of the Security Council, I have listened to many
reports on tragic humanitarian situations. We must
address the best way for us to contribute concretely to
the maintenance of international peace and security
in the Middle East and North Africa. In Syria, Yemen
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Libya, we have recently seen glimmers of light and
hope for the possibility of bringing a permanent end to
the conflicts in each of those countries.
In Syria, the cessation of hostilities that began in
late February has created the conditions necessary for
facilitating immediate humanitarian access to besieged
and hard-to-reach areas, an improvement conducive to
the political process. The new round of intra-Syrian
talks has just begun in Geneva. We greatly appreciate
the tireless efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and his team. Japan has
been giving aid to Syria for providing food, improving
living conditions and implementing vocational training.
In that regard, I am pleased to announce that Japan has
decided to provide additional assistance amounting to
$11 million as grant aid for rehabilitating three existing
electricity facilities in Syria through the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). Notes to that effect
were exchanged last Friday here in New York between
Ms. Sima Bahous, UNDP’s Assistant Administrator,
and myself. Electric generators provided by Japan
to Syria during the 1980s and 1990s through our
development fund continue to furnish more than 56 per
cent of the entire electricity supply in Syria. I believe
that project will help to strengthen the resilience of
Syrian society and thereby create conditions enabling
the Syrian people to feel like staying in their country.
Turning to Yemen, Japan welcomes the nation-wide
cessation of hostilities in place since 10 April. We have,
however, received the disappointing news that the
scheduled peace talks in Kuwait, facilitated by Special
Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, have not yet begun.
We urge all the Yemeni parties to engage in the peace
talks as soon as possible.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), I have
always stressed that sanctions are meant to support
a political solution. The resumption of direct talks is
therefore a long-awaited step forward. Since September
2014, Japan has extended $85 million in grant assistance
to Yemen. One of the projects includes assistance to the
constitution-drafting process. I believe that, once an
agreement is reached through the Yemen peace talks,
the spending assistance programme will continue, and
the parties will be able to arrive at an early formulation
of the constitution.
Despite some encouraging signs in the region of the
Middle East and North Africa, almost no positive change

S/PV.7673

has occurred in the Middle East peace process since the
previous open debate in January (see S/PV.7610). As
peace talks have stalled, desperation and violence have
spread. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recalled
today, settlement activities, which are illegal under
international law, are in direct contradiction with the
goal of a two-State solution. We reiterate that no act
justifies violence, and we call on leaders to denounce
violence without exception. Japan will continue
to provide economic assistance to Palestine in the
firm belief that a sustainable economy underpins the
viability of a two-State solution. We also stand ready to
participate in initiatives that can lead to peace between
Israel and Palestine, including the one put forth by the
Government of France.
I will end my statement by paying tribute to the
tireless efforts on the part of Special Envoys and
Representatives of the Secretary-General stationed
in the region of Middle East and North Africa, and
by expressing my hope that, with the strong political
will of the international community, we will see more
positive developments in that region during the next
debate on this agenda item, slated for July, when Japan
will have the honour to preside over the Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to discuss and hear
the diverse positions and opinions on the Palestinian
question. I can assure the Council that what we will
hear and say will not differ very much from what we
have heard and reiterated over the past 10 years.
The indivisible rights of the Palestinian people have
been recognized and documented in the Organization,
and most notably within its two principal bodies, the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as
in the international conventions that have been deposited
with the United Nations. The recognition of those
rights by the international community was not intended
to remain theoretical or to mitigate the suffering of
the Palestinian people simply by expressions of our
condemnation of the occupation and its practices.
Rather, the goal was, and remains, to take the necessary
measures to end the occupation in all of its forms,
thereby ensuring international peace and security. That
would be in the service humankind’s conscience, but we
seem to have forgotten the Palestinians and their right
to establish an independent State, based on the 4 June
1967 borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

16-1077525/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The increase in occupation activities within the
Palestinian territories — whether through colonization,
the appropriation of land, the demolition of homes or
the forced exodus across the Green Line, including
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, is simply the natural consequence
of the international community’s shortcomings with
regard to implementing and defending the right of the
Palestinian people to the two-State solution. Allow me
to share with everyone very briefly the legal foundations
established by the international community and the
Security Council for settling the issue in the Middle
East.
There are legal bases and resolutions whose
implementation we are still waiting for. Some believe
that they have been successful in diverting the attention
of Arab countries and the international community
away from those resolutions. As an example, I will read
out paragraphs 5, 6 and 7, respectively, of resolution
465 (1980), which was adopted unanimously and states
that the Security Council,
(spoke in English)
“Determines that all measures taken by Israel
to change the physical character, demographic
composition, institutional structure or status of
the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied
since 1967, including Jerusalem, or any part thereof,
have no legal validity and that Israel’s policy and
practices of settling parts of its population and new
immigrants in those territories constitute a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War and also constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East;
“Strongly deplores the continuation and
persistence of Israel in pursuing those policies and
practices and calls upon the Government and people
of Israel to rescind those measures, to dismantle the
existing settlements and in particular to cease, on
an urgent basis, the establishment, construction
and planning of settlements in the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;
“Calls upon all States not to provide Israel with
any assistance to be used specifically in connexion
with settlements in the occupied territories”.
26/34

18/04/2016

(spoke in Arabic)
What I have just read out is not an illustration
of the position of Egypt alone, or that of the Arab
States alone. It is a position that enjoys international
status commensurate with the Charter of the United
Nations. It is the view of the international community
as reiterated by the Security Council in many of its
resolutions, albeit one that still needs to be fully
implemented. The resolution is very clear with regard
to the legality of the occupation, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. The Security Council has called upon Israel
to dismantle the settlements and has called upon States
not to provide aid to Israel in connection with those
actions. That reiterated position is in clear support of
the Palestinian people regarding their right to protection
under the articles of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War. Resolution 465 (1980), among others — especially
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) — applies to all
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan.
Some think that they can exploit the Syrian crisis to
divert the attention of the international community
away from the right of the Syrian people to recover
their territory. Egypt reiterates that Israel is obligated
under those resolutions to withdraw from the occupied
Syrian territories in the Golan.
Despite those clear rights and the fact that Israel
was supposed to initiate reforms and alter the situation,
and despite the injustice that the Palestinian people have
been suffering and the continued occupation of Arab
territories, including the Golan, the Arab States decided
to make a goodwill gesture by proposing the historic
initiative of 2002, the Arab Peace Initiative. It affirmed
Israel’s right to exist in complete security in the region
and the right of Israel’s people to normalize relations
with the people of neighbouring States after ending
the occupation. We have therefore been surprised by
the attitude and indifference of the Israeli Government
with regard to the Initiative over the past years. I ask
the following question: Does the Government of Israel
prefer to continue the occupation and defy international
law, to the detriment of this historic opportunity, which
is still available and would allow for the normalization of
relations with other countries of the region and thereby
allow its people to live in lasting peace and security?
We are not asking anyone to share in expressions of
sympathy or condemnation, nor are we searching for a
temporary painkiller, the effect of which only weakens
over time and cures nothing. The pain of the Palestinian
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

people is becoming increasingly acute. We are asking
the Security Council to undertake a genuine review in
complete transparency and implement the two-State
solution before it is too late. That can be done during
this sensitive period by establishing a comparison
between the situation that we were supposed to have
achieved, had the Security Council resolutions and
the Oslo Accords been implemented, and the current
situation. We simply wish that the Security Council
would respect its obligations with regard to preserving
international peace and security and put an end to the
Israeli occupation in conformity with international law,
which is of timeless nature. We ask members of the
Security Council to review their positions. We also ask
Israel to review its position and to ensure that it upholds
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The protections offered by such laws
must be provided to all individuals without distinction.
Allow me to conclude by referring to what the
representative of Israel said in the Council today when
he stated that Jordan and Egypt had laid down their
arms to wager on peace instead. I would like to share
with the Council what the actual context was, namely,
that that peace, as chosen by Israel, was not a peace in
terms of our laying down our arms; that we did not do.
It was a forced peace aimed at restoring stability in the
region, but we have still not officially resolved the issue
that led to the conflict in the first place, that is, the
occupation by Israel of our Arab territories to this day.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay deplores and condemns the terrorist attack
carried out just a few minutes ago that targeted a bus in
Jerusalem. Uruguay deplores and condemns each and
every terrorist attack. Last week, we said that terrorism
could truly be labelled as an act of cowardice; that is the
only appropriate name for it.
At the outset, I would like to begin by thanking
the Secretary-General in particular for his presence and
for his briefing to the Security Council, in which he
referred to various elements and positions that Uruguay
shares. The impasse in the peace process between
Israel and Palestine, the events of recent months in
Syria, the situation in Yemen, the continuing impact
of the activities of terrorist groups in the region and,
in particular, the death and suffering of thousands of
innocent victims are but some of the challenges that the
Middle East continues to face.

S/PV.7673

On the issue of the Middle East peace process,
Uruguay would like to reaffirm its full support for
the right of Israel and Palestine to live at peace within
secure and recognized borders in a spirit of renewed
cooperation, free from any threats or acts that might
undermine peace, particularly including acts of
terrorism. Uruguay reiterates its full support for a
two-State solution, firmly convinced that it is the only
option that would allow the coexistence of Israel and
Palestine on a peaceful footing.
We stress the need for the international community
to increase its efforts to encourage the parties to return
to the negotiating table with a view to achieving a
peaceful, just, negotiated and lasting solution — one
that is in line with international law and takes due
account of the interests and needs of all the parties to
the conflict. We call upon them to refrain from adopting
unilateral decisions, which simply hinder dialogue. In
that respect, we believe that, as a result, there can be no
continuation of the settlement policy, the settlements
being illegal in the West Bank.
Uruguay also robustly condemns the stabbings and
other brutal attacks targeting Israeli citizens, as well as
the incitement to, and glorification of, those abhorrent
acts. We would like to reiterate the importance of
international cooperation. Such cooperation is essential
for contributing to the economic and social development
of the Palestinian people. The strengthening, and the
establishment where necessary, of national institutions
and basic infrastructure are also essential in order to
ensure the viability of the Palestinian State, a State that
has pursued the path towards confirmation as a fullfledged sovereign State.
Uruguay would like to highlight the deep bonds of
friendship that unite us with both the State of Israel
and the Palestinian State. We would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate the willingness of Uruguay to
contribute to and support any initiative that could lead
to a successful conclusion of the peace process. We have
taken note of the statement delivered by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully,
and we would like to convey our willingness to work
with him.
With regard to the situation in Syria, we believe
that the efforts undertaken to find a political solution to
the conflict are crucial. In that context, we would like
to reiterate our full support for the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,

16-1077527/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and his entire team. They have engaged in important
work and made significant progress in bringing about
face-to-face talks between the two parties, thereby
making progress in finding a political solution to the
conflict, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015).
The cessation of hostilities in Syria, in place
since 27 February, has allowed us an opportunity to
substantially reduce violence, improve humanitarian
access and foster a better climate for the negotiations
in Geneva. Despite the fragility of the current situation
and the fact that there have been some setbacks in
recent days, we believe that this is the best course of
action that might finally bring an end to the long and
bloody war in that country. Faced with the dramatic
humanitarian situation in Syria, Uruguay would like to
underscore the need to continue efforts to ensure that
humanitarian assistance makes its way to those who
most need it. We would like to reiterate our appeal to the
Syrian Government to grant, without further delay, the
necessary permits in order to ensure that humanitarian
agencies can continue their shipments and can continue
with their vital work.
Uruguay would like to stress the illegality,
inacceptability and immorality of using hunger as a
tactic of war. Such practices constitute war crimes, and
all who commit such crimes should be held accountable.
We also denounce all attacks on humanitarian and
medical personnel and the seizing of medical provisions
from humanitarian convoys. Such actions must come
to an end. They are in no way commensurate with
the standards of international humanitarian law. My
country, together with other members of the Security
Council, is working on a draft resolution to address the
situation in Syria that we hope will soon be accepted.
With regard to Yemen, Uruguay commends
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral to Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Abmed,
and welcomes the recent agreement on the cessation
of hostilities in the country. Uruguay has confidence
in the negotiations, which were supposed to begin
today in order to achieve an exit point for the conflict.
Similarly, we would like to emphasize the vulnerability
of the Yemeni population at this time. It is alarming
that approximately 80 per cent of the population needs
some form of humanitarian assistance, which means
that it is urgent that we adopt measures to put an end to
the suffering of the civilian population.
28/34

18/04/2016

Finally, turning to the situation in Libya, Uruguay
warmly welcomed the news of the arrival in Tripoli
of the members of the Presidential Council of the
Government of National Accord. We hope that that
event will constitute a turning point ushering in a new
phase in the history of Libya, a phase in which both
the new Government and the international community
will focus and pool their efforts on the unity, stability,
security and development of the country.
I would like to reiterate Uruguay’s conviction that,
through diplomacy, dialogue and strict adherence to
international law, we can lay the foundations that will
allow us to deliver lasting peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Chinese presidency’s
initiative to convene this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The Secretary-General reported on the political and
security situation in the region in his briefing, and I
would like to thank him for that. The situation justifies
the Security Council’s regular discussion of it.
At the outset, may I, on behalf of my Government
and the people of Senegal, express my condolences and
solidarity with the people of Japan and Ecuador, hard
hit during the recent earthquakes.
With regard to terrorism, I would like to recall that
Senegal condemns all violence, regardless of where it
comes from.
Our meeting this morning comes once again at a
time characterized by continued settlement activity, an
exacerbation of violence and an absence of a political
horizon in the occupied territories of Palestine. The
stalemate in the political process is undoubtedly the
basis for the spike in violence on both sides, with a
large number of casualties, especially on the Palestinian
side. Since October 2015, the escalating violence has
led to the death of over 200 Palestinians, including 48
children, and 30 Israelis, not to mention the thousands
of wounded. It bears repeating that the systematic and
disproportionate use of force is not a solution to the
crisis, especially in the absence of a political horizon.
We must deplore the incitement to violence and
hatred that certain Palestinian factions engage in. We
must also condemn the unacceptable acts of terrorism
committed by Israeli settlers in the West Bank, including
in Jerusalem. Those acts are likely to aggravate the
already deep divisions between the two peoples and
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to undermine the prospects for reconciliation and
sustainable peace.
The punitive policies carried out by the occupying
Power in the Palestinian territories are also a source
of concern. Since the beginning of this year, hundreds
of Palestinian homes and structures, some built with
the help of international partners, have been destroyed,
and the number of demolitions this year far exceeds that
of 2015.
Similarly, the unacceptable policy involving the
geographical, demographic and cultural modification
of Jerusalem risks turning the political crisis into a
religious conflict with serious consequences for the
whole region and beyond. In addition to constituting
violations of international law, the increasing settlement
activities challenge the two-State solution, to which the
Israeli State has nonetheless reiterated its commitment.
One cannot ignore the worrisome situation of the
Palestinian economy, in particular in Gaza. In addition
to being an unacceptable humanitarian disaster, the
blockade against the Gaza Strip is a potential threat
to Israel’s security, in that it increases the already real
risk of having the Palestinian cause coopted or used
by other actors, such as the Islamic State, with all the
negative consequences that that may bring about. In that
respect, we call upon the Israeli Government to take the
necessary measures, particularly in the economic field,
to alleviate the suffering of the affected populations.
Palestine has a school enrolment rate of
approximately 99 per cent, one of the highest rates
in the world, and gender balance is deeply rooted in
the education system, thanks to the commendable
efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
However, with an unemployment rate of over 40 per
cent among graduates, it is easy to understand the sense
of desperation that drives people, especially young
people. In addition, the impact of the Syrian crisis on
Palestinian refugees, especially children, is worrying.
It should be recalled that 42 per cent of the 118 schools
run by UNRWA in Syria, which were attended by
67,300 students, have been forced to close. In total, no
fewer than 460,000 Palestinians have directly suffered
the consequences of the war in Syria.
In awaiting the recent efforts of the Quartet,
including the forthcoming issuance of the report on
the status quo, based on a decision taken at the highlevel meeting in Munich on 12 February with a view to

S/PV.7673

overcoming the current impasse, my country remains
willing to consider any initiative that would lead to
a resumption of the negotiations, including that of
France to organize an international conference on the
Palestinian issue.
For its part, Senegal calls for the resumption
of negotiations between Israel and Palestine on the
basis of clear elements, with a specific time frame for
reaching a final solution based on international law
and the relevant resolutions. The time has come for a
Palestinian State to be established within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the United Nations partition plan of 1948. A solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of two
States, with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine,
would clearly lead to better management of the security
and socioeconomic challenges in the Middle East. In the
meantime, the Council should plan for precautionary
measures to enforce the status quo at the holy sites
in Jerusalem, without forgetting the solution of the
international protectorate for the Palestinian people.
The practical elements identified by the Secretariat,
based on historic precedent, at the request of the State
of Palestine, seem absolutely worthwhile, pending a
lasting solution to the crisis, which we eagerly await.
In concluding, I must renew our appeal to the
Palestinian political actors to join the Cairo agreement,
committing in good faith to the Doha negotiations so
as to work towards the formation a Government of
national unity, which would facilitate the revival of a
political process with Israel.
The conference on the issue of Jerusalem, which is
to be convened on 3 and 4 May in Dakar on the initiative
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People in cooperation with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, will provide an
opportunity, I hope, to contribute to the development of
practical solutions to the issues facing that city, which
is a symbol of the three monotheistic religions. I take
this opportunity to renew our invitation to all States
Members of the Organization to actively participate in
the meeting.
With regard to the situation in Syria, my delegation
appeals to the parties to the conflict to continue, with
the support of influential stakeholders, including
countries in the region and the International Syria
Support Group, to uphold the cessation of hostilities,
pursuant to resolution 2268 (2016), which was itself the

16-1077529/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

result of the joint efforts of the task force on the truce
in Syria, which we commend.
In that regard, I wish to reiterate to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Joint Special Representative of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria, our
full support for his efforts to restore lasting peace in
Syria, where the conflict has already led to the death
of more than 260,000 people and generated 4.6 million
refugees and 13.5 million displaced persons.
Finally, with regard to Yemen, we reaffirm
Senegal’s support for the initiatives of the Special
Adviser on Yemen aimed at promoting a credible
political process and lasting peace in the country. We
appeal to the parties to uphold the ceasefire in order to
facilitate the discussions in Kuwait.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I wish to thank the
Chinese presidency for convening this open debate. We
fully agree with the importance of a regular review of
the situation in the Middle East by the Security Council.
I also would like to express our solidarity with
Ecuador and Japan, which suffered major earthquakes
over the past two days.
Ukraine consistently supports the Middle East
peace process and the principle of a two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine coexisting in peace and
security. In that regard, we are deeply concerned about
the latest wave of attacks and widespread violence
that has been seen since September 2015 and has
resulted in numerous casualties. The rising death toll
among civilians cannot, and should not, be tolerated;
it serves as irrefutable proof that the status quo is just
not sustainable. Another terrible reminder of that is
the recent attack against the Israeli bus in Jerusalem,
which we condemn in the strongest terms. It is obvious
that absolutely no terrorist act can be justified. Yet we
strongly believe that all sides must demonstrate genuine
restraint and to refrain from the disproportionate use
of force, which can only stir up violence and lead to
increased casualties. All of that plays into the hands
of extremists, who are trying to undermine the fragile
prospects for peace.
We are convinced that the establishment of a
stable, peaceful and democratic Palestinian State
is in Israel’s long-term security interests. However,
the ongoing process of settlement expansion and the
legalization of outposts could undermine the efforts
of the international community to achieve tangible
30/34

18/04/2016

progress in the peace process. On the other hand, we
fully understand the aspirations of the people of Israel
to live in peace within secure borders. Therefore, the
inability of the Palestinian authorities to prevent the
acts of violence regularly perpetrated against Israeli
citizens is of serious concern.
Let me stress our conviction that palpable progress
in the peace process can be achieved only through
mutual compromises and concessions reached at
the negotiation table. We firmly believe that only
a negotiated settlement leading to an Israeli and a
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security is realistic. For the Israelis, it would mean a
life free from violence and the daily fear of terror, and
for the Palestinians, finally, a chance to live freely in a
State of their own.
Everybody seems to share a common vision that
there is no alternative to the peace process. Ukraine,
which supports the efforts of the Quartet and regional
countries aimed at achieving a settlement of the
conflict, favours the early resumption of direct IsraeliPalestinian negotiations. We believe that direct talks
between the parties are the best way to achieve a
peaceful solution, as no unilateral steps will solve the
key problems facing the peace process.
At the same time, it is quite obvious that it is not
enough just to demand action from the Israeli and
the Palestinian sides. Ultimate success will depend
on a genuine commitment by all interested parties.
Diplomatic efforts must be redoubled so as to contain
and de-escalate the latest wave of violence and unlock
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.
In this light, we believe that the French initiative to
convene an international conference aimed at recreating
the momentum for the resumption of talks deserves
serious consideration. I can also assure the Council
that Ukraine remains steadfast in its support for any
effort to restore the hope that a two-State solution can
be achieved through negotiations.
Speaking of wider Middle East regional security,
we cannot but underscore the importance of the ongoing
efforts to resolve the conflicts in Syria and Yemen. The
Syrian crisis is probably the gravest regional crisis and
one of the biggest security challenges the world has
faced recently. We are convinced that the final point
of destination of the Syrian political process is the
establishment of a credible, inclusive, non-sectarian
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

governance transition body, followed by a new
constitution and elections.
At present, we are at a critical juncture in the
efforts to reach a long-overdue settlement in Syria. The
ongoing second round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva
is cause for hope, but at the same time it underscores
the challenges that lay ahead.
Where are we after the two rounds of talks?
Unfortunately, there have been no profound changes
in the situation. We see the Syrian regime continuing
its obstructive approach to each of the three pillars
of the settlement of the current Syrian crisis: the
cessation of hostilities, a political transition and
humanitarian access.
On Yemen, we are cautiously optimistic and
encouraged by the fact that the United Nations-brokered
ceasefire that started on 10 April is holding, despite
minor violations. This certainly creates a conducive
environment for the talks in Kuwait, which were to
start today but were postponed, as we have just learned
with regret.
The lack of meaningful dialogue during this round
of talks could have disastrous results. The only ones
to benefit from this would be terrorist groups, which
are increasingly active in Yemen. Therefore we believe
that it is also important that this opportunity be taken
to intensify efforts to drive back Da’esh and Al-Qaida
in Yemen.
The rapidly evolving threat of violent extremism
cannot be contained within the boundaries of any
region. It benefits from existing conflicts and continues
to destabilize countries across the Middle East. We must
address the root causes that led to this challenge in the
first place. Therefore, to prevent the further spread of
violent extremism, we need to work harder to resolve
the unprecedented humanitarian crisis unfolding in this
part of the world. The recent refugee crisis in Europe is
yet another reminder of the fact that we cannot turn a
blind eye to the catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Syria, Libya, Iraq and Yemen.

S/PV.7673

At the outset, I should like to express our
condolences and sympathy to the Governments and
the peoples of Japan and Ecuador. We are certain that
they will overcome their difficulties and rebuild their
countries as soon as possible.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and
we appreciate the efforts by the Secretariat and the
Secretary-General himself for advancing the peace
process in the Middle East.
The question of Palestine is the core of the Middle
East question and underpins peace in the Middle East.
It is the shared responsibility of the international
community to safeguard the legitimate interests of the
Palestinian people. At present, the situation between
Palestine and Israel is grim. Violent conflicts are on
the rise, the peace talks have come to an impasse, the
security situation has deteriorated, and humanitarian
disasters have intensified.
The conflict between Palestine and Israel poses
the danger of continuous escalation, with the spillover
effect also on the rise. A comprehensive and fair solution
to the Palestinian question is in the interests of all sides.
The international community should take swift action
and focus its efforts on the following aspects.
First, we must stay the right course: establishing an
independent State of Palestine and peaceful coexistence
between Palestine and Israel. Establishing a Palestinian
State with full sovereignty, based on the 1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, is the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people as well as the key to
resolving the question of Palestine. Intra-Palestine
reconciliation could facilitate the establishment of the
State of Palestine.

I hope that the tireless efforts of the wider
international community and the Council will yield
results and that the vicious circle of violence in the
Middle East will finally be broken.

Secondly, peace talks, as the only way forward,
must continue. If they stall, this could exacerbate
differences, incite hatred and drag Palestine and Israel
into a vicious circle of escalating violence in which
both sides would pay a heavy price. The use of force is
never a solution. The earlier the peace talks start, the
sooner the people of Palestine and Israel will benefit.
It is only by resuming negotiations at an early date
that it will be possible to achieve peace and stability
between Palestine and Israel and the region. This is in
the fundamental interests of both sides.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

Thirdly, in promoting the peace process we must
abide by the principle of land for peace, the two-State
solution, the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant

16-1077531/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Nations resolutions. These are important
outcomes achieved by the international community
following difficult negotiations and serve as important
guidance for advancing the peace process in the Middle
East. On this basis, all sides should stay the course and
help to promote a political solution.
Fourthly, both Palestine and Israel should take
specific steps to move the peace process forward.
Israel must first demonstrate its sincerity by taking
practical steps to stop its settlement activities, cease
the demolition of Palestinian properties and stop the
violence against innocent civilians. It should lift the
blockade on Gaza so as to create conditions conducive
to the resumption of talks. At the same time, the
legitimate security concerns of the States of the region
should also be respected.
Fifthly, in order to advance the peace process,
the international community should provide vital
guarantees. The international community recently
intensified its efforts to resolve the Palestinian question,
with new ideas and innovative thinking, including
creating an international support group, convening
an international peace conference on the Palestinian
question, and cultivating forces for peace in the Middle
East. The international community should strengthen
coordination, turn the positive momentum into concrete
action and make every effort to achieve realistic and
operable results. The Security Council should respond
positively to the legitimate demands of the Palestinians
and the Arab States and give serious consideration to
draft resolutions on providing international protection
to the Palestinian people and ending the expansion and
construction of settlements. It should take the necessary
actions to promote the relaunching of peace talks.
Sixthly, the international community should do its
best to improve the humanitarian situation in Palestine
and continue to advance its economic reconstruction.
China calls upon Israel to cooperate with the
international aid efforts by completely lifting the
blockade on Gaza. All parties should respond positively
to the United Nations aid plan for Palestine and scaledup assistance to Gaza. They should engage economic
cooperation with Palestine so that the humanitarian
situation and the climate for survival on the ground
will improve and the Palestinian people will be able to
see hope.
China has always supported the Palestinian people’s
struggle for its legitimate national rights and has worked
32/34

18/04/2016

to promote peace and negotiations. In 2013, President
Xi Jinping made a four-point proposal for resolving the
Palestinian-Israeli issue. During his visit to the Middle
East in January 2016, President Xi reiterated that China
would firmly support the just cause of the Palestinian
people. The Chinese Government’s Special Envoy on
Middle East affairs has been actively engaged in efforts
to promote peace and negotiations. Every year, China
provides economic assistance to Palestine through the
United Nations or bilaterally for improving the welfare
of the Palestinian people.
Last January, China decided to provide
RMB50 million of free aid to Palestine. China is ready
to join the international community in a continued
effort to promote a bona fide solution of the IsraeliPalestinian issue. As a steadfast supporter of, and
facilitator for, peace in the Middle East, China has been
working actively for a peaceful political settlement of
the questions in Syria, Yemen, Libya, among other
hotspots, with a view to achieving peace and stability
in the Middle East at an early date.
With regard to the Syrian issue, the agreement
between the parties on the cessation of hostilities is
holding. Progress has been achieved in the field of
humanitarian relief and the peace talks in Geneva are
on track. The international community should continue
to support the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura in his good offices and make the
following efforts.
First, it should support United Nations relief
agencies in their efforts to expand humanitarian relief
activities. The countries concerned should strengthen
communication and coordination with the Government
of Syria to facilitate the process.
Secondly, it should ensure that all the Syrian parties
will continue to abide by the agreement on the cessation
of hostilities so as to continue to ease the situation.
Thirdly, it should promote progress in the
peace talks in Geneva and encourage the parties to
follow the principle of moving from the easy to the
difficult, starting with the issues where consensus
exists in order to produce a timely result and promote
confidence-building.
Fourthly, it should step up the international fight
against terrorism and join hands in combating the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist organizations listed by the Council.
16-10775

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Chinese Government appointed Ambassador Xie
Xiaoyan as its Special Envoy for the Syrian crisis. As
always, China will promote the political process for a
settlement of the Syrian question.
On the question of Yemen, the nationwide cessation
of hostilities by the Yemeni parties and the new round
of political dialogue in Kuwait signify a return to
the political track of consultation and dialogue on
the question. We hope that the Yemeni parties will
honour their commitment to abide by the cessation of
hostilities agreement and demonstrate political will
in the national dialogue by tackling issues such as
the military conflict, security arrangements and the
restoration of State institutions, on the one hand, and
focus on the establishment of an inclusive political
system in Yemen and the formulation of a political
solution that meets Yemen’s reality and accommodates
the concerns of all parties, on the other. All parties to
the conflict should actively cooperate with the United
Nations humanitarian relief efforts and provide safe
and unimpeded access to humanitarian relief items in
order to ease the humanitarian situation on the ground.
On the question of Libya, recently the Libyan
parties made an important headway in implementing the
Libyan political agreement. The Presidential Council
of the Government of National Accord moved into the
capital to start its work, but the country’s deep-rooted
problems have yet to be completely resolved, while
the external environment is highly complex. Efforts
should be made to promote synergy between Libya’s
internal efforts and external political support to further
consolidate the current state of affairs. Libya should
adhere to a political process that is led by Libyans and
open to all parties. They should work hard to defuse
conflicts, achieve national reconciliation and adopt
measures that are in keeping with the popular will and
the national choice. The international community should
urge the Libyan parties to join and fully implement the
Libyan political agreement, ensure safe and smooth
proceedings by the Presidential Council and settle
differences through dialogue and consultation.
Countries in the Middle East are all confronted with
the formidable challenge of terrorism. The fight against
terrorism is closely connected with the settlement of the
hotspot issues in the Middle East. Increasing cooperation
against terrorism is a joint responsibility of the States
of the region and of the international community. All
the parties concerned, within the framework of the
United Nations, should adopt common measures,

S/PV.7673

resolutely crack down on the spreading of ideologies of
violent extremism and terrorism, sever the channels of
financing for terrorism and stop foreign terrorist flows
in order to create favourable conditions for the political
resolution of hotspot issues. With regard to counterterrorism, there should be no double standards. Neither
should terrorism be linked with a specific ethnicity or
religion.
China is ready to work with the international
community in a joint effort to find a way out of the
chaos in the Middle East in order to reduce conflicts and
suffering, create more tranquility and human dignity
there and so that peace, stability and development may
prevail soon.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I would like appeal to speakers to deliver
their statements at a reasonable speed in order that
interpretation may be provided accurately.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Isabella
Lövin, Minister for International Development and
Cooperation of Sweden.
Ms. Lövin (Sweden): I would like to align itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union later this afternoon, but I would
like to take this opportunity to make a statement in my
national capacity.
Let me begin by encouraging the Yemeni parties to
engage without delay in the United Nations-facilitated
peace talks, which were scheduled to begin today in
Kuwait. Those talks will hopefully bring us closer to
a political solution in Yemen. Sweden welcomes the
cessation of hostilities in place since 10 April, and we
urge all parties to respect it. The massive humanitarian
needs must be met. Sweden is among the largest
humanitarian donors in Yemen, with contributions of
over $50 million since the conflict began.
Making the Syria talks in Geneva a success is an
enormous challenge, but the world cannot afford to
fail. Five years of horrific warfare must be brought to
an end. A political transition must be achieved. The

16-1077533/34

S/PV.7673

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syrian people deserve to live in peace and democracy.
For the talks to succeed, all the parties must fully
implement the resolutions of the Security Council.
While the cessation of hostilities seems to be broadly
holding, I am gravely concerned by the slowing down
in humanitarian access. In particular, I am appalled by
reports that medicines and medical equipment are being
removed from humanitarian convoys, costing innocent
lives. That is completely unacceptable.
Sweden supports the work of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
not least by funding Syrian women’s participation.
Moreover, Sweden is assisting the Syrian people in
three ways.
First, we are stepping up resilience funding through
our new $200 million Syria Crisis Strategy.
Secondly, we are increasing our humanitarian aid,
amounting to over $300 million.
Thirdly, Sweden has received over 120,000 refugees
who have fled Syria, one of the highest numbers
in Europe.
Sweden recognizes that the neighbouring countries,
especially Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey, are under
immense pressure. That is why our Syria crisis strategy
includes support for those countries’ actions as well.
Next year will mark 50 years of the occupation
of Palestine. All of us are aware of the urgency of the
situation on the ground and the absence of a political
solution. The two-State solution is fading away before
our very eyes. We are seeing continued violence and
the rapid continuation of settlement construction. We
are seeing unprecedented numbers of demolitions of
Palestinian homes and infrastructure.
The settlements are illegal and an obstacle to
peace. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem seriously
jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem serving as
the future capital of both States. A fundamental
change in the settlement policy is needed, particularly
in East Jerusalem and Area C. Such a change would
increase economic opportunities, empower Palestinian
institutions and enhance stability and security for both
Israelis and Palestinians.
Sweden stands firmly against terrorism. All acts of
violence against civilians, including the horrific attack

34/34

18/04/2016

on the civilian bus in Jerusalem today, are despicable
and must be condemned by all. Yet security measures
alone will not end the violence. The underlying causes
of the conflict must be addressed. Only then will the
violence come to an end. Only then will peace and
stability prevail. Only then will the citizens in Israel
and Palestine be able to live their lives in dignity.
The situation in Gaza remains critical. Recent
rocket attacks from Gaza and the Israeli air strike in
retaliation show the urgency of the situation. They
are reminders of the risk of further violent escalation.
In a couple of years, the lack of potable water will be
irreversible. The isolation of Gaza must end therefore,
and reconstruction must be fast-tracked.
The European Union and Sweden have called upon
all the parties to guarantee unimpeded humanitarian
access to Gaza for humanitarian organizations and other
international actors, including State representatives, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
In order to save the prospects of a two-State
solution and counter the growing hopelessness among
youth, the international community must move from
words to action. We must help the parties to move
forward by creating new dynamics and momentum
for a meaningful peace process to end the occupation.
Sweden therefore fully supports the French initiative
on an international peace conference, as a way for
the parties and the world to recommit to the twoState solution. Sweden is encouraged by the increased
Quartet activity,and looks forward to the publication of
the announced Quartet report.
The Security Council has a central role to play
and must shoulder its responsibility to uphold its
resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations. If
we, the international community, are serious about
our commitment to the two-State solution, we have
important work to do in the months ahead.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

16-10775
