UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/14
22 May 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3884th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 May 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council strongly condemns the armed attack in Angola on
19 May 1998 against personnel from the United Nations and the Angolan
National Police, in which one person was killed and three people were
seriously injured. It demands that the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation (GURN) and in particular the União Nacional para a
Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) guarantee unconditionally the safety
and freedom of movement of all United Nations and other international
personnel.
"The Security Council strongly deplores the failure by UNITA to
complete the implementation of its remaining obligations under the ‘Acordos
de Paz’ (S/22609, annex), the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) and
relevant Security Council resolutions, especially its failure to cooperate
in completing the normalization of State administration throughout the
national territory, including in particular in Andulo and Bailundo. It
also strongly condemns the confirmed attacks by members of UNITA on the
personnel of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
international personnel and Angolan national authorities. The Council
expresses its deep concern at the serious abuses committed by the Angolan
National Police, particularly in areas recently transferred to State
administration, as well as at the recent increase in hostile propaganda.
The lack of progress in completing the remaining tasks of the peace process
has led to a serious deterioration in the military and security situation
in the country. The Council calls on the GURN and UNITA in the strongest
terms to refrain from any action which might lead to renewed hostilities or
derail the peace process.
"The Security Council endorses the plan for the completion of the
remaining tasks of the Lusaka Protocol by 31 May 1998 that was submitted by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the Joint Commission
on 15 May 1998. The Council demands that the GURN and in particular UNITA
fulfil their obligations in accordance with this plan. In this context,
98-14251 (E)

220598

/...

S/PRST/1998/14
English
Page 2

the Council reaffirms its readiness to review the measures specified in
paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997 and to consider the
imposition of additional measures in accordance with paragraphs 8 and 9 of
resolution 1127 (1997).
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative, and the personnel of MONUA for their
efforts to assist the GURN and UNITA to implement their peace process
obligations.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of this matter."

-----
