United Nations

S/PV.6590

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6590th meeting
Tuesday, 26 July 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-43003 (E)

*1143003*

S/PV.6590

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bangladesh, Cuba, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Pakistan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 July 2011 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2011/444 and
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Tuesday, 26 July 2011, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of

2

the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Serry.
Mr. Serry: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the floor. Let me acknowledge the presence of both
Ambassador Mansour at this table — I think we met a
few weeks ago in Jerusalem — and of the new Israeli
Ambassador, Mr. Prosor. I had the privilege of meeting
him yesterday.
The political process to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is in profound and persistent
deadlock. Efforts to find the necessary common ground
for resumed negotiations have proven extremely
difficult, given the differences and lack of trust
between the parties. Political leaders on both sides are
frustrated, as are their publics. This is particularly
acute on the Palestinian side in the absence of a
credible political horizon for ending the occupation
that began in 1967. Israel remains concerned about
achieving lasting security and an end to the conflict.
The Quartet has engaged throughout this year to
promote meaningful negotiations. Most recently, the
Secretary-General
joined Quartet
partners
in
Washington, D.C., on 11 July. The Quartet sought to
translate the important speech of President Obama on
19 May, in which he laid out parameters on borders
and security as what he termed a “foundation for
negotiations”, into an internationally agreed framework
for the parties to resume talks. The Secretary-General
appreciated the substantive discussion in Washington,
D.C. The Quartet did not issue a statement to help
chart the way forward, but its efforts continue.
Both President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu continue to reiterate their desire to
negotiate. However, in the absence of a framework for
meaningful talks, and with Israeli settlement activity
continuing, the Palestinians are actively exploring
approaching the United Nations. President Abbas states
that he remains committed to negotiations and that
efforts in the United Nations would help to preserve
the two-State solution. Israel opposes this course of
action, stating that it will make negotiations for a twoState solution more difficult to achieve. The
Palestinians are consulting closely with the Arab

11-43003

S/PV.6590

League on this issue, and both parties are intensively
engaging members of the international community.
We hope that the international community can be
united in forums of collective decision-making — now,
in September, and after September too — and shape a
legitimate and balanced way forward that will help the
parties to overcome their differences and ultimately
return to negotiations. We will continue to work with
Quartet partners to seek urgent action in this regard.
We also note the prerogatives and responsibilities of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.
We must not lose sight of what is at stake. The
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and my
own Office, the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator in the Occupied Territories (UNSCO),
have
all
acknowledged
the
unprecedented
achievements of the Palestinian Authority in the West
Bank. The Palestinian Authority has, in key areas,
reached a level of institutional performance sufficient
for a functioning State. The Palestinian Authority is
ready to assume the responsibilities of statehood at any
point in the near future.
Real security and economic gains have been
made, benefiting both peoples. Better governance,
increased investment, improvements in movement and
access, and donor engagement have strengthened the
West Bank economy in a difficult global environment
over the past two years. The training and deployment
of thousands of Palestinian security officers and
intensified security coordination have seen terrorist
cells dismantled and extremist incitement combated.
Palestinians have seen law and order return to the main
cities, and Israelis have faced comparatively few acts
of violence from the West Bank.
However, as we have often warned, this agenda
will soon reach the limits of achievement without more
political and physical space. This requires Israeli steps
to roll back measures of occupation and continuous
donor support. For example, we have repeatedly called
on Israel to allow the expansion of Palestinian urban
centres to accommodate population growth and
industrial activity, which would necessitate including
some parts of Area C. While steps of enablement were
made in the past, bold measures have been lacking in
recent times, and the implementation of those measures
that have been announced, including the February 2011
package agreed with Quartet Representative Blair, has
been slow. Indeed, we have seen many negative actions

11-43003

in Area C. The demolition of Palestinian structures has
surged. This year, 700 people have been displaced as
approximately 370 structures have been demolished —
the highest number since 2006. Water and sanitation
systems have been targeted in particular.
Settlement activities continue in many of the
most sensitive areas of East Jerusalem and Area C. In
the past month, 40 units were approved in Karnei
Shomron in the northern West Bank. I am particularly
concerned that on 26 June 2011, for the first time in
several years, Israel confiscated 19 hectares of private
Palestinian land in the village of Karyut, also in the
northern West Bank. An outpost, illegal even under
Israeli law, has been placed on that land. This departs
from Israeli public undertakings not to build new
settlements or set aside land for new settlements, and
sets a worrying precedent for the future legalization of
outposts, which, under the Road Map, should be
removed. Settlements are illegal under international
law and prejudge final status discussions, and
settlement activity must cease.
Issues on which we report regularly to the
Council, including settler violence, incursions citing
security concerns, movement and access limitations,
and the route of the barrier, continue to be sources of
friction between the parties. I note that on 23 June the
Israeli authorities, as ordered by the Israeli Supreme
Court, began re-routing a section of the barrier near
Bil′in, a village where there are weekly protests, thus
giving residents access to an additional 1,020 dunums
of agricultural land, although they are still deprived of
another 1,280 dunums.
There are now growing calls from civil society
groups and political figures for intensified peaceful
protests against the status quo and calls for action to
realize the Palestinian right of self-determination.
Meanwhile, precisely at the time when the Statebuilding plan was meant to reach fruition, the
Palestinian Authority has faced setbacks owing to its
fiscal position and shortages in donor funding, forcing
it to cut back on security expenditures and only pay
half-salaries in June.
I urge donors, including members of the Arab
League, who are meeting on this issue today in Cairo,
to ensure that the Palestinian Authority can pay salaries
and meet its other financial obligations. I urge Israel to
do more to empower its moderate, committed and
peaceful Palestinian partner.

3

S/PV.6590

Security Council resolutions 1850 (2008) and
1860 (2009) and the framework of international law
continue to guide United Nations policy on Gaza. We
are concerned that the calm between Israel and Gaza,
which was restored in early April, has been challenged
by the firing of some 18 rockets into Israel since
23 June. During the same period, Israel conducted
three incursions and 16 air strikes, killing two and
injuring eight Palestinian militants, but also killing one
Palestinian civilian and injuring 14 others. One Israeli
soldier was injured during an incursion, and an Israeli
civilian contractor was lightly injured by gunfire from
Gaza. Militants’ firing of indiscriminate rockets
towards civilian areas is unacceptable and must cease.
Israel must also show restraint. Tensions have subsided
in recent days. My office remains active in promoting a
full restoration of calm, which remains a cornerstone
for any broader achievements in Gaza.
A nascent recovery is under way in Gaza, with
real GDP growth of 15.1 per cent in 2010 and 17.9 per
cent in the first quarter of 2011. However, this rebound
starts from a very low base and is driven in part by
public expenditures, donor aid, tunnel traffic, increased
imports from Israel and limited exports. Imports are
only about a third of the volume before the closure.
Unemployment in Gaza is very high, at 31 per cent;
54 per cent of households remain food insecure; and
38 per cent live in poverty.
Israel’s June 2010 policy change from a list of
permitted items to a list of prohibited ones has
contributed to an increase in consumer good imports. A
limited range and volume of agricultural products has
also been exported since Israel’s December 2010
decision to allow them.
The level of United Nations projects approved for
Gaza to date, pursuant to Israel’s policy, totals
$265 million — a significant start towards addressing
Gaza’s vast basic needs including in education,
housing and sanitation.
The Rafah crossing for people now operates six
days a week between Gaza and Egypt.
Together with our Quartet partners, we urge Israel
to allow aggregate, iron bar and cement for use by
Gaza’s private sector. The ongoing illicit tunnel trade
in these essential building materials empowers those
who control smuggling at the expense of the legitimate
commercial sector. Exports to foreign countries and the
West Bank should also be further enabled. The much

4

freer movement of people to and from the Strip is vital
if Gazans are to enjoy basic rights, normal interaction
with the outside world, and human dignity. We
continue to seek the full reopening of all legitimate
crossings. We urge continued vigilance to combat
smuggling of weapons into the Strip.
Most of the vessels involved in a recent flotilla
did not receive authorizations from maritime
authorities from countries in the region to sail towards
Gaza. On 19 July, Israeli naval forces intercepted a
small boat carrying approximately 10 activists who
intended to sail to Gaza, and directed it to the Israeli
port of Ashdod. Unnecessary confrontations at sea
were avoided, as urged by the Quartet.
In Gaza, the Hamas interior ministry closed the
local Sharek Youth Forum on unspecified accusations
of immoral behaviour. The authorities are also seeking
to audit international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) with on-site inspections. We urge full respect
for the free and independent exercise of the functions
of those organizations. We also urge full respect for the
work of United Nations agencies, some of whose
activities in support of Palestinian beneficiaries have
been misrepresented recently.
We are also very concerned that a bomb was
detonated near the UNSCO compound in Gaza on
25 June causing material damage to the perimeter wall,
which underlines the continued challenging security
environment facing the United Nations in the Strip.
I also draw your attention to the fact that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) faces an
unprecedented funding shortfall of $61.4 million for its
core programmes and operations, as well as for its
emergency food and employment operations. I urge
donors to provide decisive and speedy support to
UNRWA, without which support to Gazans could be
significantly curtailed come October.
The Secretary-General joined the DirectorGeneral of the International Red Cross in expressing
his grave concern at the continuing captivity of Israeli
Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit on the fifth anniversary of
his detention, and called on Hamas to protect his life,
treat him humanely and present a proof of life. We also
continue to call for his release and for the conclusion
of prisoner exchange negotiations, which would also
enable the release of a significant number of
Palestinian prisoners. We note with concern reports of

11-43003

S/PV.6590

steps taken to harden the conditions of detention of
some of these prisoners during the reporting period.
Implementation of the May reconciliation accord
is stalled amid disputes over the composition and
programme of a new Government. The longer
reconciliation is delayed, the more that developments
on the ground will push the West Bank and Gaza
further apart, with grave consequences for prospects
for a viable Palestinian State. The United Nations
continues to promote reconciliation within the
framework of the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the positions of the Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
There has been no movement on the regional
tracks of the peace process. Popular protests and
political change have become part of the regional
dynamic and affect the way the parties perceive their
security and political strength. Uncertainty in the
region should be cause for the parties to redouble
efforts to address stability. Progress towards peace is
more urgent than ever.
I will not brief on Lebanon given that the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon briefed you last week.
In conclusion, after nearly 20 years of
inconclusive peace negotiations since the Madrid
Conference, yet again we are reaching a point where
the parties fail to meet an agreed timeline for a
permanent status agreement. I can only describe the
current situation, whereby the process of Palestinian
State-building in the West Bank has matured but the
political track has failed to converge, as dramatic.
We continue to urge the parties to find a way
forward at this sensitive and important time. We hope
that the international community can help by shaping a
legitimate and balanced framework. Without a credible
political path forward, accompanied by more farreaching steps on the ground, the viability of the
Palestinian Authority and its State-building agenda —
and, I fear, of the two-State solution itself — cannot be
taken for granted.
This agenda should be advanced within the
framework of Security Council resolutions and
international law, the agreements and obligations of the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The President: I thank Mr. Serry for his briefing,
and I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

11-43003

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I wish to
convey Palestine’s congratulations to Germany on its
presidency and skilled stewardship of the Security
Council this month. I am personally delighted to see
you, Mr. Minister of State, presiding over the Security
Council as an indication of the importance that
Germany places on this debate.
We laud your efforts in leading the Council,
particularly in the proceedings on the application for
full United Nations membership by our brotherly
country of South Sudan. Palestine reiterates its
warmest congratulations and full solidarity and support
to South Sudan in this new chapter of independence for
the people of South Sudan, wishing them all success
and prosperity.
We express appreciation as well to the Gabonese
Republic for its wise guidance of the Council in June. I
also express appreciation to the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing today and for all of
his serious efforts on the ground on behalf of the
Secretary-General. I must add that I was extremely
delighted to meet with him a few weeks ago in his
office in Jerusalem, an office that is so beautiful and
evokes many optimistic hopes for us, the Palestinians,
that we might have it as the office of our presidents
when we have our own independent State.
The Security Council convenes this open debate
at a moment requiring serious reflection and candid
deliberation about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
the international efforts to resolve it and the ArabIsraeli conflict as a whole.
We are all aware that the answers to the problem
lie in the legal principles and just positions at the core
of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. The missing factor is the political will to
uphold international law and implement those
resolutions. While numerous good-faith regional and
international efforts have been exerted, they continue
to fail owing to Israel’s relentless violations of the law
and the general failure to hold Israel accountable for its
illegal actions. Israel needs to change course in a way
that would make the realization of the two-State
solution possible. This is a fact, and it is the major
reason why the Israeli military occupation continues
and why the Palestinian people continue to be denied
justice and their right to self-determination and
freedom.

5

S/PV.6590

In our letters sent in the recent period, we have
fully informed the Council of the deplorable situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of the Israelis’ illegal policies,
which are destroying the contiguity of the territory and
inflicting more suffering on our people. Such illegal
practices have not ceased for a single moment, and
they include the following.
The illegal settlement campaign continues,
especially in and around occupied East Jerusalem, in
breach of Israel’s obligations under international law,
United Nations resolutions and the Quartet Road Map’s
demand for a freeze of all settlement activities.
Construction of settlements and the wall and the
demolition of homes continue unabated, as do attempts
to seize and de facto annex land.
Terror attacks continue against Palestinian
civilians by Israeli settlers, clearly emboldened by the
extremist tendencies of the Government, which
continues to protect them and promote their agenda,
with more than 139 attacks documented in the past
month.
Collective punishment of the population in the
Gaza Strip through the illegal blockade and obstruction
of international reconstruction efforts and any
semblance of normal life continue.
Military
air
strikes
continue
against
neighbourhoods in Gaza, as do attacks on Palestinian
fishing boats, causing injury to dozens of civilians and
destruction to property.
Military raids and arrests of Palestinian civilians,
including children, and the deterioration of already
harsh conditions imposed on Palestinian prisoners,
particularly following the Israeli Prime Minister’s
declaration to “toughen conditions” on them, continue.
The plight of all prisoners, including those suffering
from acute health conditions and those on hunger strike
in protest of Israel’s cruel treatment, remains of utmost
concern.
The use of excessive force against Palestinians
and others, including Israelis, peacefully demonstrating
against the Wall and the settlements continues.
(spoke in Arabic)
I would like, in this forum, to salute the people of
Bil′in and their friends for their peaceful struggle. They
have succeeded in defeating Israel one kilometre from

6

the Green Line. I had the honour to visit Bil′in last
week, and I visited the old track and the new
construction of the wall. In this forum, I would like to
salute Bil′in for this great achievement.
(spoke in English)
In addition, hostile acts and threats continue
against peace activists, especially those protesting the
blockade, human rights organizations and civil society
activists. Israeli aggression against non-violent protest
has also taken a new form in the punitive,
undemocratic boycott law that was recently adopted.
All of these illegal actions and provocations are
indicative of the Israeli Government’s extremely rightwing and anti-peace agenda. Israel, the occupying
Power, is obstructing peace in both word and deed,
sabotaging the small opportunity remaining to achieve
the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
borders for the realization of peace and coexistence
between our peoples.
These facts must be faced head on, and all empty
excuses and illogical pretexts for such illegal actions
must be rejected. The fragility of the situation and
rapid rise in tensions require immediate redress by this
Council, in line with its Charter obligations. Continued
appeasement of Israel’s expansionist agenda runs the
risk of and bears the responsibility for further harming
the prospects for peace and security, with serious short
and long-term consequences.
In this regard, we are heartened by the fact that
neither the Palestinian people nor their Arab brethren,
nor even the international community, have given up
on the pursuit of a just peace. All remain resilient in
their calls for an end to the Israeli occupation, the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, and a just solution for the Palestine refugees
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of
1948. Current opportunities to advance these noble
objectives must be seized, specifically in light of the
critical situation on the ground and in the context of
the ongoing and very relevant Arab spring.
To continue to deny the appeals of the Palestinian
people for independence in their State of Palestine in
exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination
is unjustifiable. The Palestinian people must live as an
independent, free and dignified people in peace and

11-43003

S/PV.6590

security, and Palestine must be allowed to prosper and
contribute as a full member of the community of
nations. This is the goal to which the Palestinian
leadership is fully committed and which we seek to
achieve with the invaluable support of all concerned
States and peoples from around the globe.
We are determined to overcome the obstacles in
the way of peace. However, that will require both an
honest assessment of the situation and the
determination of an appropriate course of collective
action to deal with those obstacles and to truly advance
just and lasting peace, security and coexistence.
In that regard, the failure of the Quartet to adopt
clear and fair parameters for the solution to allow for
the resumption of credible negotiations between the
two sides was a serious missed opportunity. It was a
setback for the Quartet’s efforts to shepherd the peace
process towards its objective of ending the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and the conclusion of a
peace treaty that would end the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in all its aspects, including the just resolution
of all final status issues: Jerusalem, Palestinian
refugees, settlements, borders, security and water.
That failure of the Quartet was caused by Israel,
which refused to accept the legitimate and
internationally supported basis for negotiations,
including the elements contained in the bold speech
made by United States President Barack Obama on
19 May and the positions taken by the European Union
and the Quartet as a whole. Held hostage to such
intransigence, the Quartet was regrettably unable to
endorse the parameters and to call upon the parties to
return to the negotiating table on that basis.
Here, it must be clarified that the Palestinian side
abides by its commitments and is ready to resume
serious negotiations, within a limited time frame, based
on clear parameters, including the understanding that
the pre-June 1967 borders must be the foundation on
which any negotiations proceed. President Abbas has
been clear in that regard. Israel, however, continues to
arrogantly and dangerously reject that basis, making
the revival of peace negotiations impossible at the
present time.
The aim is not to place blame, but it is necessary
to confront the truth in order to act collectively to
overcome the impediments to achieving a peaceful
solution. If the international community continues to
absolve Israel of its unilateral and illegal behaviour,

11-43003

there will be no incentive to change that behaviour.
Permitting the occupying Power to continue to breach
the law without consequence will completely destroy
the two-State solution as a viable option, ushering in
yet another period of turmoil, insecurity and suffering,
and a search for alternative solutions. If we are serious
about opening the doors to the two-State solution,
Israel must be held fully responsible for its actions.
The decisions that must be made at this moment
are critical to reviving the failing peace process and to
changing the destructive course on which the
occupying Power has put us all. However, the decisions
to be made are not difficult, for they are logical,
justified and rooted in international law, United
Nations resolutions and the international consensus
solution to the conflict, namely, the two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders, which is a historic
compromise agreed to long ago by the Palestinian
leadership.
The Palestinian leadership remains committed to
the terms of reference of the peace process: the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map. We are determined to
remain proactive and to make a positive contribution
towards ending the conflict and achieving the national
aspirations and rights of our people. Any steps taken by
the Palestinian leadership will be fully transparent and
consistent with the goal of the peace process. Through
legitimate political, diplomatic and legal means, and
with the support of the international community, we
believe that it will be possible to achieve peace.
The coming months will be critical. September
2011, the date set by the Quartet and endorsed by the
international community for concluding a peace
agreement, remains a target date for effecting a change
that can create the positive dynamics and momentum
necessary to achieving a breakthrough.
Next month, the Palestinian National Authority
will complete its implementation of the two-year plan,
launched by Prime Minister Fayyad, to build the
institutions of the Palestinian State, end the occupation
and achieve independence. With international political
and financial support, that plan — a complementary
track to the peaceful platform on which President
Abbas was elected — has reached its objectives, as
acknowledged by the international community. We
have fulfilled our responsibilities and are ready to

7

S/PV.6590

govern ourselves. The only remaining obstacle is
Israel’s 44-year military occupation.
Our people have legitimate rights, needs and
demands, and it is our duty to listen and to act
responsibly to advance their just cause. We cannot keep
waiting for Israel to negotiate in good faith — an
almost impossible matter as long as the occupier
continues to be absolved of its obligations under
international law and might is permitted to trump right.
A new process — awakened by the failings of a
20-year process since Madrid and an 18-year process
since the signing of the Oslo Accords due to Israel’s
refusal to end its occupation, its illegal settlement
activities and its human rights violations and to commit
to peace — has been set in motion. The time for
change is now. There is no justification for the denial
of the rights and the freedom of the Palestinian people.
We thus continue to appeal for the recognition of
the State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders.
We are convinced that the more than 120 bilateral
recognitions of Palestine to date are each a
reaffirmation of our inalienable right to selfdetermination and our natural and legal right to
statehood and to be a part of the international
community. We recognize the important respective
roles played by Governments, parliaments, civil
society and all the world’s citizens in that regard. We
renew our gratitude for their vital support and
solidarity.
Further, we believe that actions undertaken at the
United Nations — the centre of multilateral activity —
whether in the Security Council or the General
Assembly, can contribute towards achieving the peace
that we all seek, and that they will not obstruct the
realization of that objective. That is not a unilateral
action. On the contrary, it is multilateral. The
consecration of the two-State solution in bold
resolutions, including recognition of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, and its admission as a
full Member of the Organization, will help to make the
two-State solution more inevitable.
That decisive measure could finally convince
Israel, the occupying Power, that its occupation and
oppression of the Palestinian people are completely
rejected by the world and that it must abandon its
destructive course, including its greatest unilateral
illegal action — the settlement campaign, which has

8

been rejected by the entire international community,
including all members of the Council. We believe that
that is what will ultimately lead to a change in the
status quo and to peace.
We are thus hopeful that the international
community, including the Council, will uphold the
legal, political and moral responsibilities towards the
question of Palestine that have remained unfulfilled
since the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution
181 (II), which partitioned Mandate Palestine, and for
which there is now an historic opportunity to finally
fulfil towards ensuring justice and freedom for the
Palestinian people.
Why should the Palestinian people be forced to
languish yet another year — or even one more day —
under foreign occupation? They should not and they
must not. This is the time to end the Israeli occupation.
This is the time for Palestine’s independence. This is
the time for Palestine and Israel to live side by side in
peace and security, and this is the time for a new
Middle East. We believe that the international
community is ready for that, and we trust that the
appropriate actions will be undertaken soon to make
this a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me thank you, Sir, for
your able stewardship of the Security Council this
month. It is an honour and a privilege to have you
presiding over this important debate of the Security
Council.
I would like to begin by offering my
Government’s condolences to the people and
Government of Norway following last week’s appalling
attacks in Oslo and Utøya. The victims of this tragedy
remain in our thoughts and prayers.
I speak before the Council today as a proud
representative of the Jewish State and the Jewish
people — a people whose bond to the land of Israel
and our eternal capital, Jerusalem, extends back more
than 3,000 years. It is where we began and where we
have been reborn, realizing the dreams of our
forefathers to be a free people in our own land. Our
nation seeks a lasting peace in which the Palestinians
will have their own State alongside — but not instead
of — the Jewish State of Israel. This morning, I would
like to share several observations about the Middle

11-43003

S/PV.6590

East peace process, which stands yet again at a critical
juncture.
First, let me state clearly that unilateral actions
will not bring peace to our region. Like a false idol, the
Palestinian initiatives at the United Nations may be
superficially attractive to some, yet they distract from
the true path to peace. Winston Churchill said that all
the secrets of statecraft lie in history. On this question,
history’s lessons are unmistakable. Peace can be
achieved only through bilateral negotiations that
address the concerns of both sides. This was the way of
President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin; the way of
Prime Minister Rabin and King Hussein. It has been
the framework for negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians for the past two decades.
Only this month, we were again reminded that
negotiations are the route to statehood when South
Sudan proclaimed its independence and was accepted
as the 193rd State Member of the United Nations. It
marked a new chapter in a long and difficult journey.
Both South Sudan and the Sudan harboured serious
frustrations. Major problems arose. Yet, the parties did
not seek quick fixes or instant solutions. Although it
was hard, they sat together and negotiated, reaching a
mutual agreement. This is why South Sudan was
accepted by such a broad consensus of the international
community.
It is no coincidence that we do not hear the same
resounding enthusiasm for the Palestinian’s march
towards unilateralism at the United Nations. On the
contrary, many in the international community are
looking for ways to avoid this action. Many have
recognized that Palestinian attempts to create a State
by bypassing negotiations are akin to picking out a
chimney-pot for one’s house before laying its
foundation. They see the potential consequences of
mistrust and unmet expectations that could lead to
violence.
It is evident that some Palestinian leaders
understand this as well. Prime Minister Fayyad has
spoken out against such a declaration. Just last week,
Nabil Amr, a member of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization Central Council and a former minister of
the Palestinian Authority (PA), called on the PA to
delay its statehood bid. Palestinians like Mr. Fayyad
and Mr. Amr see the practical reality before us. Like
many others, they recognize that after September will
come October, and November, and December. They

11-43003

know that this declaration will be in violation of the
bilateral agreements that are the basis for IsraeliPalestinian cooperation, and will create expectations
that cannot be met.
Now is the time for the international community
to tell the Palestinian leadership what it refuses to tell
its own people. There are no shortcuts to statehood.
They cannot bypass the only path to peace. The
Palestinians will have to make compromises and make
hard choices. They will have to get off the bandwagon
of unilateralism and back to the hard work of direct
peacemaking.
There have been attempts to find a framework for
relaunching the peace process between Israel and the
Palestinians. These efforts must be consistent, taking
into consideration the vital interests of both sides.
Some of those who speak most loudly and clearly
about the interests of Palestinians suddenly seem to
lose their voice, hesitate and sometimes even mumble
when it comes to discussing Israel’s vital interests: its
recognition as a Jewish state and its right to live within
safe and secure borders. Both of these issues —
security and recognition of Israel as a Jewish State —
are absolutely essential to ensuring the future of the
State of Israel.
With regards to our security challenges, let me
remind the Council that Hamas and Hizbullah have
fired 12,000 rockets into Israel since we withdrew from
Gaza and southern Lebanon. You do not have to be a
rocket scientist to realize that if rockets fall on your
cities, schools and citizens, your Government has a
right to defend itself. Our civilians face this reality
every single day. No target is free from attack. Just this
year, rockets have been launched at homes,
synagogues, kindergartens and even a bright yellow
school bus, killing a 16-year old boy.
Without clear security arrangements, there is no
guarantee that terrorists, arms and munitions will not
flow into the West Bank in a future Palestinian State,
just as they are being smuggled into Gaza today as we
speak. One does not have to look too far to recognize
Israel’s existential security challenges. Let me point
out that Israel’s only international airport — named
after David Ben-Gurion, one of our founding fathers —
lies within a few miles of the West Bank. That is
shorter than the distance from where we are sitting
right now to JFK or Newark Airports. It could be a
target of constant rocket fire. One can only imagine the

9

S/PV.6590

reaction if other airports were under a similar threat.
Lasting peace must be based on a demilitarized
Palestinian State and an emphasis on education that
promotes peace instead of hatred, tolerance instead of
violence, and mutual understanding instead of
martyrdom.
On the issue of the Jewish State, we must have
clarity as well. If lasting peace is to take hold, Israel’s
recognition of a future Palestinian State must be met
with an equal acknowledgement that Israel is the
Jewish State. Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu has
stated openly and repeatedly that we will accept a
Palestinian State alongside a Jewish State. Yet the
Palestinian leadership has not done the same. It will
not tell its own people that it accepts a Jewish State.
Without such an acknowledgement, it will remain
unclear whether the Palestinians’ quest for statehood is
part of an effort to end the conflict with Israel or a
pretext to continue it.
Palestinian leaders claim that they will be
prepared for statehood by September, parading this as a
magic date before the international community. We
recognize the progress that the Palestinian Authority
has made over the past two years with the assistance
and cooperation of Israel and the international
community. The West Bank economy is a bright spot in
the midst of a global recession, growing by 10 per cent
in 2010.
Yet, it is clear that much still needs to be done to
create a functioning State that lives in peace with its
neighbours. Even the most basic condition for
statehood does not exist. The Palestinian Authority
does not maintain effective control over all of its
territory nor does it hold a monopoly on the use of
force. The Hamas terrorist organization still maintains
de facto control in Gaza.
Let me turn at this point to my Palestinian
colleague, Permanent Observer Mansour, and ask a
simple question. On behalf of whom will he present a
resolution in September — Mr. Abbas or Hamas? Will
it be on behalf of both the Palestinian Authority and the
Hamas terrorist organization, which promotes a charter
calling for the destruction of Israel and the murder of
Jews? Will it be on behalf of Akram Haniyeh, the
Palestinian Authority’s chief spokesman? — Or Ismail
Haniyeh, the Hamas Prime Minister in Gaza, who in a
speech there last December said:

10

“When I say ‘the land of Palestine’, I am not
referring [only] to the West Bank, the Gaza Strip,
and Jerusalem. ... I refer to Palestine from the
[Mediterranean] Sea to the [Jordan] River, and
from Rosh Hanikra to Rafah.”
On these issues Israel and the international
community must have clarity. Whether the Palestinians
bring forward a draft resolution in the General
Assembly or invoke the “Uniting for Peace” resolution
(General Assembly resolution 377 (V)), it is clear that
the Palestinians are not united, and are far from united
for peace.
There is much uncertainty about the future
Palestinian Government: its acceptance of the Quartet
conditions, the peace process, the control of its security
forces and many other questions that each and every
representative here knows very well. It will take at
least until after the Palestinian elections next year
before it is clear what Palestinian unity really means.
For Israel, this so-called unity has only brought
continued impunity for the terrorists who fire rockets
into our cities.
Today’s debate is titled “The situation in the
Middle East”. The turmoil that is sweeping our
region — from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean
Sea — has shown that there are many challenges facing
the Middle East — most of which do not revolve only
around the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In particular, the
international community cannot allow the issue of Iran
to fall under the radar. Iran remains the centre of
terrorism in our region, transferring arms to Hamas,
Hizbollah and other terrorist groups, in serial violation
of numerous Security Council resolutions.
Iran continues to advance instability in the
Middle East — from Syria to Bahrain to Morocco. Last
month’s report by the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) made clear that Iran
continues to pursue nuclear weapons capabilities, in
complete disregard of the will of the international
community. New information shows Iran’s intention to
install uranium centrifuges at its facility in Qom — a
facility that was concealed for many years from the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Such behaviour
does not just endanger the Middle East only, or a
specific group of countries. It endangers us all. We
cannot underestimate the danger of long-range missiles
and short-range minds. The international community
cannot stand by as the Ayatollah regime seeks to

11-43003

S/PV.6590

assemble a dangerous mix of extremist ideology,
missile technology and nuclear radiology.
Let me remind the Council that Gilad Shalit,
Israel’s kidnapped soldier, has been held in captivity
for more than five years, with not a single visit from
the Red Cross. We expect the international community
to do all in its power — and more than it has done so
far — to bring about his immediate release, which we
await, and every family in Israel awaits.
Israel is happy to have many friends around the
world. As we are often reminded, true friends never
shy away from letting you know what they think.
Today I issue a call to the true friends of the
Palestinians — to those who want to see them fulfil
their national aspirations. As they march down the path
of unilateralism, the Palestinian’s true friends should
tell them the simple truths. Direct negotiations cannot
be bypassed. Peace cannot be imposed from the
outside.
To the Palestinians I also issue a call. Take
Israel’s outstretched hand. Seize the opportunities
before us to advance down the real road towards
peace — a road of solutions not resolutions, dialogue
not monologue and direct negotiations not unilateral
declarations.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to members of the Security
Council.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): It is an
honour to have you, Minister Hoyer, preside over the
Council, and I thank Special Coordinator Serry for his
briefing here today.
The United States is committed to a just and fair
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Last May,
President Obama outlined a comprehensive vision for
peace between Israelis and Palestinians. He noted that,
at a time when the people of the Middle East and North
Africa are casting off the burdens of the past, the drive
for a lasting peace that ends the conflict and resolves
all claims is more urgent than ever. The President’s
remarks laid out a firm foundation for future

11-43003

negotiations, and those remarks have been strongly
supported by the international community. My
Government has been clear all along. The only place
where permanent status issues can be resolved,
including borders and territory, is in negotiations
between the parties — not in international forums such
as the United Nations.
We must all ensure that our actions help move
peace efforts forward. Our focus has been on
encouraging direct engagement by the parties on the
basis of President Obama’s remarks. We are also
continuing our support for the Palestinian Authority’s
important efforts to strengthen the Palestinian
economy, enhance the capability and professionalism
of its security forces and build up the necessary
institutions of statehood. However, as President Obama
has made clear, Palestinian leaders will not achieve
peace or prosperity for their people if Hamas insists on
a path of terror and rejection. Palestinian leaders must
also take further steps to combat incitement to
violence, and Hamas must immediately and
unconditionally release Gilad Shalit, who has now
suffered in captivity for more than five years.
Today is our last open debate on the Middle East
before the opening of the next General Assembly. Let
there be no doubt: Symbolic actions to isolate Israel at
the United Nations in September will not create an
independent Palestinian State. The United States will
not support unilateral campaigns at the United Nations
in September or at any other time. A viable and
sustainable peace agreement can only be achieved by
mutual agreement of the parties themselves. Only
through serious and responsible negotiations can the
parties achieve the shared goal of two States for two
peoples, with a secure Jewish State of Israel living side
by side in peace and security with an independent,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine.
This is the goal; this is the vision. But there are
no shortcuts. We call again on all Member States to
encourage the parties to take constructive actions to
promote peace and to avoid actions that could
undermine trust, prejudge negotiations or place the
temptations of symbolism over the hard work of
reaching agreement.
Let me also reiterate that, like every United
States administration for decades, we do not accept the
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity. The
fate of existing settlements must be dealt with by the

11

S/PV.6590

parties along with other permanent statues issues, and
Israel should continue its efforts to deter and prosecute
anti-Palestinian violence perpetrated by extremists.
Let me turn briefly to the situation in Gaza. The
recent seizures of advanced weaponry bound for Gaza
as well as the recent and alarming rocket and mortar
attacks on Israel from Gaza should remind us all that
Israel continues to have clear and legitimate security
interests regarding cargo bound for Gaza.
While Israel has eased restrictions on the
movement of goods and people in and out of Gaza,
more needs to be done. Ordinary Gazans still have very
real humanitarian needs. So we are working closely
with Israel, the international donor community and the
Palestinian Authority to deliver critical assistance to
the people of Gaza. We continue to urge those who
wish to deliver assistance to use established channels
to ensure that Israel’s legitimate security needs are
addressed, while the Palestinians’ humanitarian needs
are met.
Let me say a few words about the ongoing crisis
in Syria. The world has been inspired by the courage of
the peaceful protesters who have taken to the streets
across the country to demand their universal rights.
The regime has responded with violence, brutality and
mass arrests. But Syria is currently headed towards a
new political order, shaped by the Syrian people, in
which the Government will derive its legitimacy from
the consent of the governed. A transition to democracy
is already under way. President Al-Assad may try to
delay that transition, but he cannot stop it, and Syria
can never return to the way it was before.
The United States fully supports the Syrian
people’s demands for a unified Syria, with a
democratic, representative and inclusive Government
that respects basic liberties and provides equal
protection under the law for all citizens, regardless of
sect, ethnicity or gender. We call on the Syrian
Government to stop the violence and arrests
immediately, and to allow peaceful protests and
freedom of speech. Human rights abuses must end now,
and human rights monitors must immediately be
granted access to all of Syria. We again call on the
Syrian Government to permit access for the factfinding mission called for by the Human Rights
Council in April. The Security Council has a
responsibility to address the situation in Syria and the
Government’s ongoing repression, which could further

12

destabilize the country and undermine peace and
security in the region.
Finally, let me say a word about Lebanon. We
hope that Lebanon’s new Government will live up to
all of its international obligations, including the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006), and uphold the country’s
commitment to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. In
particular, we call on the Government of Lebanon to
continue to meet its obligations under international law
to support the Tribunal. Lebanon’s independent judicial
proceedings offer the nation a chance to move beyond
its long history of political violence and achieve the
peace and stability that the Lebanese people deserve.
Those who oppose the Special Tribunal seek to create a
false choice between justice and stability. Lebanon,
like every other country, deserves both.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I warmly welcome you to the
Security Council, Mr. President. Let me also thank the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Serry, for his comprehensive
briefing.
The Middle East peace process remains
deadlocked, in spite of concerted efforts on the part of
the international community to return the parties to
direct negotiations. Mistrust and a lack of confidencebuilding measures have combined to complicate the
outlook. Amid the deadlock, both sides seem to be
contemplating a series of mutually harmful unilateral
actions. While one side is now threatening to annex
settlement blocs and even cancel the Oslo Agreements,
the other is seeking to achieve membership in a broad
range of international organizations. Deeply frustrating
as the continuing deadlock is, the parties must
recognize that the parameters of the two-State solution
and an end to the conflict must be negotiated.
With the Middle East Quartet unable to present a
common platform for the renewal of negotiations at its
last meeting, the only way to avoid the impending
political confrontation is for the parties to immediately
re-enter into direct negotiations on all permanent status
issues, including borders, Jerusalem, refugees and
security. Bringing both sides to constructive dialogue
will be easier to achieve if there is a common platform
or agenda around which all interlocutors, including the
Quartet, can converge. Israel’s implementation of its
Road Map obligation to freeze all settlement activities,
and Palestine’s commitment to the security of the State

11-43003

S/PV.6590

of Israel will undoubtedly facilitate the process. The
international community, particularly the Security
Council, must be fully involved in charting the way
forward.
Inter-Palestinian reconciliation is indispensable to
achieving the peace required to drive the process of
establishing an independent State and peace in the
Middle East as a whole. It is important that the April
reconciliation agreement be sustained and fully
implemented. The formation of a consensus
Government will go a long way towards helping to
forge lasting peace and stability, as well as to
supporting accelerated economic development.
We welcome the improved and steady movement
of goods and services through the crossings into Gaza.
The delivery of humanitarian assistance to the people
of Gaza through the channels established by the Greek
authorities, in consultation with the United Nations, is
highly commendable. We urge all flotilla initiatives to
take similar steps to avoid the escalation of tensions in
the region. The approval by Israel authorities of United
Nations road and school projects is encouraging, and
we hope it will help to improve the welfare of the
Palestinian people. We continue to commend the role
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in
providing much-needed relief and assistance to
Gazans, and we urge greater international financial and
logistical support for UNRWA.
On Lebanon, we reaffirm our commitment to that
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
congratulate Prime Minister Mikati on the formation of
a new Government, which should stay committed to
the country’s international obligations, including
resolution 1701 (2006), and to supporting and
preserving the work of the Special Tribunal. We urge
Israel to implement its proposal to formally withdraw
its forces from the northern part of Al-Ghajar.
The security and humanitarian situation in Syria
remains a source of concern, with refugee movements
creating serious consequences for neighbouring
countries. We urge the parties in Syria to exercise
maximum restraint and engage in meaningful dialogue
towards a peaceful settlement of the crisis. The
Government’s endorsement yesterday of a law that
would allow the formation of political parties alongside
the ruling party is a welcome development. It is
incumbent on the Government to continue to

11-43003

implement the promised reforms and to grant access to
aid agencies and the United Nations in order to provide
much-needed assistance to those who require it.
Nigeria remains hopeful that, in spite of the
current stalemate in the peace process, a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the Middle
East question is possible. The parties must continue on
the path of dialogue; they must also make the painful
compromises necessary for achieving enduring peace
in the region.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Pending the long-awaited
Quartet parameters for peace negotiations in the
Middle East, Arab leaders, including the Palestinians,
have welcomed as constructive elements the lines
drawn by President Obama last May. While they
continue to support holding an international conference
on the Middle East in Moscow, they also welcome the
recent French initiative to host another international
conference in Paris. But this Arab attitude has once
more met with Mr. Netanyahu’s reiteration of his
resounding four “no’s”: no freeze on settlements; no
return to the 1967 borders; no negotiations over the
future status of Jerusalem; and no right of return for
Palestinian refugees.
The Palestinians have been accused of seeking
recognition of statehood and membership of the United
Nations as an alternative to negotiations. But the
reality is that those negotiations have been non-existent
since September 2010, when the Israeli Government
failed to renew the settlement freeze, partial though it
was.
Moreover, in view of Mr. Netanyahu’s four
“no’s” obstinately undermining any possible significant
outcome, at best such negotiations could lead only to
yet another round of frustrating negotiations.
However, hoping against hope, President
Mahmoud Abbas is indeed worthy of praise for having
steadfastly reiterated, just three days ago, that the
Palestinians would continue to opt for negotiations
over any other path, including at the United Nations.
President Abbas is right, as there can be no
comprehensive solution without genuine negotiations
on final status issues, including border-related issues,
security arrangements, the future of settlements, the
status of Jerusalem, the return of refugees and watersharing. However, it should be noted that statehood
was never among those issues, and the reason for that
is very simple. Statehood is but an expression of the

13

S/PV.6590

right of self-determination, and self-determination is
part of the inalienable rights of people. An inalienable
right is by definition a right that can be neither
surrendered nor negotiated. In the United Nations
system, the Palestinians’ inalienable right to selfdetermination was first recognized by the General
Assembly in its resolution 3236 (XXIX), of 1974, and,
since then, has been reaffirmed every year by an
overwhelming majority of the members of the
Assembly.
The question has sometimes been asked as to
whether Palestine fulfils the requirements of statehood.
Under international law, the test of whether an entity
claiming to be a State is, in fact, a State remains
whether such an entity meets the requirements of
statehood as defined in the 1933 Montevideo
Convention on the Rights and Duties of States.
The first criterion is that of a permanent
population. It is our guess that no one here still
questions the existence of a Palestinian people. Both its
existence and its inalienable rights as a people have
long been recognized by our Organization.
The second criterion is that of a defined territory.
For the Palestinian leadership, the territory of the State
of Palestine comprises the well-known Gaza Strip and
West Bank, which was occupied by Israel in 1967, and
whose final borders could be subject to mutually
agreed-upon adjustments by both the Palestinians and
the Israelis. The fact that the territory’s final borders
are not confirmed is no impediment to statehood, as
many States’ borders have undergone changes or have
been challenged without their statehood being affected,
as noted by the International Court of Justice in other
cases.
The third criterion is that of government. The
position of the international community is that the
condition of proper institutions for self-governance has
now been fulfilled. On this condition of statehood, the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Serry, who is here with us
today, concluded in his report to the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians meeting in Brussels on
13 April that Palestinian “governmental functions are
now sufficient for a functioning government of a
State”; we heard him repeat this earlier today in this
Chamber. That conclusion was underscored by

14

concurring World Bank and International Monetary
Fund (IMF) reports.
The fourth and final criterion is the capacity to
enter into relations with other States. Such a capacity
is, obviously, evidenced by the fact that Palestinian
embassies and missions operate in more than 100
countries.
Palestine therefore meets all four criteria of
statehood. However, it is an occupied State, and it is
our duty to help it put an end to occupation and achieve
independence.
It has also been asked whether the Palestinian
quest for recognition of statehood and United Nations
membership violates previous Palestinian-Israeli
agreements. First, the basis of Palestinian statehood
precedes any Palestinian-Israeli agreement and cannot
therefore be logically or practically in violation of
them. As a matter of fact, Palestinian statehood is
rooted in General Assembly resolution 181 (II), of
1947, which divided Palestine into two States and has
often been labelled “the birth certificate of Israel”.
Based on that resolution, the Palestinian leadership
proclaimed, during an extraordinary meeting of the
Palestinian National Council held in Algiers, the birth
of the State of Palestine in 1988, that is, five years
prior to the Oslo accords, the first Palestinian-Israeli
agreement.
Secondly, rather than considering the fulfilment
of Palestinian statehood as contradictory to or
incompatible with the peace process that started with
the Oslo accords, the international community
endorsed the two-State solution in the road map and in
Security Council resolution 1850 (2008) and continued
to encourage the Palestinians to consolidate and
strengthen their Government and national institutions.
Seeking recognition of statehood has sometimes
been referred to as a unilateral move. Could seeking
such recognition and applying for membership in the
United Nations, as announced by the Palestinian
leadership and supported by the Group of Arab States,
qualify as a unilateral move?
Obviously, giving full legal effect in the United
Nations system to the recognition by the majority of its
Members of the State of Palestine can by no means
qualify as a unilateral act. That would simply reflect
the expression of the collective will of the vast
majority of the Members of the United Nations, which,

11-43003

S/PV.6590

in turn, is the most multilateral of forums in the
international system.

State of Palestine with the two countries, Palestine and
Israel, living peacefully side by side.

Unilateral actions continue, however, to be taken
on the ground and to jeopardize not only the
resumption of the much-hoped-for negotiations but
also the viability of the two-State solution. The
continuous building of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, the demolition of Palestinian
houses, the eviction of Palestinians from their ancestral
homes and the confiscation of their lands, as well as
the building of the infamous Wall by the Israeli
occupying forces are not, to the best of our knowledge,
carried out with the consent of their victims, but are,
par excellence, unilateral acts. These are the unilateral
and illegitimate acts that must be stopped.

Israeli settlement activities have directly caused
the stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks and
also constitute the major obstacle to the resumption of
those talks. China is against Israel’s construction of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and
appeals to Israel to immediately cease its settlement
activities and to promote conditions conducive to
mutual trust between the two parties in order to break
the stalemate in the peace talks.

Seeking recognition for the State of Palestine and
granting it full membership in the United Nations is not
about delegitimizing Israel. It is about upholding a
legitimate right of the Palestinians and, yes,
delegitimizing Israel’s decades-long occupation.
To those who are still reluctant to join us in such
an endeavour, allow me to say: do not blame the
victims, but support their quest for dignity. To reap
peace, invest in justice. Recognize the State of
Palestine. Help it achieve independence.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Mr. Hoyer, Minister of State of Germany,
who is presiding over today’s meeting, and I thank
Mr. Serry for his briefing. I also listened carefully to
the statements made by the representatives of Palestine
and of Israel.
The protracted and unresolved Middle East issue
is the main obstacle blocking progress on peace and
development in the Middle East, which thus affects
global peace and stability. The Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks have again reached a stalemate with a lack of
substantial progress over the past few months. The
Middle East is now at a crucial crossroads. China is
deeply concerned by the current status of peace talks
between Israel and Palestine.
China supports a solution to the Israel-Palestine
dispute through political and diplomatic channels
based on relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map for peace in the Middle East, with
the aim of establishing a fully independent, sovereign

11-43003

China welcomes the internal reconciliation
agreement among the Palestinian parties and hopes that
they will use it to strengthen internal unity and
cooperation and play an active role in moving the
Middle East peace process forward.
The solution to the Middle East issue is
inseparable from vigorous support and assistance on
the part of the international community. China attaches
great importance to the important role of the Quartet
and hopes that it will soon propose specific
programmes conducive to the resumption of peace
talks between the two parties. China hopes that the
international community will display the necessary
political wisdom and courage and strengthen its efforts
to promote peace negotiations and that it will continue
its tireless efforts to facilitate the resumption of the
peace talks. China has noted the recent proposals and
initiatives put forward by the relevant parties and is
open to any diplomatic efforts and initiatives
conducive to breaking the current stalemate.
The Middle East question has long been on the
Council’s agenda. China favours the Council’s more
active and practical involvement in this issue, as well
as a greater role for the Council in revitalizing the
Middle East peace process.
In order to achieve a comprehensive, lasting and
just peace in the Middle East, the peace talks between
Lebanon and Israel and between Syria and Israel, as
part of the Middle East process, should be conducted in
parallel. All relevant parties should create conditions
conducive to dialogue and negotiation in order to put
an end to the prolonged confrontation and resulting
tensions in the Middle East.
China has resolutely supported the just cause of
the Palestinian people to restore their legitimate
sovereign rights and supports the establishment of a

15

S/PV.6590

fully sovereign and independent State of Palestine.
China congratulates Palestine for subscribing to the
choice of peace, and China will continue to support the
just cause of the Palestinian people. We sincerely hope
that the goal of establishing an independent state of
Palestine will be achieved at an early date.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome you,
Mr. President, to the Council and it is a pleasure to see
you presiding over this important meeting. My
delegation expresses its appreciation to Special
Coordinator Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing to the
Council. South Africa associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later on by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We
also thank the Ambassadors of Palestine and Israel for
their statements.
Following President Obama’s statement during
the general debate this past year, we had hoped that the
Palestinians’ final status would be resolved by this
September and that during this year we would welcome
yet another new Member State to the United Nations,
in addition to South Sudan. President Obama’s
statement created a strong expectation within the
international community that an enabling environment
would be cultivated, within which final status
negotiations between Palestine and Israel would take
place, culminating in the resolution of that decadeslong conflict. Sadly, however, owing to intransigence
and lack of political will, peace and a sustainable
resolution to the conflict seems more elusive than ever.
It was disappointing that the recent meeting of
the Quartet in Washington, D.C., failed to provide a
clear road map showing the way forward. It is
imperative for the Quartet to work urgently with the
parties within parameters that essentially include a
decision on the borders of the two States based on the
4 June 1967 lines, with mutually agreed swaps;
security arrangements; a just, fair and agreed solution
to the refugee question; and fulfilment of the
aspirations of both parties with regard to Jerusalem.
South Africa stands ready to work with its partners to
support the Quartet in this process.
Furthermore, if the parties wish to reach an
amicable and mutually beneficial agreement on the
final status issues, there is certainly no gain in
suspending negotiations. A return to negotiations by
both parties, without preconditions and without altering
final status issues is therefore more than ever critical.

16

This will require the parties to indicate, through both
words and actions, that they are committed to a
negotiated process and to reaching a mutually
acceptable outcome. Israel’s continued disregard for
international law and the decisions of this Council, the
General Assembly and the International Court of
Justice, by continuing to build illegal settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, remains a serious obstacle to peace. These
actions are aimed at changing the facts on the ground
and will make agreement on the final status issues
much more difficult to achieve, mainly because they
make the realization of a contiguous Palestinian State
nearly impossible.
Violence by any side, including rocket attacks
against Israel and its disproportionate response, is no
way to advance the aspirations of either side.
Over 60 years have passed since the 1947
adoption of resolution 181 (II) in the General
Assembly on the United Nations partition plan for
Palestine, and over 40 years have passed since the
adoption of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). As
we are all aware, resolution 181 (II) recommended the
partition of Palestine into two independent States, and
resolution 242 (1967) laid the basis for the border
between the two States — yet we continue debating
matters already decided and agreed upon by those
bodies.
It is South Africa’s view that we need to focus on
the implementation of those decisions. The State of
Israel has recently celebrated its sixty-third
anniversary, yet the State of Palestine, recognized by
many of us, remains outside the membership of this
Organization. We welcome the Palestinian efforts to
seek United Nations recognition for their State. We can
fully appreciate the frustration expressed by the
Palestinian people in their quest for statehood.
South Africa fully supports the recent decision of
the African Union taken in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea,
which called upon its:
“... Members States, especially those Members of
the United Nations Security Council, to support
the Palestinian efforts during the next session of
the United Nations General Assembly to obtain
full membership to the United Nations for the
State of Palestine based on the 1967 lines with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and URGES all
Member States which have not yet done so to

11-43003

S/PV.6590

recognize the State of Palestine to do so as soon
as possible”.
It is our view that instead of using our efforts to
deter Palestinians from exercising their Charter-given
right to self-determination, we should exert efforts
towards finding a resolution on final status matters, so
that the two independent States, Israel and Palestine
can exist side by side in peace.
We support Palestine’s continued efforts at Statebuilding, and in this regard we welcome the signing of
the reconciliation agreement between Fatah and
Hamas. We urge Israel and the international
community to respect this internal sovereign decision
of the Palestinians and focus on the peace process. We
encourage the Palestinian parties to work together on
implementing the reconciliation agreement. We further
call on the international community to extend unbiased
support to the Palestinian Authority in its effort to
build institutions in an unfettered manner.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about
Israel’s continued blockade of the Gaza Strip, and joins
the international community’s demand that Israel end
the illegal blockade that continues to exacerbate the
suffering of ordinary civilians. The blockade and
imposed restrictions violate international humanitarian
law, including article 23 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and contradict the will of the international
community, as expressed in various Security Council
resolutions.
In conclusion, we reiterate that, in our search for
a solution to the Palestinian question, it is now, more
than ever, clear that we must not lose sight of the
broader regional questions to which Palestine is
inextricably linked. We therefore call on the
international community to accelerate efforts towards
the holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis,
including the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Let me
thank Mr. Serry for his briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer
for Palestine for their statements.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union.
Since the beginning of this year the Arab world
has found itself at the heart of historic turmoil from
which the region will emerge transformed. These

11-43003

developments are the sign of the Arab societies’
aspirations to freedom. France has commended the
movement and reaffirms again its support for all efforts
for democratic transition that are peaceful and
negotiated.
We believe this regional momentum provides a
unique opportunity to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. To do that, the position of France is based on
certain straightforward convictions.
First, the status quo is untenable. Secondly, only
dialogue will make it possible to achieve the sole
legitimate solution, which is two States for two
peoples. Further, the resumption of the peace process
must be based on balanced parameters agreed between
the two sides. We stated those parameters here on
18 February (6484th meeting). Let me recall them.
There must be an agreement on the borders of the
two States, based the lines of 4 June 1967, with
equivalent exchanges of territory on which the sides
will have agreed. Security arrangements are needed
that for the Palestinians respect the sovereignty of the
State of Palestine and show that the occupation is over,
and for the Israelis protect their security, prevent the
resurgence terrorist acts and take into account new and
emerging threats. Thirdly, there must be a just,
equitable, realistic and agreed solution to the issue of
refugees. Lastly, the aspirations of both sides with
respect to Jerusalem must be fulfilled. A way must be
found through negotiations to resolve the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of two States.
It is in that spirit that France has proposed an
initiative aimed at resuming negotiations on the basis
of these clear, balanced parameters, which reflect a
broad international consensus and are in keeping with
the primary expectations of both sides. We regret that
the Middle East Quartet, at its meeting of 11 July, did
not endorse these parameters and did not issue an
appeal for a resumption of the peace process. Despite
that setback, we call on the parties to refrain from any
action that could prejudice the resumption of bilateral
talks and to not resign themselves to the dangerous
stalemate in which we currently find ourselves.
We commend the progress achieved by the
Palestinian Authority in building institutions for the
future Palestinian State. We call on all donors to
continue their efforts in terms of budgetary assistance.

17

S/PV.6590

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
continues to be of concern. We call again on the Israeli
authorities to change their policies with regard to Gaza,
without compromising their legitimate security
concerns.
Our position on settlements continues unchanged.
They are illegal from the standpoint of international
law and are an obstacle to peace. They are based on
despoiling the Palestinian people, and they undermine
the confidence between the sides. They pose a threat to
the possibility of achieving the two-State solution. We
condemn ongoing settlement activities on the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem and call on Israel to
abandon its building projects.
Lastly, we cannot ignore the regional context of
the peace process. In Lebanon there are developments
along the border that have sparked concern in the
international community. We condemn the attack on
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon on
27 May and, just a few hours ago, once again, against
the French contingent. In that context, France calls on
all parties to meet their obligations set out in Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006).
The formation of the Lebanese Government by
the Prime Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Mikati, is an
important step for Lebanon and the Lebanese. The
Government must continue to implement Lebanon’s
obligations and international undertakings, particularly
with respect to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and its
funding, in accordance with resolution 1757 (2007) and
the commitments undertaken by the Lebanese Prime
Minister.
We are further concerned by the deadly events
that took place on 15 May and 5 June on the Golan
Heights, along the Syrian-Lebanese border. France
again underscores the absolute need for the Syrian
authorities to ensure compliance with the separation
zone between Israel and Syria, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 350 (1974).
For more that four months now, the Syrian regime
has been involved in systematically repressing peaceful
demonstrations, ignoring the appeals of the
international community. The Syrian organizations for
the defence of human rights are today listing nearly
1,500 killed and 12,000 political arrests. Each week we
see civilian victims. The Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect

18

said on 21 July that crimes against humanity may have
been committed and continue to be committed in Syria.
On 11 July the embassies of France, the United
States and Qatar in Damascus were attacked without
Syrian security forces attempting to defend them.
France condemns such schemes, which run counter to
Syria’s obligations under international law. Such illegal
initiatives, such crude manoeuvres will not enable the
authorities in Damascus to divert attention from the
substance of the problem: ending the repression of the
Syrian population and implementing a democratic
transition. We hope the Security Council will finally be
able to take up its responsibilities to condemn the
violent repressions to which the Syrian people are
subjected.
The events today in the Arab world, including the
Palestinian territory, demonstrate to us the urgency and
the strength of the aspirations of Arab societies for
liberty and democracy. In a few weeks we will see the
deadline set in the Fayyad plan. The expectations of
the Palestinian civil society have never been so high.
We should not ignore that signal and risk falling back
into an impasse with the always-present threat of
further escalation of violence. We need to find an
opportunity to resume dialogue under the auspices of
the international community. It is from the standpoint
of the proposals of the parties, from the standpoint of
their initiatives to resume the peace process that France
will shoulder its responsibilities in steadfastly working
to advance peace.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): We
welcome you in the chair, Mr. President, for this
important debate on the situation in the Middle East.
We in our turn would like to thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing. He brought us up to
date on the Israeli-Palestinian peace process and on
other situations in the Middle East.
Gabon would like to recall its support for the
legal framework founded on the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and of the General Assembly. We
also recall our position here in favour of a two-State
solution: a Palestinian State and an Israeli State living
side by side in peace.
The present context in the Middle East calls for
new efforts to resume negotiations and to arrive at a
dynamic compromise, one that must be based on
parameters that are broadly accepted by the

11-43003

S/PV.6590

international community, which were recalled in
President Obama’s statement.
My delegation remains concerned at the longstanding stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks, despite the commendable efforts of the
international community to restart direct negotiations
between the two parties, in particular the Quartet
meeting held on 11 July at the imitative of the United
States Government. It is regrettable that this meeting,
while it inspired some hope, did not lead to the
resumption of negotiations. The stalemate is
unacceptable and, if it continues, risks creating a rift in
the international community on the prospects of the
peace process.
It is well known that a great number of countries
support the decision of Palestine to declare its
independence. If this situation is not met with a
resumption of negotiations, it could create an even
more difficult situation in the Middle East. The current
situation in the region thus calls for renewed efforts.
We remain concerned by the cycle of attacks and
reprisals that is hampering the consolidation of the
progress made on the ground by the Palestinian
Authority, whose efforts we call on the international
community to continue to support.
With regard to the impasse and obstacles, it is
ever more urgent to restart the peace process on the
basis of principles that are clear and accepted by all
parties, which must include, of course, the
establishment of a climate of trust between the parties,
a commitment to pursuing peace negotiations in good
faith, the security of Israel, and the creation of a
Palestinian State. The stability of the entire region also
depends on this commitment.
Turning to Lebanon, my delegation welcomes the
formation of the new Government under the leadership
of Prime Minister Najib Mikati. We hope that this
Government will work to resolve security concerns,
particularly those raised by non-State armed groups,
and to return to dialogue and national reconciliation.
With regard to the situation in Syria, while it
remains concerned, my delegation notes the recent
adoption by the Parliament of a draft law authorizing
political pluralism. We urge the Government to
continue on this track in order to win back the trust of
the population and the international community.

11-43003

We condemn the continued colonization of
Palestinian land. We also condemn the indiscriminate
attacks against Israel. We wish to see the two parties
return to the negotiating table in order to break the
current deadlock.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): At the outset,
allow me to recognize your presence here today with
us, State Minister Hoyer. I thank Special Coordinator
Robert Serry for his very useful briefing, and the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their contributions to today’s
debate.
Portugal’s position and concerns are well known.
We have been repeating them here month after month
as the overall situation has unfortunately not changed,
as Mr. Serry underlined. I can therefore be brief. We
remain gravely concerned at the prolonged, frustrating
and dangerous stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli
peace process and the lack of any credible negotiating
process. As a member of the European Union, we
naturally share the views that will be expressed by the
Acting Head of its delegation later in today’s debate.
We regret that a way has not yet been found to
bring the parties back to direct talks, which have been
on hold since September 2010. We are still convinced
that negotiations remain the only way to achieve a final
settlement based on the two-State solution, with the
emergence of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living peacefully with Israel and its
other neighbours.
To succeed, negotiations must be based on clear
parameters that reflect widely held principles. They
must also address all final status issues and ensure
tangible achievements within a set time frame. They
will demand the clear political will of both sides and
have to be conducted in good faith.
As developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the wider region continue to underscore,
time is of the essence. The developments on the ground
that Mr. Serry has outlined continue to be extremely
worrying. They constitute serious obstacles to peace
and undermine trust and the feasibility of a two-State
solution. This is particularly the case of the accelerated
settlement activities in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem; renewed land confiscation in the occupied
territories; and the unabated demolition of Palestinian
homes and the eviction of their inhabitants.

19

S/PV.6590

Once again, we strongly deplore that Staff
Sergeant Gilad Shalit remains in captivity and
continues to be denied any humanitarian access. This is
totally unacceptable, and we urge his immediate
release. Portugal is equally troubled by the marked
increase in security-related incidents in and around
Gaza after a period of calm. We vehemently condemn
the launching of rockets from Gaza into Israel and call
on all sides to refrain from provocative actions and to
exert maximum restraint. On the other hand, Portugal
urges the Government of Israel to end the closure of
Gaza and fully comply with resolution 1860 (2009).
We reiterate that all assistance and legitimate goods
destined for Gaza should be delivered, channelled
through official crossings and established mechanisms.
Palestinians have worked diligently in preparing
for their statehood and, as Mr. Serry reiterated, are
ready for it. Let me recall President Obama’s words of
19 May:
“The Palestinian people must have the right to
govern themselves and reach their full potential
in a sovereign and contiguous State.”
We therefore commend and strongly encourage the
ongoing efforts of the Quartet in pursuit of an urgent
resumption of meaningful direct negotiations that will
result in the establishment of a Palestinian State on the
basis of the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent land
swaps as may be agreed by the parties. As I said, time
is of the essence. The status quo is not only
unsustainable but also very dangerous.
We had very useful consultations on Lebanon last
week, during which I stated our position fully. Here, I
wish to reiterate our condemnation of the terrorist
attack against a United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) convoy on 27 May. We also regret
the loss of life on 15 May during the Nakba
demonstrations in the south of Lebanon, and commend
the efforts of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces
to prevent the recurrence of a similar tragic outcome on
5 June.
Portugal welcomes the formation of the new
Lebanese Government. Lebanon now has the
opportunity to address many challenges and fulfil its
international obligations, including those pertaining to
resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004) and the
Special Tribunal. We also urge Israel to honour its own
commitments under resolution 1701 (2006) and to
swiftly complete its withdrawal from the northern part

20

of Al-Ghajar and to fully respect both the sovereignty
and the territorial integrity of Lebanon by air, land and
sea.
The situation in Syria remains of the utmost
concern. We are deeply troubled by the ongoing
repression of peaceful protestors across the country and
the dramatic death toll it has entailed. We regret that
the Syrian authorities have note yet responded to the
calls to immediately stop the violence. It is also
regrettable that Damascus has not yet allowed the
undertaking of a fact-finding mission, which is
expected to report back to the Human Rights Council.
We commend the neighbouring countries that are
providing assistance to fleeing populations.
The solution to the crisis lies in an immediate end
to the violence, a credible, genuine and inclusive
national dialogue, and meaningful political reforms
without delay. The only way to provide stability for
Syria in the long term is through a peaceful transition
to democracy based on national unity, territorial
integrity and respect for the rights of all its citizens.
We call, then, on the Syrian authorities once again to
cease the violence it has imposed on its citizens, and
we urge it to exert the utmost restraint and to allow for
humanitarian access.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): It is a pleasure to welcome
you, Mr. President, and to see you presiding over
today’s meeting. I thank Special Coordinator Robert
Serry for his briefing, and the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.
We meet again to discuss the situation in the
Middle East in the midst of unprecedented
transformations in the region. Unfortunately, those
transformations have so far failed to bring change to
the Israeli-Palestinian situation.
The Palestinian aspiration to statehood is not an
abstraction. It is the cornerstone of democracy, dignity,
freedom and human rights for the Palestinian people.
We regret that, apart from the disagreements between
the two sides, the main partners in the peace process
remain unable to help the parties overcome the current
impasse.
In this context, it is not surprising that the
Palestinian leadership has announced its intention to
request the United Nations to recognize the Palestinian
State, based on the pre-June 1967 lines and with East

11-43003

S/PV.6590

Jerusalem as its capital, and to apply for full
membership of the Organization. The absence of a
peace process adds to the legitimacy of the Palestinian
request.
Resorting to the United Nations cannot be seen as
a unilateral move. It is the exact opposite. The very
concept of a two-State solution arises ultimately from
the
multilateral
system,
as
the
Permanent
Representative of Lebanon has just reminded us.
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947 endorsed
the plan of partition. The recognition of a Palestinian
State is the completion of this 64-year-old promise.
Having had an important role in the General
Assembly session that legitimized the State of Israel,
Brazil feels it is time for the United Nations to grant
the same vote of confidence to the Palestinian people’s
capacity to build a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
State of its own. The Palestinian State, although under
foreign occupation, is already a reality on the ground,
as we have heard from the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.
Palestinian institutions are now sufficient for a
functioning State. International recognition can help
reduce the asymmetry that characterizes relations
between the parties. It can help realign the debate on
the application of international law in the occupied
Palestinian territories. It can also help to advance
negotiations on core issues in a more fair and just
manner. In the letter in which Brazil recognized the
State of Palestine, we reiterated our understanding that
only dialogue and peaceful coexistence with its
neighbours can truly advance the Palestinian cause.
Resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009)
encourage intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the
formation of a Palestinian Government committed to
the Quartet principles and the Arab Peace Initiative,
and that respects the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. The Palestinian reconciliation
agreement signed in Cairo in May is a first step
towards this important goal, which will provide the
Palestinian people with a united and coherent
representation.
We urge the Palestinian leaders to fully embrace
non-violence, human rights and democracy as core
principles of their struggle to end occupation. We
expect them to fully commit to the security of the State
of Israel and to the right of Israel to exist in peace and
harmony with its neighbours.

11-43003

A new Middle East is in the making before our
eyes. The legitimacy of the movements that seek
transformation lies in the democratic character of their
demands and in the peaceful nature of their actions. In
each national context, these forces will find their
particular political expression in the face of different
strategic, security, social, ethnic and economic
conditions. Challenges will be manifold. Genuine
change, in line with the aspirations of the people, can
only come from within.
We condemn once more, in the strongest possible
terms, the use of lethal force against unarmed
demonstrators. Repression is likely only to strengthen
the will of those struggling to exercise basic, universal
rights. As we stand in solidarity with those peacefully
demonstrating for democracy and social justice, we
must pursue avenues to peaceful political solutions
leading to meaningful reforms. Sustained international
engagement will be needed, in order to ensure that
those transformations are followed by a more equitable
development and a better life for all citizens in the
region.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing today.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
presence and contributions to our debate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned about the absence of any progress in the
Middle East peace process. The current impasse is not
in the interests of either the Israeli or the Palestinian
people. The scheduled time frame for the conclusion of
peace negotiations is approaching rapidly. Hence, we
cannot afford further delays before the beginning of
serious and responsible negotiations between the
Israelis and Palestinians. At this critical moment, it is
also of vital importance that the Security Council, the
Quartet, the Arab League and other international and
regional actors continue their efforts aimed at bringing
the parties to direct substantive talks.
In that light, we understand President Obama’s
statement of 19 May and his appeal for decisive action
that should lead to a lasting peace that includes two
States for two peoples. For our part, we reaffirm our
commitment to the two-State solution, with the State of
Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous and

21

S/PV.6590

viable State of Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security.
The current upheavals in the wider region clearly
reflect the democratic aspirations of the peoples in the
Middle East. This new environment creates an
opportunity to speed up the negotiation process. We
hope that the interested parties will recognize this
newfound momentum and, by taking up the chance for
substantial negotiations, will join the stream of positive
changes in the Middle East.
Continued settlement activities on occupied land
are illegal under international law and contrary to
Israel’s obligations under the Road Map. These
activities represent an obstacle on the road to
comprehensive peace. We therefore call upon Israel to
respond positively to appeals by the international
community by ending all settlement activities in
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is firm in its position
that civilian populations must be protected. It is for this
reason that we urge the parties to observe restraint and
make every effort to avoid violence and further loss of
innocent lives.
The continuation of the unsustainable and
unproductive situation in Gaza is also of concern. In
this regard, we welcome the Israeli Government’s
recent approvals of materials for new homes and
schools to be constructed by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. However, we strongly believe that this is not
enough and that more needs to be done. Only the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) can meet the
basic needs of the 1.5 million Palestinian residents of
the Gaza Strip. Hence, we reiterate our call for a full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and for the
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza, including goods
from the West Bank. Israel’s security concerns,
including a complete stop to violence and arms
smuggling into Gaza, must also be addressed.
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina believes
that lasting peace and stability in the region of the
Middle East are possible through diplomatic efforts
and full commitment to the peace process. To that aim,
we expect the parties to take difficult decisions and
return to direct talks without delay.

22

Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you,
Mr. Minister, as Chair of the Security Council meeting.
We thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his substantive briefing
on developments in the regional situation. We regret to
note the intransigence in the Middle East settlement
process. There remain considerable differences in the
approaches of the parties. An atmosphere of mutual
mistrust prevails.
As a result, there is an impasse. For almost a
year, the negotiation process has been stalled. That is a
very bad and dangerous trend, given the extensive
transformations and changes in the Middle East and
North Africa. That should not distract us from our
common task, which is to promote a Middle East
settlement. In order to restore trust, above all the
parties need to avoid steps that prejudice the outcome
of a final settlement. They need to refrain from any
manifestations of violence, in particular against
civilians, and to demonstrate in practice their
willingness to compromise. In that regard, it is crucial
that settlement activities, above all in East Jerusalem,
be ended.
We believe it important to underscore that
negotiations should be resumed on the well-known
international legal basis, including Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Road Map.
Any attempts to undermine that basis will not bring the
sides closer to starting constructive dialogue.
Apart from that, we would like to underscore the
Arab Peace Initiative. Given the role played by the
League of Arab States and its Committee in the Middle
East peace process to promote that Initiative, we
support close coordination between the Quartet and
that regional organization. In fact, that is how we view
a common and targeted international approach to
resolving the key issue of the Middle East. We see the
ultimate aim of the negotiating process as achieving
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to build
their own viable and independent State, with its
territorial integrity and East Jerusalem as its capital,
living in peace and security with Israel, within
internationally recognized borders based on the 1967
lines and potential agreed land swaps.
The implementation of any future PalestinianIsraeli arrangements will be called into question unless
there is a single partner on the Palestinian side. For that

11-43003

S/PV.6590

very reason, Russia supports Palestinian steps to
achieve national reconciliation. We are ready to
contribute to the successful implementation of the
plans for intra-Palestinian unification and to provide
comprehensive assistance to a future Palestinian
Government.
We are seriously alarmed by the ongoing tension
in the Gaza Strip and the continued plight of the
peaceful Palestinian people. We strongly advocate the
complete lifting of the Israeli blockade of the Strip.
A complete, comprehensive and just settlement in
the Middle East is possible only by covering all tracks,
including the Syrian and Lebanese tracks. We advocate
unconditional and strict compliance with the relevant
Security Council decisions to restore peace and
security in the region and to normalize Israel’s
relations with its neighbours.
In such conditions, we believe that the ongoing
mediation role of the Middle East Quartet is needed
more than ever in the interests of finding an acceptable
formula for the resumption of the negotiation process
and the definition of parameters for a settlement, which
must be achieved through dialogue among the
interested parties.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Robert Serry for his briefing this
morning and the Permanent Representatives of
Palestine and Israel for their important contributions.
As we speak, momentous events continue to
unfold across the Middle East. The determined struggle
of people in the region to secure their universal rights
against, in some cases, brutal Government repression
offers hope for the future. The only credible answer to
legitimate popular demands is sustainable reform.
Nowhere is the fight for basic rights and the brutality
of an autocratic regime unwilling to give its people
what they want and what they are entitled to more
apparent than in Syria.
We condemn the continuing heavy violence in
Syria, the murder of peaceful protesters and the attacks
on the United States and French embassies in
Damascus. The Syrian regime has killed more then
1,500 civilians, and the death toll is rising on a daily
basis. President Al-Assad claims that he is holding
Syria’s different factions together, but his regime’s
brutality risks inflaming sectarian tension. President
Al-Assad must swiftly and meaningfully implement

11-43003

reforms that he himself has promised, ensuring that
they mark the start of a sustainable transition to a new
political system that meets the aspirations of the Syrian
people.
In our view, Security Council action demanding
an end to the violence and calling for a peaceful
Syrian-led political process is long overdue. We will
continue to push for action, challenging those on the
Council who stand in the way to meet their
responsibilities.
Events in the wider Middle East are inextricably
linked to efforts to find a long-term solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. At a time when populations
in the region are striving for and realizing their rights,
the Palestinians, too, must realize their goal of an
independent and viable State of Palestine.
As we have said before, it would be a great
shame and a source of continued insecurity if the hopes
of the Palestinian people were left unfulfilled, while
the region is transformed around them. Therefore, it is
critical that progress in the peace process be made.
September — the time frame set out by President
Obama and the Quartet to welcome Palestine as a full
Member of the United Nations and the month that will
mark the completion of the Palestinian Authority’s
State-building programme — is fast approaching.
There is a danger that, in September, all
stakeholders in the peace process give up hope and
look simply to manage the situation, but, in our view,
that would be premature. The parties should redouble
their efforts to break the impasse and should resume
direct negotiations on the basis of clearly articulated
parameters — two States based on the 1967 borders,
with mutually agreed land swaps; security
arrangements that protect Palestinian sovereignty,
while also providing sufficient reassurance to Israel;
Jerusalem as the capital of both States; and a just
solution for refugees. We encourage the Quartet to set
out those simple parameters and to urge the parties
back into talks.
Neither Israel nor the Palestinians can afford to
let the current stalemate become the long-term status
quo. They must act now to keep alive the prospect and
hope for a sustainable peace. I would highlight three
areas where they must work harder to avoid further
deterioration of trust.

23

S/PV.6590

First, settlement activity must stop. Continued
settlement construction in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem is not only illegal, but is increasingly
destroying the viability of a contiguous Palestinian
State, sharing Jerusalem as its capital with Israel. As
well as construction, associated actions, such as the
destruction of freshwater infrastructure by the Israeli
authorities, undermine the very survival of entire
Palestinian communities in the West Bank. Halting
settlement activity and associated activities is not
elective surgery. It is a life-saving operation.
Secondly, Israel has legitimate security concerns
that must continue to be safeguarded. Maintaining
security cooperation and ensuring that there is a
complete and sustained cessation of rocket attacks
from Gaza are key to reassuring the Israeli Government
and public that there exists a genuine partner for peace.
Thirdly, more must be done to improve access to
Gaza. Restrictions that stifle Gaza’s economy breed
hatred, radicalism and violence. An improved Gazan
economy and the resurgence of Gaza’s pragmatic
business fraternity are not only essential to the people
of Gaza, but also firmly in Israel’s own security
interests.
There is no time to waste in making progress
towards peace. We know from history that standing
still is never an option in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. There is either progress towards a negotiated
agreement or backsliding into violence. It is up to the
leaders on both sides to take the bold steps necessary to
ensure the former and to avoid the latter.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to New
York and thank you for chairing this open debate. I
would also like to thank Special Coordinator Robert
Serry for his comprehensive briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements, which we
have carefully noted.
Since our last open debate on this item in this
Council (see S/PV.6520), the Palestinian factions have
signed an agreement. The main elements of the
agreement include reform of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the holding of elections by May 2012,
and the establishment of unified agencies, national
reconciliation and a joint committee to implement the
agreement. The unity between the Palestinian parties
should not only end the division between the West

24

Bank and Gaza, but also create State institutions in
Gaza. To this end, we hope that the Palestinian parties
will succeed in the speedy implementation of the
reconciliation agreement. We also hope that Hamas
will not only accept the State of Israel as a reality, but
also cooperate with the Palestinian Authority to deal
with Israel’s security concerns.
Stalemate in the peace talks, however, appears to
be giving rise to a sense of desperation in the
Palestinian territories. For more than four months now,
the monthly debates on the Palestinian issue in this
Council have hinged on the hope that the Quartet
would put forward a set of practical steps that could
enable Palestinians and Israelis to resume talks. This
hope was yet again belied when the Quartet meeting
Washington, D.C., on 11 July ended without any
statement.
Over the past few years, the Palestinian authority
has made significant progress in building State
institutions, improving the economy of the West Bank
and rapprochement with various factions, including
Hamas. This progress has invited commendation from
the international community at large. The Statebuilding efforts of the Palestinian Authority have,
however, reached their geographical and institutional
limits. Any further progress would require the
resumption of talks on final status issues.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip,
meanwhile, remains a cause for serious concern. The
blockade of Gaza is not only adversely affecting the
population, but also driving militant elements to vent
their frustration through violence, thereby further
complicating the situation on the ground and increasing
Israel’s vulnerability and security concerns.
The stalemate in peace talks and the grim
humanitarian situation can further complicate an
already fragile situation. We share the sense of the
international community that the freezing of settlement
activity in the Palestinian territories could enable the
peace talks to resume. We therefore call upon Israel to
implement Prime Minister Netanyahu’s address to the
Knesset in May this year, wherein he said that Israel
could consider territorial compromise in return for
security and recognition. Putting a stop to settlement
activities should be the first step in this process. Unless
this essential step is taken and peace talks resume, the
growing desperation may lead the parties to actions
that could spiral out of control. As the month of

11-43003

S/PV.6590

September approaches, it is important to realize that
there is limited time for Palestinians and Israeli to seize
the opportunity.
Other issues relating to Arab lands that remain
under Israeli occupation are equally important.
Progress on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks constitutes
the essential core to achieving a comprehensive and
durable peace in the region. In a region witnessing
protests movements all around, the continuing impasse
in peace talks could have destabilizing effect on a
much larger area. In this context, the events of 15 May
and 5 June show how fragile the situation is and how
easily violence can be incited on a larger scale,
destabilizing the whole region. We are therefore afraid
that if the peace talks do not recommence quickly,
unilateral steps by the parties will ensue, which would
increase the distance between them and make it more
difficult to find a comprehensive settlement. We
therefore call on the members of the Quartet to
intensify their collective and individual efforts to break
the stalemate.
India has a long-standing tradition of solidarity
with the Palestinian people. India has supported the
Palestinian people’s struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital and living within secure
and recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, as endorsed in the Arab Peace initiative, the
Quartet Road Map and relevant Security Council
resolutions.
India has been assisting in the capacity- and
institution-building of the Palestinian people with
material and technical assistance programmes. Through
the India, Brazil and South Africa forum, India has
extended assistance. India is also contributing
$1 million to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
continuing our solidarity with the Palestinian people in
their pursuit of legitimate goals and quest for
development based on dignity and self-reliance. In
addition, we have provided untied budgetary support of
$10 million to the Palestinian Authority for each of the
past two years.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our expectation
that the parties will restart talks without further delay.
These talks should lead to a final and comprehensive
resolution of the Middle East conflict. We owe it to
ourselves and to future generations of Israelis and

11-43003

Palestinians to ensure that they do not remain mired in
conflict, but live in peace and security.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
at the outset to warmly welcome you, Sir, and to take
this opportunity to express the support of my
delegation in your work as President of the Security
Council at this debate. I wish to thank Mr. Robert H.
Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his detailed briefing on recent
developments in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
Recent developments in the Middle East and
North Africa have generated the ongoing interest of the
international community. Colombia has not been aloof
from this situation; it has repeatedly expressed its
strong support for the legitimate aspirations of the
peoples of the region, respect for their human rights
and individual freedoms, and their right to a better and
dignified life.
We understand the situation in the Middle East as
an integral issue. That is why we advocate a lasting and
structured solution to the unstable situation in the
region. We call for an end to the use of force or threat,
and an end to terrorism. Our country is committed to
addressing the issue with democratic principles and the
ultimate goals of peace and security. We understand the
aspiration of the Palestinian people to receive prompt
recognition of the Palestinian State. We therefore
continue to support the objective of creating a viable
Palestinian State, living in peace alongside Israel and
within defined, secure and internationally recognized
borders based on the 1967 lines and changes mutually
agreed by the parties.
We express our concern over the suspension of
peace talks and ask the parties to resume negotiations
as soon as possible. We believe that negotiation is the
way to achieve a lasting solution. We are convinced
that without an agreement accepted by the parties, we
would be repeating the mistake of 1947.
We support the work of the Quartet and the
implementation of the Road Map. Therefore, we share
the views expressed by Quartet representatives on
11 July regarding the urgent need to call on parties to
overcome current obstacles and find the way to resume
direct negotiations, without delay or preconditions,
starting a preparatory phase of negotiations to
maximize the chances of success. We also support all
efforts we are making through the United Nations.

25

S/PV.6590

We believe that settlements are an obstacle to the
search for a lasting peace in the Middle East. They are
not only illegal under international law but constitute a
breach of the agreements established in the Road Map.
We firmly believe in the need for both parties to act
under international law in compliance with their
commitments and obligations.
In addition, the international community must
continue to support the institutional strengthening of
the Palestinian Authority in order to build a viable
State. We share the consensus of the Quartet that
Hamas must renounce to violence, recognize Israel and
specifically reject the use of terrorism as a political
tool.
Israelis and Palestinians cannot continue to be
immersed in confrontation and mistrust. We make an
ardent call to restart talks between the parties on the
basis of mutual respect and recognition of the identity
and rights of each people. The Palestinians are entitled
to their own State living in peace with Israel and
moving toward common prosperity. Future generations
of Palestinians must be able to grow up in hope, not
despair. Similarly, current and future generations of
Israelis must be able to live free from fear of attack and
to enjoy peaceful relations with the neighbouring Arab
countries.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as Minister of State.
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Robert
Serry for his excellent briefing.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union.
We are at a crucial moment in the Middle East
process. People across the region are rising up for
freedom, democracy and a better life. At the same time,
we face a continuing stalemate in the IsraeliPalestinian peace process. Within the volatile regional
context, it is more urgent than ever to reach lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians. For the people
in the region, progress in the peace process would send
a strong signal of stability and would be testimony to
the merits of politics and diplomacy.
We all share the same vision. We want to see the
State of Israel and a sovereign, independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security. It is time to
make decisive progress. Prime Minister Netanyahu and

26

President Abbas must assume their responsibility and
take bold steps towards the resumption of direct and
substantive talks.
We remain convinced that clear parameters are a
prerequisite for successful negotiations. President
Obama set out a balanced approach in his speech on
19 May. The European Union, for its part, has
articulated what it considers to be the key parameters.
Germany, France and the United Kingdom stated their
view on this matter in a joint explanation of vote in this
Council (see S/PV.6484). We continue to believe that
an international endorsement of parameters is needed
in order to create a basis for genuine negotiations.
The Quartet continues to play a central role in
this process and has been in permanent contact with the
parties. Germany strongly supports the efforts by the
European Union High Representative, Baroness
Ashton, in the Quartet for a credible and balanced
perspective to relaunch and facilitate the peace process.
We call on the Quartet to continue and intensify its
efforts to set out a fair and balanced framework for
negotiations in order to trigger progress prior to the
September deadline that it has itself endorsed.
Palestinian leaders have announced that they may
turn to the United Nations in their quest for statehood.
At the same time, Palestinians have made it very clear
that a resumption of negotiations is their preferred
option. Palestinians expect from their leaders headway
in establishing a Palestinian State. Germany
acknowledges the remarkable progress by the
Palestinian Authority in building the institutions of the
future State of Palestine. In their reports, the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the United
Nations have clearly stated that the Palestinian
Authority has crossed the threshold towards a
functioning State in key sectors. Now, the political
process needs to catch up urgently with the substantial
progress made on the ground. At the same time, we
must do everything to preserve the achievements on the
way to Palestinian statehood.
Let me be very clear on this: Germany supports
the establishment of a Palestinian State. As a matter of
course, such a State will become a Member of the
United Nations. Progress in this direction is a matter of
urgency. Palestinians and Israelis have been waiting for
too long to see the conflict end. But there is no viable
or acceptable alternative to negotiations. Only
negotiations will end the occupation, and only

11-43003

S/PV.6590

negotiations can provide a possible solution to the core
issues. Any action that is not conducive to a
comprehensive solution and that could undermine trust
between the parties should therefore be avoided.
We are deeply concerned that failure to provide a
credible political horizon for real progress towards a
two-State solution could lead to serious consequences.
Germany remains deeply concerned about continued
settlement construction in the Palestinian territories
and in East Jerusalem and about new construction
plans and recent land confiscation in the West Bank,
the first since 2008.
In this Council, Germany, together with Britain
and France, has made its position on settlements very
clear: they are illegal under international law and are
an obstacle to peace, and they constitute a threat to a
two-State solution. All settlement activity, including in
East Jerusalem, should therefore cease immediately.
All members of the Council are in agreement that
continued settlement activity constitutes a major
obstacle to the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. It is most unfortunate that
settlement construction has continued despite so many
appeals.
Gaza remains a serious concern. We strongly
condemn the recent resumption of rocket and mortar
attacks on Israeli territory after the ceasefire following
the Cairo Agreement. That type of action is utterly
unacceptable. Germany recognizes Israel’s right to
protect its citizens against attacks. At the same time,
we look to Israel to exercise this right judiciously, in
order to forestall further escalation. We continue to call
for the immediate and unconditional release of Staff
Sergeant Gilad Shalit, who has been held hostage for
more than five years now.
Let me turn to one of the challenges that lie
ahead. There is a need to sustain the positive
developments initiated by the Palestinian Authority.
The current financial situation is critical. It is not clear
if salaries can be paid any longer. We call on all donors
to honour their existing commitments. It may also
become necessary to mobilize an additional
international donor effort, and we would welcome any
such initiative.
We need to help create and maintain the
conditions for self-sustained economic growth,
including in Gaza. The appropriate way ahead is the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009), calling

11-43003

for the immediate, sustained and unconditional opening
of crossings for goods and people to and from Gaza,
and for the prevention of the illicit trafficking of arms
and ammunition. At the same time, we expect any
Palestinian Government to commit itself unequivocally
to the principle of non-violence, to a two-State solution
and to a negotiated peaceful settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, accepting the previous agreements
and obligations, including Israel’s legitimate right to
exist. By the same token, we expect those bearing
Government responsibility in Israel to unequivocally
accept the two-State solution and to do their utmost to
set the course for it.
People in the Middle East have suffered too long
from conflict and confrontation. Our shared goal is a
just and lasting peace that ends the conflict and
resolves all claims. In our time, many attempts to reach
this goal have been frustrated. We understand the
growing impatience, but we should be clear about what
will bring us closer to peace, and what may result in
further frustrations.
I should just like to say a word on Syria. We are
deeply shocked by the current events in that country.
Despite promises of reforms and dialogue with the
opposition, military actions, killings, arrests and
repression continue. We are concerned about acts of
violence between followers of different creeds. We
urge the Syrian Government to stop playing the
sectarian card. The Syrian regime must put a halt
immediately to all violence against and repression of
the Syrian people. Only if the violence stops is there a
chance for initiating a sustainable political process.
The transition towards a new Syria must be based on
the full political participation of all its citizens and on
commitment to the protection and promotion of human
rights.
It is not for outsiders to decide the future of
Syria. This is an issue of the sovereignty of the people.
The people of Syria are speaking loudly and clearly,
just as the peoples of Egypt and Tunisia expressed their
views. The legitimate demands of the Syrian people
must be addressed. The Security Council cannot stand
aside. It is our firm belief that a strong signal from the
Council condemning the ongoing violence and
repression of the Syrian people is of the utmost
importance. The Security Council must assume its
responsibility.

27

S/PV.6590

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and to begin by
welcoming you, Mr. President, as you preside over the
Council today, and by expressing the Movement’s
appreciation for today’s briefing by Mr. Robert Serry,
United Nations Special Coordinator and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that, at this
critical juncture, the international community must
renew its resolve to uphold its long-standing
commitment to the realization of the two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on the basis of
international law and the well-known terms of
reference of the 20-year peace process. There is an
international understanding that we must reach the end
of the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian and Arab
lands occupied since 1967; the independence of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on the borders of 4 June 1967; a just solution to
the plight of the Palestine refugees, and thus the
establishment of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace.
It is therefore regrettable that all serious efforts
made to date by the concerned international and
regional parties, including by the Quartet in its last
meeting on 11 July in Washington, D.C., have not yet
led to the resumption and advancement of direct
negotiations on the Palestinian-Israeli track. It is
equally alarming to the Movement that the mere
issuance of a Quartet statement has become an issue in
itself, highlighting the serious need to improve the
efficacy of that mechanism and to resolve the conflict,
which remains a threat to international peace and
security.
It is also greatly to be regretted and condemned
that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to pursue
its illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, along
with many other unlawful policies and practices that
continue to exacerbate the situation on the ground and
to raise tensions. Such illegal practices also constitute
the main obstacle to efforts to resume credible peace
negotiations and are making it nearly impossible to
realize the two-State solution on the basis of the

28

borders of 4 June 1967. In that regard, NAM strongly
condemns the boycott law enacted by the Israeli
Knesset earlier this month, which penalizes people or
organizations who call for a boycott of the illegal
Israeli settlements. It is a law that many in Israel itself
find unconstitutional and anti-democratic.
Recent declarations regarding the establishment
of thousands more illegal settlement units, as well as
the continuing and unprecedented pace of Israeli
demolition of Palestinian homes and properties,
especially in neighbourhoods of occupied East
Jerusalem, in order to build new settlements in the
heart of the City, all affirm Israel’s hostile intentions
and belie its Government’s alleged commitment to the
peace process and a two-State solution. All current
indications, from provocative declarations to
accelerated construction on the ground and continued
revocation of Palestinian residency rights, are that
Israel is clearly choosing settlements over peace.
Indeed, to date, Israel has persisted in its unlawful
attempts to alter the geographic and demographic
composition of the Palestinian territory, particularly
East Jerusalem, the annexation of which remains and
will remain rejected and unrecognized by the
international community.
The sponsorship by the vast majority of the
Non-Aligned Movement member States of the draft
resolution (S/2011/24) presented earlier this year to the
Council, calling for the immediate cessation of all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, reflects the
international position on this important issue. NAM
regrets that the draft resolution was not adopted by the
Council, as we had hoped for and expected in
accordance with the Council’s duty under the Charter
to address Israel’s deliberate destruction of the
attainment of peace and security in the Middle East.
The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes its position,
clearly stated at the NAM Ministerial Conference held
in May in Bali, Indonesia, and reiterates its call for the
Council to be resolute in demanding that Israel, the
occupying Power, abide by its legal obligations.
Moreover, we believe that calls for compliance
must be backed by credible action. Israel must be
called on to abide forthwith by all its obligations under
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Road Map, without
exception, and must be held accountable for their
violation. That includes the obligation to immediately

11-43003

S/PV.6590

and completely cease all settlement activities and to
respect the international consensus on that issue,
including the calls from the United Nations, NAM, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the European
Union, the Quartet and all other concerned
international and regional bodies and actors.
NAM also emphasizes the need to compel Israel,
the occupying Power, to fully lift its illegal blockade of
the Gaza Strip, in line with its obligations under
international law, resolution 1860 (2009) and all other
relevant United Nations resolutions. This inhumane
blockade continues to provoke the deep concern of
people all over the region and the world, reflected,
inter alia, in acts of solidarity such as the freedom
flotilla. In this context, the Movement expresses its
concern about and condemnation of the Israeli
military’s boarding and seizure on 19 July of the
French civilian boat Dignité-Al Karama, which was
sailing to Gaza to lend much-needed support to the
people of Gaza, and calls for the blockade of Gaza to
be lifted immediately.
In this connection, the Movement re-emphasizes
the need for the reconstruction of Gaza, and calls on
Israel to open all its crossing points into Gaza and to
allow for the sustained and regular movement of
persons and goods, including essential construction
materials and those necessary for reconstructing United
Nations facilities and United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) schools. Normal commercial flows must
also be permitted, since they are imperative to the
rehabilitation of livelihoods and economic recovery.
NAM also reiterates the need to empower UNRWA
with all the financial and human support necessary for
it to carry out its mission effectively.
NAM also expresses its deep concern about
Israel’s continuing arrest and imprisonment of
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in the recent period.
NAM strongly condemns the continued detention and
imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians in Israeli
jails, where ill treatment and torture are common. The
Movement welcomes all international efforts aimed at
raising awareness of the plight of Palestinian political
prisoners, including through the meetings held in
Algeria in December 2010 and in Morocco in January
2011, as well as the convening of the United Nations
international meeting on Palestinian political prisoners
in Austria in March. NAM particularly stresses the

11-43003

importance of the declaration on Palestinian political
prisoners adopted in May at the NAM Ministerial
Conference in Bali, Indonesia. It is the conviction of
the Movement that those prisoners, who include
children and women, should be immediately released,
and that proper international inspection of their
condition should be a priority for the international
community, particularly the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council.
NAM stresses that serious, genuine and
meaningful negotiations can be conducted only within
well-defined parameters and a specified time frame.
NAM highly appreciates the initiatives launched in the
past few months to restart the negotiations on this
basis. These include President Obama’s speech on
19 May; the Russian initiative to dispatch a mission by
the Security Council to the region and to convene an
international conference to resume the negotiations; the
parameters presented by the United Kingdom, France
and Germany to be taken as a basis for the resumption
of negotiations by the Quartet; and the French initiative
to start negotiations for one year, ending with the
convening of an international conference; as well as
many other initiatives and efforts by the Non-Aligned
Movement, including the NAM caucus in the Security
Council. In the meantime, the NAM regrets the fact
that consensus was not possible among the members of
the Security Council on any of these initiatives. This
casts a negative shadow on the ability of the Security
Council to deal effectively with such a situation, which
continues to endanger international peace and security.
The Movement calls upon the Security Council
and the Quartet to exert maximum efforts to set clear
parameters and a time frame for the negotiations. At
the same time, should those efforts fail to produce the
required results, the international community, including
the members of the Quartet, must do their utmost to
facilitate and support constructive efforts to overcome
the stagnation of the situation and contribute to peace.
This should include actively working towards universal
recognition of the State of Palestine on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and receiving the State of Palestine as a full Member of
the United Nations, particularly since we heard today
from Mr. Serry that Palestine was ready for statehood.
Indeed, there is a unanimous conviction that
respect by Israel of its obligations is imperative so as
to enable the resumption of direct negotiations aimed
at achieving a two-State solution on the basis of

29

S/PV.6590

Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road map. At
this critical juncture, it is therefore incumbent upon the
international community to act collectively to compel
Israel to abide by its obligations forthwith and to
resume final status negotiations on the basis of the
internationally agreed terms of reference that form the
foundation of the two-State solution on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, so that we can realize this year
the independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and thus begin a new era in the
Middle East.
Turning now to Lebanon, the NAM condemns
Israel’s ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and the recurring serious breaches of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement calls on all
concerned parties to implement fully Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to put an end to the
current fragility and avoid the recurrence of hostilities.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical or
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as any Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by Security Council resolution 497 (1981)
and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to
the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
Furthermore, the NAM condemns in the strongest
terms the excessive use of force and the killing of
unarmed civilian protesters by the Israeli forces on
15 May and 5 June 2011 and calls for those responsible
for those brutal acts to be brought to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba associates itself fully with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
The situation in the Middle East, particularly in
the occupied Palestinian territory, remains alarming.

30

The tremendous physical, economic and social
devastation caused by the illegal and destructive
colonization practices carried out in the occupied
Palestinian territories represents the main obstacle to
the achievement of a peace agreement.
The settlement policy is preventing the creation
of a Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders
and, consequently, the possibility of a just solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Cuba is deeply concerned about the serious
situation in the Gaza Strip. The Government of Israel
must lift, immediately, unconditionally and completely,
the cruel and illegal blockade on Gaza and allow for
the free circulation of supplies from and to the Gaza
Strip, as well as permanent humanitarian access.
The creation of two States living peacefully side
by side, with recognized borders, is not merely wishful
thinking. Palestinians have long been owed a solution
enabling the creation of their State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Similarly, the question of its
refugees must be resolved in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 181 (II).
However, the Government of Israel continues to
hinder the resolution of the conflict, while the country
that is supposed to guarantee the peace process has not
showed the required political will to give that process
the necessary impetus.
Cuba supports all legitimate efforts aimed at
reaching a just solution to this conflict and at the
creation and recognition of a Palestinian State.
The Security Council cannot remain passive on
the question of Palestine. There is no other conflict
more threatening to international peace and security.
Yet the Council continues to fail to take action. The
United States veto of every draft resolution introduced
on this issue has made the Security Council into a
hostage of the domestic policy of one of its members.
The threat of veto remains a sword of Damocles over
the most powerful, and yet the most antidemocratic,
international body of the multilateral system. This
situation is unacceptable and must change, failing
which the impunity with which the Government of
Israel acts in the occupied Palestinian territory will
increase.
Cuba believes that it is possible to find a shortterm peaceful solution. The Palestinian Authority has
been working hard in the past few months, and many

11-43003

S/PV.6590

States have responded positively to the call to
recognize the Palestinian State. Cuba urges those States
that have not yet done so to recognize, as soon as
possible, the Palestinian State on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Cuba reaffirms that all of the measures and
actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel aimed at altering
the legal, physical or demographic condition and the
institutional structure of the occupied Syrian Golan are
null, void and without legal effect. We reiterate that all
of these unilateral measures and actions, including the
illegal construction and expansion of Israeli
settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967, constitute
violations
of
international
law,
international
agreements, the relevant resolutions and the Charter of
the United Nations, and the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Cuba calls on Israel to fully withdraw
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967.
In conclusion, Cuba is confident that the growing
recognition by many countries of the Palestinian State
on the basis of the 1967 borders will generate a fresh
impetus and pave the way for a lasting solution to the
conflict.
Cuba reiterates its position in favour of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace for all the peoples of
the Middle East region that would put an end to the
occupation of all Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 and guarantee the exercise of selfdetermination by the Palestinian people through the
establishment of an independent and sovereign State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing our gratitude to Mr. Robert Serry, the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for the briefing he provided at the
start of the debate.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement of
the Non-Aligned Movement just delivered by the
Representative of Egypt and with that of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to be delivered
later by the Representative of Kazakhstan.
The resilience of the Palestinian people is worthy
of recognition. They have endured repression and
endless mayhem for decades, yet they have kept on

11-43003

moving forward towards achieving their dreams: the
dream of statehood, namely, the dream of our
Palestinian friends, brothers and sisters, to have a place
that they can call their own.
The August 2009 comprehensive plan for
Palestine formulated by the Government of Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad, entitled “Palestine: Ending the
Occupation, Establishing the State", is a component in
the establishment of Palestinian statehood and thus part
of the significant journey to achieve that long-term
dream. We must support that dream, and we must
continue to support the rehabilitation and development
of Palestinian national institutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement ministerial meeting
in Bali in May made a commitment to support the
independence of the State of Palestine. In the same
vein, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation echoed
the same position.
We welcome the important step forward taken in
recent times by several States to extend recognition to
the State of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We urge members of
the international community that have yet to do so, to
confirm their recognition of the State of Palestine
without delay, as justice delayed is justice denied.
Indonesia wishes that in September, less than two
months from now, in the Hall of the General Assembly,
we, the community of nations, shall witness and
welcome the birth of a new nation, the State of
Palestine, in fulfilment of a long dream.
However, the dream of our Palestinian people and
their journey to an independent State has unfortunately
continued to be beset by hurdles and setbacks. Israel
continues with its infamous ingenuity to combine
persistent hostility towards the Palestinians with
determined efforts to frustrate the peace process.
Summary evictions of Palestinians, demolition of their
property, and the expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, comprise a grand design to construct a new
reality. Such efforts mimic the strategies and tactics of
a colonial Power.
Israel must recognize that we are living in an era
when human rights are to be respected and protected
and that the will of the oppressed will prevail. No
country can live with a clear conscience if it resorts to
brutal repression. No country can wear the mantle of

31

S/PV.6590

dignity while ignoring universal democratic values.
Israel must change its controversial policies and cease
its inhumane actions.
Israel has many choices. But the most honourable
and most reasonable choice is to conduct direct
negotiations with Palestine. That choice will garner the
sympathy and support of the international community.
Such direct negotiations must lead to realizing the
dream of statehood — nothing more and nothing less.
Let me conclude by underlining that the path
towards statehood is filled with roadblocks. We can
attest to this. But my delegation firmly believes that
we, the international community, must and can remove
all hurdles to the peaceful and comprehensive
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We must
embrace the significant moment when the international
community, in particular the Security Council, fulfils
its obligation to the Palestinian people — a moment of
remarkable progress and transformation in the history
of the Middle East.
For its part, Indonesia’s commitment and support
for the Palestinian cause is total and unwavering. Our
commitment to an independent, viable and democratic
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security with
its neighbours, is absolute.
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Abdou Diallo, Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I should like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your presidency of the Council
for the month of July, which marks the start of the
summer holidays and serves to remind us of where we
stand with regard to work that we must complete at the
forthcoming session, including on the question of
Palestine.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador
Nelson
Messone,
Permanent
Representative of Gabon, for his exemplary leadership
of the Council during the past month. I would also like
to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive
briefing.
Two and a half years after the end of Israeli
military operations in the Gaza Strip, we are, once

32

again, witnessing a surge in violence in and around
Gaza. The worrisome situation requires the Council to
take urgent and appropriate action, in accordance with
its resolution 1860 (2009), in order to protect the
civilians in that overpopulated Palestinian territory. As
well, the illegal economic blockade of Gaza must be
lifted and a durable ceasefire ensured. Efforts aimed at
achieving Palestinian reconciliation carried out around
the leadership of President Abbas, as called for in
resolution 1860 (2009), should also be supported.
Undoubtedly these basic measures are vital to
stabilizing the situation and establishing peace.
The stalemate in the peace process is
unacceptable at a time when so many have pinned their
hopes on September and the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly. Now, more than ever, the Council
must act resolutely to bring about a peaceful settlement
to the question of Palestine. In that regard, it should be
recalled that the Quartet Road Map, which the Council
endorsed in its resolution 1515 (2003), has already set
out the necessary requirements, including refraining
from any action that might undermine confidence
between the parties.
The Council will thus agree with me that a call
for the resumption of negotiations must necessarily be
accompanied by measures to compel Israel to abide
strictly by its obligations under international law.
Indeed, inaction on the part of the Council further
invites Israel to intensify its illegal policies, as
evidenced by the explosive growth of Israeli
settlements.
The Council is aware, however, that that the
ultimate objective of the settlement project is to
consolidate Israeli control over the occupied
Palestinian territory and make it impossible to achieve
a two-State solution based on the June 1967 borders, as
called for by President Obama in his speech of 19 May.
Furthermore it is deplorable and even frustrating
that the Quartet’s much-anticipated meeting did not
lead to a decision on clear parameters, similar to those
endorsed by the European Union, to guide IsraeliPalestinian negotiations.
Since the last open debate of the Council on the
Palestinian question (S/PV.6520), our Committee has
made every effort to promote a solution that would rest
on the existence of two States and establish peace
between the Israelis and the Palestinians. In that
connection, the Committee held the United Nations

11-43003

S/PV.6590

Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People in
Helsinki, in April, to mobilize international support for
the Palestinian State-building programme. In that
connection, it is widely agreed that the Palestinian
Authority has succeeded in establishing sound public
institutions.
Similarly, in Brussels in June, the Committee
convened the United Nations International Meeting in
Support of the Israeli-Palestinian Peace Process, to
take stock of European and other international and
multilateral initiatives aimed at achieving a two-State
solution. Our Committee is also heartened by the
growing number of States recognizing Palestine.
We are also mindful that the Road Map includes
other multilateral options, including, in the context of
the United Nations, promoting the achievement of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security. Today, perhaps more than ever, the
Security Council has a particular role to play in
achieving this shared but often delayed goal.
In this manner, and by acting with strong political
will and courage, we can achieve justice for both the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples. This has been the stated
aim of the United Nations since 1975, which our
Committee strives to achieve.
The President (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union,
Mr. Pedro Serrano
Mr. Serrano (European Union): Many thanks,
Mr. President, for giving the floor to the European
Union (EU). Many thanks, too, to Special Coordinator
Robert Serry for his briefing and to the representatives
of Palestine and Israel for their statements.
The candidate countries Croatia and Montenegro;
the countries of the Stabilisation and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; and Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova align themselves with this statement.
While dramatic events are unfolding in the
Middle East region, the Arab-Israeli conflict continues
to be caught in a worrisome stalemate. It is a matter of
the highest priority for us to continue to make every
effort to contribute to the ending of this conflict. The
legitimate aspirations of the peoples in the region,
including those of Palestinians for statehood and of
Israelis for security, are at stake.

11-43003

The meeting of the Middle East Quartet on
11 July confirmed the need to set out a reference
framework to help the parties to resume negotiations.
Efforts are continuing to find the formula that can best
achieve this goal. EU member States have repeatedly
expressed their full support for High Representative
Ashton in her continued efforts for the Quartet to
create a credible perspective for the relaunching of the
peace process, most recently in the Foreign Affairs
Council Conclusions adopted on 18 July 2011.
The EU stresses the central role of the Quartet.
Indeed, the complexity of the transformational moment
witnessed across the Arab world calls for multilateral
efforts aimed at supporting a negotiated solution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. The European Union continues to
believe that this is the best way forward. The European
Union also encourages an active Arab contribution to
this process and reiterates its view of the value of the
Arab Peace Initiative.
The European Union’s goal remains the just and
lasting resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
with the State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine living side by side, in peace and security and
mutual recognition.
Recalling the Berlin Declaration, the EU
reiterates its readiness to recognize a Palestinian State
when appropriate.
The European Union believes that negotiations
should include all final status issues, including borders,
Jerusalem, refugees, security and water, respecting
previous agreements and understandings. Clear
parameters defining the basis for negotiations — as
contained in Council Conclusions of December 2009,
December 2010, May 2011 and presented to this
Council on 21 April 2011 (6520th meeting) — are key
elements for a successful outcome.
This is an opportunity for the EU to recall its
positions in this regard. We believe that the following
parameters could serve as a basis for a resumption of
negotiations between the parties.
First is an agreement on the borders of the two
States based on the lines of 4 June 1967, with
equivalent land swaps as may be agreed between the
parties. Secondly, security arrangements must for
Palestinians respect their sovereignty and show that the
occupation is over, and for Israelis protect their

33

S/PV.6590

security, prevent the resurgence of terrorism and deal
effectively with new and emerging threats. Thirdly,
there must be a just, fair and agreed solution to the
refugee question. Fourthly, the aspirations of both
parties for Jerusalem should be fulfilled. A way must
be found through negotiations to resolve the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.
The European Union calls on all parties to abstain
from actions that are not conducive to a comprehensive
solution of the conflict. Furthermore, it expects the
parties to avoid practices that undermine trust and to
refrain from any provocative action which may
threaten the ongoing efforts to resume direct talks.
The European Union reiterates that settlements in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are illegal
under international law, constitute an obstacle to peace
and threaten to make a two-State solution impossible.
All settlement activity, including in East Jerusalem,
should stop immediately.
The European Union remains one of the major
supporters of and contributors to the Palestinian Statebuilding efforts led by President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad. The European Union reiterates its
strong support for the institution-building process and
welcomes the outcome of reports which state that the
Palestinian Authority is above the threshold for a
functioning State in the key sectors studied.
In this regard, the EU expresses its full
appreciation of the current Government’s success in
implementing the State-building plan. The European
Union expects a future Palestinian Government to
continue the Palestinian Authority’s institutionbuilding efforts and to uphold current standards in
terms of transparent and efficient public finance
management, as consistently commended by the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank.
The European Union considers intra-Palestinian
reconciliation behind President Mahmoud Abbas to be
an important element for the unity of a future
Palestinian State and for reaching a two-State solution.

34

In this context, the EU commends the Egyptian role in
brokering the Cairo agreement on 3 May. The EU looks
forward to continuing its support, including through
direct financial support, for a new Palestinian
Government, composed of independent figures, that
commits to the principles set out in President Abbas’
speech on 4 May, upholding the principle of
non-violence, remaining committed to achieving a
two-State solution and to a negotiated peaceful
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, accepting
previous agreements and obligations, including Israel’s
legitimate right to exist.
The EU calls for the unconditional release of the
abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit without delay.
Despite some progress following the decisions of
the Israeli Government to ease the Gaza closure, the
EU reiterates its call, in line with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009), for an immediate, sustained
and unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, while addressing Israel’s legitimate
security concerns.
With regard to the situation in Syria, the EU
deplores the fact that the Syrian leadership has chosen
to ignore repeated calls by the international community
and continues its policy of deliberate, violent
repression of peaceful protestors. The EU reiterates its
condemnation of this policy in the strongest terms. The
violence must be stopped immediately in order to
prevent further bloodshed. In this context, the
European Union calls for a political process leading to
rapid and concrete implementation of substantial
reforms, addressing the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people on their way to a peaceful, genuine and
irreversible transition to democracy.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
therefore intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

11-43003
