UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/37
28 July 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations among the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council,
at its 3409th meeting on 28 July 1994, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled "The Situation in the Middle East":
"The members of the Security Council have noted with appreciation the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) (S/1994/856) submitted in conformity with resolution 895
of 28 January 1994.
"They reaffirm their commitment to the full sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Lebanon within its
internationally recognized boundaries. In this context, they assert that
any State shall refrain from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations.
"As the Security Council extends the mandate of UNIFIL for a further
interim period on the basis of resolution 425 (1978), the members of the
Council again stress the urgent need for the implementation of that
resolution in all its aspects. They reiterate their full support for the
Taif Agreement and for the continued efforts of the Lebanese Government to
consolidate peace, national unity and security in the country, while
successfully carrying out the reconstruction process. The members of the
Council commend the Lebanese Government for its successful efforts to
extend its authority in the south of the country in full coordination with
UNIFIL.
"The members of the Security Council express their concern over the
continuing violence in southern Lebanon, regret the loss of civilian life,
and urge all parties to exercise restraint.
"The members of the Security Council take this opportunity to express
their appreciation for the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General and

94-30762 (E)

280794

/...

S/PRST/1994/37
English
Page 2

his staff in this regard and commend UNIFIL’s troops and troop-contributing
countries for their sacrifices and commitment to the cause of international
peace and security under difficult circumstances."

-----
