126

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peaples, 4 7 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
May 1976 at the invitation of the administering Power,
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern lreland, 48
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 49
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the British Virgin Islands;50
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the British Virgin Islands to self-determination and
rndependence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Notes with satisfaction the conclusions and recommendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission
dispatched to the Territory in May 197 651 and expresses
its appreciation to the members of the Visiting Mission
for the constructive work accomplished and to the administering Power and the Government of the British
Virgin Islands for the close co-operation and assistance
extended to the Mission;
4. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to continue to take all necessary
measures, in consultation with the Government of the
British Virgin Islands, to expedite the process of decolonization in the Territory in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration;
5. Endorses the view of the Visiting Mission that
measures to promote the economic development of the
British Virgin Islands are an important element in the
process of self-determination and expresses the hope
that the administering Power will continue to intensify
and expand its programme of budgetary and development aid;
6. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the Territory, and requests
those agencies and organizations to respond appropriately to the development needs of the British Virgin
Islands;
7. Further requests the administering Power, in
consultation with the Government of the British Virgin
Islands, to pay particular attention to the training of
qualified local personnel;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
full examination of this question at its next session in
the light of the findings of the Visiting Mission, including the possible dispatch of a further mission to the
47 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.I), chaps. III and XXVIII.
48 Ibid., chap. XXVIII, annex.
49 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 11th meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
50 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chap. XXVIII.
51 Ibid., chap. XXVIII, annex, paras. 154-170.

British Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/55.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 52
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to American Samoa,
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to American Samoa,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to NonSclf-Governing Territories and reiterating its conviction
that the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to
the conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein
with respect to their future status,
Mindful that American Samoa requires the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by its people of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of American
Samoa, and stressing the necessity of diversifying its
economy as a matter of priority in order to reduce its
dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
American Samoa;na
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to American Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people, to
continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the
full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth in the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of American
5 2 Ibid.,

53 Ibid.,

chaps. III and XXII.
chap. XXII.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for the Territory;
6. Requests the administering Power to consider
favourably inviting a United Nations mission to visit
American Samoa for the purpose of observing conditions in the Territory and learning first-hand of the
aspirations of the people concerning their political
status;
7. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of American Samoa, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the
Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources
by taking effective measures which guarantee the rights
of the people to own and dispose of those natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life
of American Samoa;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa,
including the possible dispatch of a visiting mission in
consultation with the administering Power, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
I December 1976
31/ 56.

Question of Brunei

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brunei,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,54
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as
well as other relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations relating to the Territory, including in
particular the consensus on the question adopted by
the General Assembly on 13 December 197 4, 55
Recalling also its resolution 3424 (XXX) of 8
December 1975,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Brunei to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Brunei;
3. Notes that no progress has been achieved so far
in the implementation of General Assembly resolution
3424 (XXX);
54 Jbid., chap. XVIU.
55 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631 ),
p. 117, item 23.

127

4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work towards
the early implementation of resolution 3424 (XXX);
5. Calls again upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, consistent with its responsibility as the administering
Power, to take all steps within its competence to facilitate expeditiously the holding of free and democratic
elections by the appropriate government authorities in
Brunei, in consultation with and under the supervision
of the United Nations, in accordance with the inalienab!,e right of the people of Brunei to self-determination
and independence, and further calls, prior to the elections, for the lifting of the ban on all political parties
and the return of all political exiles to Brunei so that
they can participate freely and fully in the elections;
6. Calls upon the administering Power, in conformity with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly, to extend full co-operation to
the Special Committee;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
keep the situation in the Territory under review and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976

31/57.

Question of the United States Virgin
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,"6
RPcalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the United States Virgin Islands,
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the United States Virgin Islands,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to NonSelf-Governing Territories and reiterating its conviction
that the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein
with respect to their future status,
Mindful that the United States Virgin Islands requires
the continued attention and assistance of the United
~ations in t!1e a~hievement by its people of the objectives embodied m the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territory, and stressing the necessity of diversifying its
56 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.I), chaps. III and XXXI.
