SS

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

penditures, covering the basic topics of that report, and
to transmit it to the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session;
2. Invites all Governments to extend to the SecretaryGeneral their support and full co-operation to ensure
that the study will be carried out in the most effective
way;
3. Calls upon non-governmental organizations and
international institutions and organizations to cooperate with the Secretary-General in the preparation of
the report;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Economic and social
consequences of the armaments race and its extremely
harmful effects on world peace and security"
94th plenary meeting
I 2 December 1980

35/142.

Reduction of military budgets
A

The General Assembly,
Expressing its deep concern about the ever-spiralling
arms. race and growing military expenditures, which
constitute a heavy burden for the economies of all nations and have extremely harmful effects on world peace
and security,
Deeply convinced that the common aspirations of
mankind for peace, security and progress require the
urgent cessation of the arms race, particularly of the
nucl~ar-arms race, and the reduction of military expenditures, as well as the adoption of effective measures
leading towards general and complete disarmament,
Reaffirming the provisions of the Final Document of
the ~enth Spe_cial Session of the General Assembly accordmg to which gradual reduction of military budgets
~n a mut~ally agreed basis, for example, in absolute
figures or m terms of percentage points, particularly by
nuclear-weapon States and other militarily significant
States, would be a measure that would contribute to
c_urbing the arm~ race and would increase the possibilit1~s. of reallocat1on of resources now being used for
m1h~ary purposes to economic and social development,
particularly for the benefit of the developing countries, 111
Reaffirming that it is possible to achieve reductions in
military bu_dgets without a~fecting the military balance
to the detriment of the national security of any State.
. Re~alli1;g its resolution 34/83 F of 11 December 1979,
m which 1t, inter alia, stipulated that, in the light of the
above-mentioned provision of the Final Document a
new impetus should be given to endeavours to achi~ve
agreements to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain, in a
balanced manner, military expenditures, including adequate measures of verification satisfactory to all parties
concerned, and, to this end, requested the Disarmament Commission to undertake during 1980 to examine
and identify effective ways and means of achieving such
agreements,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament
c;ommission ?n the work accomplished during its session of 1980 m pursuance of resolution 34/83 F, 11
10

Resolution S-10/2, para. 89.
Official Records of the Uenera/ A.rsnnh!i-. 7hirlv-fifih Session.
Supplement No. 42 (A/JS/42).
11

Noting also the recommendation of the Disarmament
Commission concerning the elements of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, 12
which provides that during the Decade renewed efforts
should be made to reach agreement on the reduction of
military expenditures and the reallocation of resources
from military purposes to economic and social development, especially for the benefit of developing countries,
Aware of the various proposals submitted by States
and of the activities carried out so far within the framework of the United Nations in the field of the reduction
of military budgets.
~ecalling also paragraph 41 of the Final Document,
which refers, inter alia, to the contribution of the unilateral measures to the attainment of the disarmament
goals, and welcoming in this connexion such measures
taken by States aimed at the freezing and the reduction
of their military expenditures,
I. Reaffirms the urgent need to reinforce the endeavours of all States and international action in the
area of the reduction of military budgets, with a view to
reaching international agreements to freeze reduce or
otherwise restrain military expenditures;
'
2. Reiterat~s the appeal to all States, in particular
the most heavily armed States, pending the conclusion
of agreements_ on the reduction of military expenditures, to exercise self-restraint in their military expenditure with a view to reallocating the funds thus saved to
economic and social development, particularly for the
benefit of developing countries;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue at its session to be held in 1981 the consideration
of ~he _item entitled "Reduction of military budgets",
takmg mto account the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 34 /83 F as well as those of the present resolution, and, in particular, to identify and elaborate on
the principles which should govern further actions of
States in the field of the freezing and reduction of
military _expenditures, keeping in mind the possibility of
embodymg such principles into a suitable document at
an appropriate stage;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
S_tates to ~xpress their views and suggestions on the principles which should govern their actions in the field of
the freezing and reduction of military expenditures and
to_ prepare on this basis a report to be submitted to the
Disarmament Cc)mmission at its session in 1981;
_5. Consider.~ that !hi_s action to be carried out by the
Disarmament Comm1ss1on should be regarded as complementary to any other ongoing activity within the
framework of the United Nations related to the question _of reduction of military budgets as well as to any
possible unilateral initiatives which may be undertaken
by States in this field;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Reduction of
military budget~--.

94th plenary meeting
12 Decemher I 980
B
The General Assm1h!y,
Recalling the provision of paragraph 90 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
,.· See rcsnlut1on ,, -+6 ahove.

III.

59

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
---

Assembly, 13 according to which it should continue to
consider what concrete steps should be taken to facilitate the reduction of military budgets, bearing in mind
the relevant proposals and documents of the United
Nations on this question,
Convinced that reductions of military expenditures
could be carried out without affecting the military
balance to the detriment of the national security of any
country,
Recalling its resolution 33 /67 of l 4 December 1978, in
which the General Assembly requested the SecretaryGeneral, with the assistance of an ad hoe panel of experienced practitioners in the field of military budgeting:
(a) To carry out a practical test of the proposed
reporting instrument with the voluntary co-operation of
States from different regions and representing different
budgeting and accounting systems,
(b) To assess the results of the practical tests,
(c) To develop recommendations for further refinement and implementation of the reporting instrument,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General 14 submitted in pursuance of resolution
33 /67, containing recommended steps leading to the
early implementation of the revised instrument in a general and regular system for the international reporting of
military expenditures, ensuring an increasing participation with a view to universal reporting by an everwidening set of States and at the same time recommending that a further study should be undertaken of
the problems of comparing military expenditures among
different States and in different years as well as the
problems of verification that will arise in connexion with
agreements on reduction of military expenditures,
Recognizing with satisfaction that a carefully
elaborated reporting instrument has now become
available for general and regular implementation, in the
course of which it may be further refined, in particular
through its testing by a widening set of States,
Emphasizing the value of such a reporting instrument,
once fully implemented in its refined form, as a means
to increase confidence between States by contributing
to greater openness in military matters.
Convinced that the systematic reporting of military
expenditures is an important first step in the move
towards agreed and balanced reductions in military
expenditures,
I. Requests the Secretary-General . to make the
necessary arrangements for the above-mentioned report
to be issued as a United Nations publication and widely
distributed;
2. Recommends that all Member States should make
use of the reporting instrument and report annually to
the Secretary-General their military expenditures of the
latest fiscal year for which data are available, presenting their first report preferably not later than 30
April 1981;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report on these
matters to the General Assembly on an annual basis:
4. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of an ad hoe group of qualified experts in the field
of military budgets: 1 ;
"Resolution S-10/2.
14
A/35/479.
15
Subsequently referred to as the Group of Experts on the Reduction of Military Budgets.
·

--

.

-

(a) To refine further the reporting instrument on the
basis of future comments and suggestions received from
States during the general and regular implementation of
the reporting instrument:
(b) To examine and suggest solutions to the question
of comparing military expenditures among different
States and between different years as well as to the
problems of verification that will arise in connexion with
agreements on reduction of military expenditures:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of paragraph 4 above to the General
Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament:
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
group of experts with the necessary financial assistance
and secretariat services:
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Reduction of
military budgets".

94th plenary meeting
I 2 December I 980

35/143.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution
34/71 co'1cerning the signature and ratification
of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December
1967, 3262 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3473 (XXX) of
11 December 1975, 32/76 of 12 December 1977, S-10/2
of 30 June 1978, 33/58 of 14 December 1978 and 34/71
of 11 December 1979 concerning the signature and
ratification of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco ), 16
Taking into account that within the zone of application of that Treaty, to which twenty-two sovereign
States are already parties, there are some territories
which, in spite of not being sovereign political entities,
are nevertheless in a position to receive the benefits
deriving from the Treaty through its Additional Protocol I, to which the States that de Jure or de facto are internationally responsible for those territories may
become parties,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Kingdom
of the Netherlands became parties to Additional
Protocol I in 1969 and I 971, respectively,
I. Regrets that the signature of Additional Protocol
I by the United States of America and by France, which
the General Assembly duly noted with satisfaction and
which took place on 26 May 1977 and 2 March 1979,
respectively, has not yet been followed by the corresponding ratifications, notwithstanding the time
already elapsed and the invitations that the Assembly
has addressed to them and which it reiterates with special urgency in the present resolution;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Implementation of
General Assembly resolution 35 / 143 concerning the
signature and ratification of Additional Protocol I of the
" United Nations. Treatv Series, vol. 634. No. 9068, p. 326.
