S/PV.9425

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9425th meeting

Wednesday, 27 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Nyarku
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-27975 (E)
*2327975*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing the lack of
Israeli-issued building permits, which are almost
impossible for Palestinians to obtain, Israeli authorities
demolished, seized or forced people to demolish 238
structures, displacing 183 people, including 46 women
and 91 children. A total of 32 of those structures were
donor funded.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, to
participate in this meeting
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: Today’s briefing is devoted to
the twenty-seventh report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The
reporting period is from 15 June to 19 September.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on Israel to
immediately and completely cease all settlement activity
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and to fully respect all of its legal obligations
in this regard. Settlement activity has, nevertheless,
continued. Israeli authorities advanced plans for 6,300
housing units in Area C, including the retroactive
legalization, under Israeli law, of three outposts near
the settlement of Eli. In East Jerusalem, approximately
3,580 housing units were advanced. On 11 September,
a plan was advanced for 3,500 housing units, most of
which are located in East Jerusalem on land owned by
the Greek Orthodox Church. The Church said the units
will be for members of the Christian community.
On 18 June, the Israeli Government removed the
requirement for ministerial approval at interim stages
of settlement planning and delegated that authority to
the Additional Minister in the Ministry of Defense,
likely expediting settlement expansion.
On 2 August, the Israeli Supreme Court dismissed
a petition to dismantle an outpost established in the
former settlement of Homesh in the occupied West
Bank, evacuated under the 2005 disengagement
law. Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures continued across the occupied West
2/16

27/09/2023

On 11 July, Israeli security forces evicted a
Palestinian family living in Jerusalem’s Old City since
the 1950s, handing the property to a settler organization,
following a Supreme Court ruling that the property is
owned by a Jewish trust, based on Israeli laws that
allow only Jews to reclaim property they owned pre1948. On 17 August, a Palestinian elementary school
in Ein Samiya serving nearly 80 pupils was demolished
days before the start of the school year. Fifty-nine
schools, serving some 6,500 Palestinian students, are
at risk of demolition.
In a continuing trend, many Palestinians, including
children, left their communities, citing violence by
settlers and shrinking grazing land.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including
acts of terror, as well as all acts of provocation and
destruction. Unfortunately, daily violence continued.
Over the reporting period, 68 Palestinians, including
18 children, were killed by Israeli security forces
during demonstrations, clashes, security operations,
attacks or alleged attacks against Israelis, and other
incidents. A total of 2,830 Palestinians, including 30
women and 559 children, were injured. Of that number,
271 were injured by live ammunition, and 2,119 by tear
gas inhalation. In addition, 2 Palestinians were killed
and 73 injured, including three women and 12 children,
amid a high level of attacks by Israeli settlers. Ten
Israelis, including one woman, two children and three
Israeli security forces personnel, were killed, and 122
Israelis, including six women and six children, and 33
ISF personnel, were injured by Palestinians in attacks,
clashes, stone-throwing and other incidents.
Israeli security forces carried out 1,042 search-andarrest operations in the West Bank, resulting in 1,504
Palestinians arrested, including 88 children. Israel
currently holds 1,264 Palestinians in administrative
detention, the highest number in over a decade.
The high number of fatal incidents during the
reporting period precludes us from detailing all of
them, but allow me to highlight a few. Many Palestinian
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

casualties in the occupied West Bank occurred in the
context of Israeli operations in Area A, including some
during subsequent armed clashes with increasingly
sophisticated weaponry. On 15 August, in the Aqbat
Jabr refugee camp, south of Jericho, two Palestinians,
including a 16-year-old boy, were killed by Israeli
security forces. Two others were killed on 17 and
22 August, including a 16-year-old boy, in Jenin and
the nearby village of Zababida. On 19 September, four
Palestinians were killed by Israeli security forces in the
Jenin refugee camp during intensive armed exchanges.
Settler-related violence continued throughout the
reporting period, including on 4 August, when armed
Israeli settlers approached the village of Burqa, near
Ramallah, leading to stone-throwing confrontations
with Palestinians. Settlers killed a 19-year-old
Palestinian and injured another. One Israeli was injured
by Palestinians throwing stones. Israeli police arrested
two Israelis and placed them under house arrest. In
addition, on 27 August, the Israeli settlers burned land
south of Nablus and threw stones onto Palestinian
houses. Three Israelis, including one woman, were
killed by Palestinian gunmen in shooting attacks in the
occupied West Bank on 19 and 21 August.
In other incidents, on 15 August, armed Palestinians
near Jenin attempted and failed to launch an improvised
rocket towards an Israeli settlement in the area. In Gaza,
since late August, Palestinians have resumed protests
near the perimeter fence. Palestinian protestors have
thrown stones and explosive devices towards Israeli
security forces and launched incendiary balloons, and
Israeli security forces have fired live ammunition and
tear gas at protestors, causing casualties.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for the parties to
refrain from acts of provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric. Unfortunately, such acts
continued. In an interview, an Israeli minister said:
“my right and that of my wife and my children to travel
on the roads in Judea and Samaria is more important
than the freedom of movement for Arabs.” A member
of the Israeli Knesset said that any “Palestinians
running away from an Israel Defense Forces [IDF]
soldier must be shot,” adding, that “a Palestinian who
approaches an IDF soldier must also be shot”. An
Israeli minister visited the holy sites on the Jewish
commemoration day of Tisha B’Av and called on Israelis
to “return” to the sites and “show our governance”.
In a speech, a senior Palestinian Authority (PA)
official said that Hitler “fought against the Jews because
they were dealing with usury and money” and denied
3/16

27/09/2023

that “Hitler killed the Jews for being Jews”. Officials
or official social media posts from Fatah, Hamas and
other Palestinian factions glorified perpetrators of
attacks against Israeli civilians.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse negative trends on the ground that
are imperilling the two-State solution. Notwithstanding
some positive steps, negative trends continued.
During this period, Israeli authorities reduced the
handling fee for fuel that Israel transfers to the PA on a
monthly basis to increase revenues in the PA. On 9 July,
Israel’s Security Cabinet voted to act to “prevent the
collapse of the Palestinian Authority”.
On 30 July, President Mahmoud Abbas presided
over a meeting of Secretaries-General of Palestinian
factions in Egypt, calling for a follow-up committee
to complete dialogue to end divisions and achieve
Palestinian national unity. On 10 August, President
Abbas issued a presidential decree removing 12 of the
16 PA governors from office, including four from Gaza.
On 14 August, participants at a Hamas-organized
meeting called for elections to take place in Gaza under
Central Elections Commission supervision — a call
welcomed by Hamas.
On 17 September, the Erez crossing was closed
for exits due to Jewish holidays, and it has remained
closed due to the violence near the security fence, with
some exceptions including the transfer of patients for
medical treatment. Over 22,000 work and business
permit holders have been denied exit since the closure.
Meanwhile, funding shortages continue to
undermine the United Nations ability to provide crucial
services to Palestinians. The United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) urgently still needs $75 million to
maintain food assistance through the end of the year
to 1.2 million Palestinians in Gaza, while the World
Food Programme requires $32 million to restore social
assistance to priority families across the occupied
Palestinian territory. In addition, at the moment,
the humanitarian appeal for Palestinians throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory is funded at only
33 per cent.
In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council also
calls upon all States to distinguish, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the territories occupied since 1967. On 26 June,
the United States Department of State confirmed that
it had circulated foreign policy guidance to relevant
agencies advising that
“engaging in bilateral scientific and technological
cooperation with Israel in geographic areas
which came under the administration of Israel
after June 5, 1967, and which remain subject to
final-status negotiations, is inconsistent with U.S.
foreign policy.”
Resolution 2334 (2016) also calls upon all parties to
continue, inter alia, to exert collective efforts to launch
credible negotiations. On 12 August, Saudi Arabia
appointed an Ambassador to the State of Palestine and
a Consul General in Jerusalem for the first time since
1947. On 14 August, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah
Al Sisi, Jordan’s King Abdullah II and Palestinian
President Abbas met in Egypt. Their joint statement
noted the importance of Israel halting all settlement
activity, the confiscation of Palestinian land and
the eviction of Palestinians from their homes, while
underscoring that a just and comprehensive solution
to the Palestinian cause is the key to stability in the
region. On 18 September, Saudi Arabia, the League of
Arab States and the European Union, in cooperation
with Egypt and Jordan, convened a ministerial meeting
to discuss practical ways to reinvigorate the Middle
East peace process.
In conclusion, allow me to share the SecretaryGeneral’s observations on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).
“I remain deeply troubled by the unrelenting
expansion of Israeli settlements and settlement
outposts in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, with over 10,000 housing units advanced
in this reporting period alone. Settlements further
entrench the occupation, fuel violence, impede
Palestinian access to their land and resources and
systematically erode the viability of a Palestinian
State as part of a two-State solution. I reiterate that
settlements have no legal validity and constitute a
flagrant violation of international law and United
Nations resolutions. I call on the Government of
Israel to cease all settlement activity and dismantle
outposts immediately, in line with its obligations
under international law;
“The demolition and seizure of Palestinian
structures, including internationally funded
humanitarian projects, entail numerous human
4/16

27/09/2023

rights violations and raise concerns about the risk of
forcible transfer. I call upon the Government of Israel
to end that practice, in line with its international
obligations, and to allow Palestinian communities
to build and address their development needs;
“I remain gravely concerned by the
intensification of violence in the occupied West Bank
and Israel — at a level not seen in decades — and
the use of increasingly lethal weaponry, including
in densely populated areas. Immediate steps are
needed to de-escalate tensions;
“I condemn all acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terror. Such acts can
never be justified and must be condemned by all.
Perpetrators must be held accountable and swiftly
brought to justice. I am disturbed by the high levels
of settler-related violence, often in the proximity
of Israeli security forces, with perpetrators rarely
held accountable. Israel must act to stop all settler
violence. I urge Israel, as the occupying Power, to
abide by its obligations under international law to
protect the Palestinian population against all acts
or threats of violence;
“I am appalled that children continue to be
victims of violence. Children must never be the
target of violence, used or put in harm’s way;
“Security forces must exercise maximum
restraint and use lethal force only when it is
strictly unavoidable to protect life. I call on Israel
to abide by its obligations under international
law, including with regard to the proportional
use of force, and ensure thorough, independent
and prompt investigations into all instances of
possible excessive use of force, while holding those
responsible to account;
“In Gaza, the resurgence of violence near the
perimeter fence is a reminder of the fragility of the
situation and the risk of escalation. Despite some
easing of access restrictions, more needs to be done
to alleviate the humanitarian situation and improve
the economy and the freedom of movement.
However, only sustainable political solutions, with
the ultimate goal of lifting the debilitating Israeli
closures in line with resolution 1860 (2009), will
restore hope to Gaza’s long-suffering population;
“I am disturbed by the multiple instances
in which officials have used dangerous or racist
rhetoric and engaged in incitement, which must
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

27/09/2023

be rejected by all. I welcome President Abbas’
convening of Palestinian factions in Egypt and
encourage all actors to take concrete steps towards
reuniting Gaza and the occupied West Bank under
a single, democratic Government;

to a two-State solution and will continue to pursue
steps aimed at promoting a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians. But the
ongoing violence is setting back the prospects for peace
and is responsible for enormous and needless suffering.

“The absence of intra-Palestinian unity
continues to undermine Palestinian national
aspirations. I remain concerned about the critical
state of the Palestinian Authority’s finances, which
is affecting the Government’s ability to deliver
services and pay public-sector salaries. I note the
Israeli Security Cabinet’s decision to strengthen
the Palestinian Authority and encourage Israel
and relevant stakeholders to take tangible steps
in that regard, while also encouraging the PA to
undertake reforms;

The United States is deeply concerned about the
levels of violence in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza,
including the violence in Gaza that resulted in the
temporary closure of the Erez crossing. We express our
condolences for the civilians who have been injured or
killed in the past month across Israel, the West Bank
and Gaza. The United States welcomes all efforts to
de-escalate the ongoing violence. We call on all parties
to refrain from actions and rhetoric that further inflame
the tensions there, including hateful rhetoric, settlement
activity, evictions, the demolition of Palestinian homes,
terrorism, incitement to violence and payments to the
families of terrorists. On the topic of hateful rhetoric,
I want to reiterate that the United States condemns
President Abbas’s blatantly antisemitic remarks in
August, which wrongly maligned the Jewish people
and distorted the Holocaust. Such divisive and hateful
remarks only undermine the prospects for peace
between Israelis and Palestinians.

“I also urge Member States to enable UNRWA to
deliver on its General Assembly mandate to ensure
the delivery of essential services that are crucial
to stability throughout the region. I also encourage
additional support to the World Food Programme
so that it can continue delivering vital assistance to
the most vulnerable Palestinian families. I welcome
the additional pledges made to UNRWA during the
ministerial meeting on 21 September;
“There can be no substitute for a legitimate
political process that will resolve the core issues
driving the conflict. I remain committed to
supporting Palestinians and Israelis in ending
the occupation and resolving the conflict in
line with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and bilateral agreements, in
pursuit of the vision of two States — Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and
sovereign Palestinian State — living side by side in
peace and security, within secure and recognized
borders, on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with
Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States.”
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
The United States continues to believe that Israelis
and Palestinians alike deserve equal measures of
security, prosperity and freedom. We are committed
5/16

The sharp rise in violence by extremist Israeli
settlers against Palestinians is also deeply alarming.
All perpetrators of violence against civilians, whether
Israeli or Palestinian, should be held accountable
according to the law. We should make no mistake, the
expansion of settlements undermines the geographic
viability of a two-State solution, exacerbates tensions
and further harms trust between the two parties. The
United States strongly opposes the advancement of
settlements and urges Israel to refrain from that activity.
We take the issue very seriously, as it undermines the
possibility of a future contiguous Palestinian State,
and we have been raising the problem it presents at
the highest levels on a consistent basis. I also want
to reiterate that the United States firmly supports the
preservation of the historic status quo with respect to
the holy sites in Jerusalem, and we oppose actions that
depart from that status quo or otherwise disturb the
sanctity of the sites. Such action is unacceptable.
We continue to engage with Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to promote steps to lower tensions
and restore goodwill. To that end, we welcome the
ongoing consultations by Israel, the Palestinians and
regional partners aimed at convening a meeting soon in
the important Aqaba-Sharm El-Sheikh format.
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As we work for long-term stability, we must also
continue to support the immediate needs of Palestinian
refugees. Last week I was pleased to be able to announce
nearly $73 million in additional contributions to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Even with that
pledge and others made at last week’s ministerial
meeting, we remain deeply concerned about the
possibility that UNRWA will not be able to operate
through the end of the year. We call on all donors to
provide additional assistance as soon as possible.
As we speak, various actors, including Iran and
Hizbullah, are working to undermine peace and
stability in the region. When the Security Council
overwhelmingly supported the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), we reaffirmed our commitment to ensuring
that those forces do not prevail. As a steadfast partner
of Lebanon, and as we emphasized in our explanation
of our vote on 31 August (see S/PV.9409), the United
States calls on the Government to take additional steps
to ensure the full implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate,
consistent with the terms of the status-of-forces
agreement. That includes additional steps to mitigate
any restrictions on UNIFIL’s freedom of movement.
And as we have previously noted, we also imposed
sanctions on Green without Borders for its support to
Hizbullah on 16 August. Furthermore, the United States
vote to renew UNIFIL’s mandate has not changed any
other aspect of United States policy, including as it
pertains to the status of the Golan Heights. Our policy
in that regard remains unchanged from 2019.
In conclusion, I want to express the continued
support of the United States for efforts to normalize
relations between Israel, its neighbours and other
countries in the region. We are hopeful that the next
iteration of the Negev format will soon be convened
at the ministerial level and will further advance
regional integration initiatives. There is no shortage of
challenges facing the region, which makes the Council’s
engagement all the more important and urgent. Let us
work together to advance peace, dialogue and a brighter
future for all.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
Thirty years after the Oslo Accords, the pace
of Israeli construction is increasing in the occupied
Palestinian territories. France condemns that policy,
6/16

27/09/2023

which contravenes the Fourth Geneva Convention
and a number of Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2334 (2016). France will never recognize the
illegal annexation of territories or the legalization of
illegal settlements and calls on Israel to put an end to
those practices.
The policy constitutes an obstacle to a settlement
of the conflict and to achieving a two-State solution.
The Council should therefore ensure respect for its
own resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016). The
priority should be ensuring that unilateral measures
cease. We need to see an end to settlement activity,
whether through the expansion or establishment of
new settlements, the forced eviction of Palestinian
families or the destruction of Palestinian structures
and economic and humanitarian infrastructure in Area
C in East Jerusalem, including schools. France recalls
that resolution 2334 (2016) also calls on States to
distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel
and the occupied Palestinian territories. In line with
its obligations, the European Union is monitoring its
strict implementation.
Faced with the ongoing deterioration of the
situation, we must urgently restore a political horizon.
Inaction brings with it a trail of violence and victims.
France reaffirms its condemnation of acts of terrorism
and its unwavering commitment to Israel’s security and
the protection of civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The peace process must be restarted
as a matter of urgency. The parameters are well
known — two States, living side by side in peace and
security, with Jerusalem as the capital of both. France
encourages the United Nations to work towards the
resumption of peace negotiations as soon as possible.
In that regard, France expresses its full support for
the initiative led by the European Union, Saudi Arabia
and the League of Arab States to prepare a package
of measures that will benefit both Palestinians and
Israelis, once a peace agreement has been signed. That
initiative must enable us to set up the incentives needed
for the resumption of negotiations. At its inaugural
ministerial-level meeting, held on 18 September on
the margins of the General Assembly’s seventy-eighth
session, the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs,
Catherine Colonna, made clear that France is ready to
contribute to that end.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for presenting the twenty-seventh report
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) and briefing us on
recent developments.
Unfortunately, the lack of progress is deeply
worrisome. Negative trends, which erode any prospects
for a two-State solution, remain commonplace. We are
faced with a situation that is increasingly unsustainable
for Palestinians and Israelis alike. As we are confronted
by that negative trajectory, I would like to stress three
crucial points.
First, Malta reiterates that settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are in violation of international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions. We are therefore
concerned about the recently announced plans to
advance yet another new settlement. We also remain
concerned about demolitions and the forcible transfer
of Palestinian communities and their impact on the
viability of a two-State solution.
Secondly, we need to bring to a complete stop the
persistent cycle of acts of violence against civilians,
including the incitement to violence and inflammatory
rhetoric. Malta is disturbed by the number of terror
attacks on Israeli civilians that have been perpetrated
to date this year, and we unequivocally condemn those
unjustifiable acts. Episodes of settler violence, which
have terrorized Palestinian communities, are equally
condemnable. We call for the perpetrators to be swiftly
brought to justice. The repercussions that the conflict
is having on civilians have seen a distressing upsurge
this year, with nearly daily violence and children being
victimized on both sides. As we continue to witness
violent acts, we must stress that obligations under
international humanitarian law need to be respected in
the paramount interest of protecting civilians. Political
leaders should also refrain from further incitement
and provocations that inflame tensions, produce hate
and glorify violence. Such inflammatory rhetoric only
pushes us further away from meaningful dialogue.
Thirdly, credible negotiations on all final-status
issues must be the basis of all our efforts. Malta is
encouraged by the Peace Day Effort initiative, which
was launched here in New York last week. We look
forward to working on its potential to build on initiatives
towards achieving a comprehensive regional peace.
Addressing the fiscal and political situation of the
Palestinian Authority (PA) is also key. We urge the
Palestinian factions to continue engagement towards a
7/16

27/09/2023

good-faith reconciliation process, and the PA to hold
its postponed national elections without further delay.
Critically, we must strive to address the increasingly
dire humanitarian needs of the Palestinians,
particularly in Gaza, where 1.3 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance. On that front, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East remains the brightest beacon
of hope for many Palestinians and requires our increased
support in the face of continued funding shortages.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates its unwavering
support for a just and comprehensive resolution of the
Middle East conflict, based on a two-State solution,
along the pre-1967 borders, while addressing the
legitimate aspirations of both sides, with Jerusalem
as the future capital of the two States, living side by
side in peace and security, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed
parameters. A recommitment to the peace process by
all parties is imperative if we are to restore stability and
secure a lasting peace.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
The question of Palestine lies at the heart of the
Middle East problem. At the recently concluded general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth
session, the repeated references that were made to the
issue reflect the international community’s general
interest in, and deep concern about, the current
Palestinian-Israeli situation. The high-level week of the
General Assembly also featured a number of meetings
and discussions on the Middle East. An overview
of the statements made at the events conclusively
demonstrates that a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement of the question of Palestine, a peaceful
coexistence between the two States of Palestine and
Israel and the shared development of the Arab and
Israeli peoples are the common aspirations of all
countries and peoples advocating for peace and justice.
With regard to the most recent developments, I would
like to make three points.
First, we should redouble our efforts to promote
peace and advance the two-State solution. This year
marks the thirtieth anniversary of the signing of the
Oslo Accords. Regrettably, 30 years later the occupied
Palestinian territories remain entrenched in conflict
and turmoil. And the two-State solution remains mere
words whose foundation has been increasingly eroded,
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with the window of opportunity for achieving peace
closing at a seemingly faster pace. Currently, only
firm political will, effective diplomatic action and
decisive collective efforts can put the Middle East
peace process back on track. China calls for a higher
priority to be given to the question of Palestine on the
international agenda and for more meaningful action to
be taken to realize the two-State solution on the basis
of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and other international consensual
measures. At the general debate last week, President
Abbas reiterated once again his call on the United
Nations to convene an international peace conference,
and China echoes his call to that end. I would like to
reiterate China’s support for convening a larger and
more authoritative and influential international peace
conference in order to create the conditions necessary
for resuming peace talks. We hope that the Council will
fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations and earnestly uphold the principles of fairness
and justice. We also support the Council in sending a
mission to visit Palestine and Israel as soon as possible.
Secondly, the international rule of law must be
upheld and settlement activities must cease. The
continued expansion of settlements encroaches on
Palestinian land, usurps Palestinian resources and
contracts the living space of the Palestinian people, all
of which actions are in violation of international law
and the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016). We once
again urge the cessation of all settlement activities,
unilateral actions aimed at changing the status quo in
the occupied Palestinian territories and escalations of
settler violence. And we call on the parties concerned
to return to the right track of the two-State solution.
Religious and holy sites are places in which believers
are deeply invested emotionally, and as such efforts
should be made to effectively preserve their historical
status quo in Jerusalem and to respect the Jordan’s
custodianship over them.
Thirdly, it is important to ensure economic
development and people’s livelihood and to break
the cycle of violence. The 50-year-long occupation
has severely hindered Palestinian economic and
social development, and the recurrent violence and
conflicts continue to exacerbate the suffering of the
Palestinian people. China condemns all violence
against civilians in the occupied Palestinian territory,
opposes all acts of provocation and incitement and calls
on Palestine and Israel to break the cycle of violence
8/16

27/09/2023

and achieve common security through dialogue and
cooperation. We urge the occupying Power to fulfil
its obligations under international law, to relax and
remove unreasonable restrictions on the movement of
Palestinian goods and land use and to lift the blockade
of the Gaza Strip as soon as possible. The international
community should continue to increase development
and humanitarian assistance to Palestine and to support
Palestine in meeting its economic and livelihood needs.
As we speak, a 100-strong Palestinian delegation is
competing in 16 events of the Asian Games being held
in Hangzhou, China. The Asian Games represent the
lofty aspiration of our peoples for peace, tolerance
and unity. We sincerely wish the Palestinian athletes
great success in showcasing their sportsmanship and in
kindling hope.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate China’s firm
support for the establishment of an independent and fully
sovereign State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and for Palestine to
become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
We are ready to work with the international community
to continue to make unremitting efforts to promote an
early, comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian question.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I also thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
helpful briefing.
I have three areas I wish to highlight since our
previous meeting in August (see S/PV.9400).
First, 15 September marked the third anniversary
of the signing of the Abraham Accords. The United
Kingdom celebrates the success of the Accords, and
we are unabashed in encouraging more countries to
normalize their relations with Israel and to seize the
opportunities it presents. We are also committed to
making sure that normalization delivers concrete
benefits for the Palestinian people.
Secondly, from 11 to 13 September, the British
Foreign Secretary visited Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Foreign Secretary spoke
with Israeli and Palestinian leaders and called for a
de-escalation of tensions, emphasized the importance
of holding long-overdue elections in the occupied
Palestinian territories and made crystal-clear the
commitment of the United Kingdom to a two-State
solution as the only way to a safe and secure Israel living
alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State. The
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

thirtieth anniversary of the Oslo Accords is a poignant
reminder that we must work together to achieve lasting
and sustainable peace in the region. During his visit, the
Foreign Secretary met the Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and went to the
Jalazone refugee camp to see, first hand, the impact of
the Agency’s work to protect the most vulnerable.
That brings me to my third point. We have
previously discussed the ongoing funding crisis that
UNRWA faces. The United Kingdom was proud to
announce an additional £10 million during the visit
to help address the crisis. Other States pledged more
funds to UNRWA during high-level week. We must
now make sure those funds are available quickly, and
we must maintain efforts to put the Agency on a more
sustainable financial footing.
Separately, I want to highlight a report of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs published
last week showing that 1,105 Palestinians have been
displaced from their communities since 2022. A major
and increasing concern is that the increasing settler
violence in the occupied Palestinian territories, largely
unchallenged, renders Palestinians at risk of forcible
transfer. We call on the Israeli Government to tackle
that threat. Tragically, the year 2023 has already seen at
least 193 Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces in
the West Bank, and 31 Israelis have died at the hands of
terrorists. We must end the cycle of violence.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing.
The fragility of the security and humanitarian
situation on the ground requires greater commitment
from the international community with respect to
resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
has lasted for more than 70 years. Countries in the
subregion and those with influence on both parties
must step up their participation. Dialogue and direct
negotiations between the parties must be resumed. The
political solution is the most viable outcome, and one
that is capable of leading to a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace. That lasting peace cannot be envisaged
in a context of hateful rhetoric, settlement expansion,
demolitions, expulsions — particularly in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem — and acts
of provocation at the holy sites, such as those that
occurred again last Sunday at the Al-Aqsa Mosque. My
9/16

27/09/2023

country calls for an end to violations of international
law and respect for the status quo of the holy sites. We
reiterate our commitment to the crucial role played by
the Kingdom of Jordan as the official Custodian of the
Muslim Holy Sites in Jerusalem.
The growing budgetary constraints experienced by
the Palestinian territories have serious consequences
on the population’s access to care, particularly in
the Gaza Strip, where patients struggle to obtain
exit authorizations for medical purposes within a
reasonable time frame. The Palestinian economy is
suffering from restrictions placed on travel and trade in
the occupied West Bank and from the blockade of the
Gaza Strip. Gabon calls for the lifting of that blockade,
in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).
On the humanitarian front, we welcome the
holding, on the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, of
the high-level meeting on the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which provides essential education,
health-care and protection services, among other
things, to nearly 6 million Palestinian refugees in
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Without financial
support, the Agency will no longer be able to provide
its services in the coming months. That situation would
only dramatically increase social tensions on the
ground, notably poverty and violence — particularly
gender-based violence, including in refugee camps.
In that regard, the announcement by the United States
to grant additional funding to UNRWA to the tune of
$73 million is a positive step.
Regarding regional dynamics, we have taken
careful note of the process of normalizing relations
between Israel and Saudi Arabia. We hope that
momentum will promote greater stabilization in the
region and can benefit the Middle East peace process,
including the Palestinian question. In that regard, the
arrival of a Saudi delegation yesterday on an official
visit to Jericho, in the occupied West Bank, the first
since the signing of the Oslo Accords in 1993, is a sign
of encouragement.
In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its commitment to
the two-State solution. We call on the parties to respect
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), and to implement the commitments made
in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh.
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

27/09/2023

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I wish to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his insightful briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. Mozambique commends
his efforts towards peace and stability in the region.

On the humanitarian front, we reiterate our call
for the international community to provide financial
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the World
Food Programme.

The current situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory is tense, violent and deplorable. It is marked
by clashes, killings and displacements, involving Israeli
forces and Palestinian civilians and armed groups. It
is a situation that leaves little room for a negotiated
settlement of the conflict.

Mozambique firmly believes that Palestine and
Israel can peacefully settle their differences and enjoy
a peaceful coexistence as good neighbours, based on
the purposes and principles of the Charter. Lessons
from peace processes around the world and in our
Southern African region in particular demonstrate that
peace is always possible if the conflicting parties are
genuinely willing to follow the path of justice, fairness
and tolerance. In that vein, we wish to encourage the
ongoing dialogue initiatives and others that may arise
in order to ensure that this crisis, which has lasted more
70 years, is finally brought to an end.

We are profoundly disturbed by the repeated and
gross violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. We strongly condemn those violations. We call
on the parties to follow the path of a constructive
and productive dialogue aimed at securing a lasting
peace and justice for both Palestine and Israel. We
condemn the practice of hate and making inflammatory
statements, be they official or individual. They should
be vigorously discouraged, as they serve only the
purpose of exacerbating and deepening differences
between the parties and perpetuating the culture of
conflict and hatred.
We call on the Government of Israel to refrain
from acting on its recent promises to intensify punitive
actions against the Palestinian people. We further call
on Israel to abide by international law and refrain from
engaging in illegal activity in the occupied territories,
including the West Bank.
Mozambique holds the view that the worrisome
events that have been taking place recently in Palestine
and those described in today’s briefing remind us of the
urgent need for action by the international community
as a whole. The Security Council in particular is dutybound to fulfil its responsibility, entrusted to it by the
Charter of the United Nations, which is to maintain
peace and security wherever they are endangered. In
that connection, we call on the parties to immediately
stop the bloodshed, halt mutual provocations and
attacks and put an end to the human suffering in
the occupied territories. We urge the parties to take
confidence- and trust-building measures so as to allow
the dialogue to flow — a dialogue aimed at launching
the necessary foundations for a long-lasting solution
in which Israelis and Palestinians can live peacefully
together side by side.
10/16

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his briefing on Israel’s settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territories in the context of the
twenty-seventh report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We listened carefully to the Special Coordinator’s
assessment of the continuing tensions in the West Bank
against the backdrop of Israel’s increasing unilateral
steps to create irreversible facts on the ground. It
is once again clear that the continuing explosive
situation is a direct consequence of Israel’s aggressive
illegal actions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including violent raids, arbitrary arrests, settler
extremism and unprecedented settlement expansion,
coupled with forced evictions of Palestinian families,
the confiscation of their property, the legalization of
settlement outposts and violations of the status quo of
the holy sites of Jerusalem.
Since the beginning of this year, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has recorded
some 600 settler attacks on Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which have occurred against the
backdrop of the Israeli leadership’s plans to increase
the number of Israelis living in the northern West Bank
from the current 170,000 to 1 million by 2050, with
an estimated $200 million allocated for that illegal
activity. Furthermore, the Israeli authorities decided
to simplify the administrative procedures required to
approve the construction of more than 4,500 housing
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

units in the West Bank, in violation of the provisions of
the relevant decisions of the Council and international
law. In parallel, the Government of Israel has approved
and funded a plan to preserve Israeli archaeological
sites in Area C in order to “strengthen the Jewish roots
in Judea and Samaria”.
Meanwhile, Israeli radicals are making provocative
visits to the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound on a neardaily basis, and more than 1,200 Palestinians are
in administrative detention in Israeli prisons. Of
particular concern is the increase in violence against
minors — more than 40 Palestinian children have
been killed since the beginning of the year — and the
demolition of educational institutions, including some
that were built with donor funds.
The continuing deterioration of the situation in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict zone, with a vacuum in the
negotiations track and the absence of any prospects
for a Middle East peace process, is undoubtedly a
cause for concern for us. In the context of the de facto
dismantling of the universally recognized international
legal basis for a peace settlement, the United States
continues to promote Arab-Israeli normalization,
circumventing the logic of the Arab Peace Initiative,
put forward by Saudi Arabia in 2002, which envisages
a resolution of the Palestinian issue first, and then, only
after that is achieved, the restoration of relations with
Israel. Washington’s actions nullify the prospects for
reviving direct negotiations between the Palestinians
and Israelis on all final-status issues on the basis of the
universally recognized framework for the Middle East
peace process, the central element of which is the twoState solution, which we have consistently supported.
In the current circumstances, it is important to
continue efforts to maintain the necessary international
attention to the developments on the ground in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict zone and to not allow the
international legal basis for a peaceful settlement to be
undermined. Russia is committed to the establishment of
a Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Our position is consistent
and will not change owing to any opportunistic
calculations. In that context, we support all the relevant
practical initiatives, in particular, that of organizing a
visit of Secretary-General Guterres to the region, as
well as the steps taken by the Palestinians themselves
to defend their inalienable rights to their own State and
to become a full member of the United Nations.
11/16

27/09/2023

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his
comprehensive briefing.
The recent events in the occupied Palestinian territory have reminded us of how urgent it is that we
intensify diplomatic efforts at the regional and international levels in order to reduce escalation and build
confidence. We emphasize the importance of exercising restraint and pursuing dialogue. Direct negotiations
are the only way to guarantee security and stability for
both sides. In that context, we welcome the diplomatic
momentum that we witnessed last week on the margins
of the general debate of the General Assembly to explore ways to coordinate international efforts in order
to revive the peace process. That includes the meeting
organized by Saudi Arabia, the League of Arab States
and the European Union in cooperation with Egypt and
Jordan, which presented positive proposals for supporting peace and maintaining the possibility of a two-State
solution. Looking ahead, we hope that the international
community will take concrete steps towards a resumption of serious and meaningful negotiations between
the two parties, based on the agreed international terms
of reference, including the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
It will also be crucial to end all illegal practices
in the occupied Palestinian territory, especially the
repeated attacks on Palestinian cities and villages
and the persistent storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
by extremists, the most recent of which occurred this
week. We stress in that regard the need to preserve the
legal and historical status of the city of Jerusalem and
its holy sites, provide full protection to the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and respect the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s
custodianship of the holy sites and endowments. Another
critical issue is ending and rejecting extremism and all
types of hate speech, which are becoming increasingly
common and are heightening current tensions. As the
Security Council affirmed in resolution 2686 (2023),
this type of rhetoric leads to the proliferation, repetition
and exacerbation of conflicts.
In the context of today’s discussion, we want to
express our concern about Israel’s continued settlement
activities, which are in violation of international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), and also undermine peace efforts.
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Furthermore, we emphasize the need to prevent and
halt settler violence, which has reached unprecedented
levels and threatens to spark further tensions.
Regarding the dire humanitarian conditions in the
occupied Palestinian territory, we note that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports
that 2 million people there are in need of humanitarian
aid. It is vital that the international community continue
to provide the necessary aid to our brother Palestinian
people, including funding the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which plays a crucial role in supporting Palestinian
refugees and establishing stability in the region.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates affirms
its commitment to a two-State solution whereby an
independent Palestinian State can be established within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace, security and
mutual recognition. We reiterate our support for all
regional and international efforts to achieve that goal,
and call on all the parties concerned to work to establish
peace and stability in the region.
Mr. Nyarku (Ghana): We are grateful to Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing to the
Council on the overall situation in the Middle East, with
an emphasis on the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016).
Ghana has been following the recent positive
developments in the Middle East with keen interest.
During the general debate of the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session we welcomed the commitment
made by the leaders of both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to working closely with neighbouring
countries, the United Nations and the international
community in order to prevent further violence, resolve
their differences and embrace a path of genuine peace
with a view to putting a definitive end to the ArabIsraeli conflict. We have noted Israel’s efforts to
improve its relations with the United Arab Emirates,
Bahrain, the Sudan and Morocco under the framework
of the Abraham Accords, as well as the prospect of a
historic peace deal between Israel and Saudi Arabia.
We encourage the deepening of Arab-Jewish relations
to forge a broader reconciliation between Judaism and
Islam, two of the major faiths in the Middle East.
The positive developments notwithstanding, we
remain deeply troubled by the increasing violence,
including acts of terror, provocation, incitement and
12/16

27/09/2023

destruction. Among them are attacks in the occupied
West Bank and Israel, settler-related activities in the
Gaza Strip and the persistent expansion of Israeli
settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
We believe that the destruction of infrastructure and
property in both the occupied Palestinian territory and
East Jerusalem, along with the continued settlement
activities, is reshaping the demographics on the ground,
seriously imperilling the viability of a two-State
solution and contributing to a downward spiral. In that
regard, we would like to briefly highlight three points.
First, we urge for a relaunch of serious political
talks, supported by the international community, to
address key territorial and security issues, including
those related to settlements and settler violence.
Secondly, the Council should support the restoration
of mechanisms that facilitate more regular and sustained
contact between both sides in order to address key
issues, including the economic, social and security
concerns of Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian
territory and security coordination between Israel and
Palestine aimed at reducing terrorist capabilities.
Last but not least, the international community
should support the crafting of a coordinated package
of short-term investments to help the Palestinian
Authority restore access to basic education, health and
social services, create employment opportunities for
young people and women, repair basic infrastructure
and strengthen the Authority’s fiscal stability.
We urge Israel to end its demolition of Palestinianowned properties, prevent the displacement and
eviction of Palestinians, in line with its obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, refrain from establishing new
settlements in the West Bank and halt the authorization
of new outposts in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We reiterate our position that a path to lasting peace
and stability in the Middle East can be achieved
only through an internationally negotiated two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side
based on the 1967 borders.
Finally, we reaffirm our demand that all parties
comply fully with their obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law — including that
obliging them to protect civilian populations — as
well as the many relevant United Nations resolutions,
especially resolution 2334 (2016). We further call on
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

27/09/2023

both parties to show maximum restraint and refrain
from unilateral actions that may contribute to violence
in the occupied Palestinian territory and in Israel.

urge our fellow Member States to provide the necessary
support to make sure that the Agency sustains its core
services for Palestinian refugees.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.

Japan once again reiterates that a long-term
resolution of the conflict is possible only with a twoState solution, with Israel and Palestine living side
by side in peace and security. We are always ready to
support any diplomatic efforts to achieve that goal.

This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
Oslo Accords, but it is regrettable that numerous
incidents have exacerbated tensions between Israel and
Palestine since the beginning of the year. The lack of
political progress is jeopardizing peace and security in
the region. We strongly call on all the parties concerned
to take concrete steps to ensure de-escalation. In
particular, both Israel and Palestine need to exercise
maximum restraint and refrain from any inflammatory
words or actions.
At the same time, we again condemn the expansion
of settlements in the West Bank, including the
authorization by the Israeli Government of three settler
outposts earlier this month. Japan continues to demand
that Israel immediately stop settlement activities,
including demolitions and evictions. They are a clear
violation of international law and go against the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
In addition, we are concerned that the Palestinian
Authority’s governing capabilities are decreasing
in various respects. While taking note of the Israeli
Cabinet’s decision in July to prevent the collapse of
the Palestinian Authority, Japan calls on both parties
to advance practical cooperation. Japan looks forward
to seeing tangible results to strengthen the financial
capabilities of the Palestinian Authority as soon
as possible.
For our part, Japan has supported Palestine in
realizing its self-reliant economy. Recently, Japan
began joint efforts with partners in the region, such as
Egypt and Jordan, on assistance to Palestine and held
Japan-Egypt-Jordan trilateral ministerial consultations
on the Middle East for the first time this month.
Supporting Palestine refugees is very important for
achieving stability in the region. In fact, Japan became
a donor country to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) even before joining the United Nations. Our
assistance to UNRWA has surpassed $1 billion over the
past 70 years. This year, Japan has contributed more
than $40 million to UNRWA, including $1 million in
emergency assistance to the Jenin refugee camp. We
13/16

Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor
Wennesland, for his briefing this morning. I reiterate
Ecuador’s support for his efforts to prevent the further
deterioration of a delicate and volatile situation.
The reports are worrisome and the statistics far from
encouraging. This has already been the most violent
year since 2005, and the number of victims continues
to rise, while the number of settlements increases
and violence is a daily occurrence. It is imperative to
reverse those trends.
Last week, just a few metres from this Chamber, the
Prime Minister of Israel and the President of Palestine
addressed the General Assembly. Both leaders spoke
of peace, ending the conflict and achieving a final
settlement. Beyond the differences that may exist in the
details of alternative solutions or paths to be followed
to reach it, we appreciate the fact that, in spite of
everything, the common objective has not been lost sight
of for peaceful coexistence between two neighbouring
peoples who deserve a future without violence. We also
call for those words to lead to action — the commitment
to peace and ending the conflict should not just be
expressed once a year in September in New York, but
it should be built into the daily rhetoric and, above all,
into the decisions and actions that are taken in Israel,
the West Bank and Gaza.
We hope that concrete steps will be taken to reduce
tensions, build confidence and recover a political
horizon that will lead to effective negotiations. I
reiterate Ecuador’s commitment, as a Council member,
to support any measure or initiative that encourages
the parties to resume negotiations and avoid further
violence. It is our duty to seek paths towards peace in
this and in all conflicts. Ecuador, like all the members
of the Council present here, has repeatedly expressed
its commitment to a negotiated, definitive and just
solution for the parties, with the co-existence of two
States — Palestine and Israel — on the basis of the 1967
borders and the relevant resolutions.
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Much work remains to be done to achieve that
yearned-for final settlement. Until then, as we strive
to achieve it, we must also ensure that the peoples of
Israel and Palestine enjoy decent living conditions,
that their integrity and security are protected and that
human rights and the rules of international law and
international humanitarian law are respected. That
is why I wish to address the situation of the children
caught up in the middle of the conflict and the existence
of grave violations of their rights. We call on the parties
to implement measures to put an end to the killing,
recruitment and arbitrary detention of children, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
In the same vein, I would like to conclude by
recalling that addressing the needs of displaced
populations is the responsibility of the international
community, regardless of the causes or perpetrators of
the conflict. I call on all those who are able to contribute
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the World Food
Programme to do so without delay.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
As other colleagues have already mentioned,
this year marks the commemoration of the Oslo
Accords. However, the path to a peace based on a
two-State solution promised in Oslo faces ever more
imposing obstacles.
The first of those obstacles is the troubling increase
in settlements. Switzerland recalls that settlements are
illegal under international humanitarian law and run
counter to several resolutions of the Security Council.
Therefore, in resolution 2334 (2016), the Security
Council reiterates
“its demand that Israel immediately and completely
cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem”
(resolution 2334 (2016), para. 2).
The same resolution also reaffirms that the
establishment of settlements constitutes a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. In addition,
we condemn the coercive environment leading to the
forced displacement of Palestinian communities.
The lack of protection for Palestinians from settler
attacks, threats and intimidation — which have increased
significantly this year, according to the Office for the
14/16

27/09/2023

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs — is particularly
alarming. Israel, as the occupying Power, must refrain
from taking any measures that would introduce
permanent changes to the Palestinian territory.
It is alarming to note that the security situation
continues to deteriorate throughout the occupied
territory. In Gaza, the risk of implosion is once again
high, while neither side seems prepared to embark upon
genuine de-escalation. The violent clashes along the
separation barrier and the air strikes are evidence of
that. Switzerland calls for the lifting of the blockade that
has been imposed on the Gaza Strip for almost 16 years,
especially in the light of the concerning deterioration of
the humanitarian situation. In addition, the immediate
reopening of the Erez crossing point is necessary to
enable some 20,000 Gazans to work in Israel.
At the same time, the increasing tensions in
the West Bank, in particular following the Israeli
operations in Jenin, Jericho and Nablus, or linked
to the proliferation of small armed groups, are also
concerning. Switzerland reiterates its call on all parties
to respect their obligations under international law
and to protect civilians. It recalls the obligations of the
Israeli authorities with regard to the use of force.
As Sukkot approaches, we urge the relevant
authorities to minimize the risk of tensions around
the holy sites, to respect the status quo at the Haram
al-Sharif/Temple Mount and Jordan’s custodianship
role. We call on the leaders of all parties to refrain
from any unilateral measures, provocative acts or
inflammatory language, which heighten tensions, as
demonstrated once again in recent weeks.
Switzerland welcomes last week’s ministerial
meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians and the Peace Day Effort initiative in
New York.
We note that there is a consensus on the need to
relaunch the peace process. Switzerland remains
convinced that only a two-State solution, negotiated by
both parties, in accordance with international law and
internationally agreed parameters, including Security
Council resolutions, can lead to lasting peace between
Israelis and Palestinians. That is the objective agreed
30 years ago in Oslo. To that end, Switzerland remains
ready to support any initiative, including through its
good offices.
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
In his address to the General Assembly last
week, President Lula da Silva highlighted the overdue
establishment of a Palestinian State as an example of
long-standing unresolved disputes lingering on while
new threats to international peace and security emerge.
Brazil has recognized the State of Palestine since
2010. However, we are fully aware of the serious
obstacles that the Palestinian people face to enjoy
their legitimate rights. The international community
in general and the Security Council in particular have
become unresponsive to the plight of the Palestinians.
That must change.
Brazil reiterates its unwavering support to the
achievement of a comprehensive, just and enduring
peace in the Middle East and to the two-State solution,
so that Palestinians and Israelis can live in peace and
security within mutually agreed and internationally
recognized borders. Our collective support is needed
even more now that a two-State solution is gravely
endangered by violence and acts that represent a
flagrant violation of international law in general and
of decisions of long-standing by the Security Council.
Revitalizing the political process is the cornerstone
to containing the current cycle of violence. The data
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs is alarming. This year has seen the highest
number of casualties in the occupied Palestinian
territories of both Palestinians and Israelis since 2005.
Managing the conflict is not an acceptable alternative
to effective negotiations.
The Council should also seriously reflect on its role
in paving the way for new direct negotiations. Sitting
on our hands while the situation unravels is shortsighted and dangerous. It is not what we are here for.
Meanwhile, we must address the core issues driving
current tensions. The main one is the expansion of
the Israeli settlements. Resolution 2334 (2016) states
clearly that Israeli settlements in the Palestinian
occupied territories, including East Jerusalem, are
unlawful and must be immediately halted. Brazil
continues to call upon the Israeli Government to cease
policies promoting those illegal practices and to curb
settler violence.
15/16

27/09/2023

Brazil strongly condemns yet again all violence
against civilians, be they Palestinians or Israelis.
We firmly oppose terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We call on both sides to exercise
maximum restraint and actively avoid further
escalation. The recent distressing events at Jerusalem’s
Al-Aqsa Mosque are deeply disturbing. We condemn
any action that aims to alter the historical status quo
of Jerusalem’s holy sites. We recognize and appreciate
the pivotal role the Kingdom of Jordan has played as a
custodian over the years.
Peace is intertwined with the universal promotion
and respect for human rights. We emphasize the urgency
of improving the living conditions of the Palestinian
people. That involves fostering the growth of the
Palestinian economy, addressing governance challenges
and respecting their fundamental rights. Brazil intends
to enhance its contribution to projects in that area. The
situation in Gaza, with its continued blockade, remains
a significant impediment to development endeavours
with all its social implications.
Lastly, Brazil remains deeply concerned about the
persistent financial limitations faced by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. The humanitarian aid to
Palestinian refugees offered by the Agency remains
indispensable. We call on all States to redouble efforts
to further support it.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank the Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
thorough update.
We just left behind an unusual busy high-level
week in which a special focus was placed on renewed
efforts for conflict resolution worldwide, including
the Israeli-Palestinian question. We noticed, without
surprise, strong support from world leaders for a twoState solution. The phrase “two States for two peoples”,
highlighted so many times, translates the great need and
the urgency for the prospects for peace to be restored as
soon as possible.
In that respect, we feel encouraged by the regional
and interregional peace efforts. We commend the
ministerial meeting on the Peace Day Effort, of
18 September, hosted by the European Union, Saudi
Arabia and the League of Arab States in cooperation
with Egypt and Jordan and the efforts to produce a
23-27975

S/PV.9425

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace supporting package. Parties must see such efforts
as a genuine contribution to revive the peace process,
and they must do their part, refrain from unilateral
steps and focus on de-escalation and steps that could
ease the already high tensions of the situation.
In the past two years, an unacceptable high death
toll for civilians on both sides has been recorded. That
cannot and must not become the new normal.
We condemn in the strongest terms all terrorist
attacks and stand with Israel in its right to self-defence
from such acts through a proportionate response.
Terrorism cannot serve any cause; it cannot be
condoned; it should never be glorified; and terrorists
cannot be compensated. Terrorism must only be
condemned and by all.
However, we are also deeply worried by the extremist
settler violence against Palestinian civilians, by the
demolitions and evictions, including the destruction of
homes and donor-funded objects, including schools. We
call for all those cases to be fully investigated and for
the perpetrators to be held accountable.
International humanitarian law must be fully
observed. Laws and rules that we have established
to protect civilians and their implementation are
not optional; they are mandatory. In that respect, we
call for the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
and reiterate our position that settlements and their
expansion are illegal under international law and an
impediment to the peace process.
We will continue to stand firmly against hate
speech, inflammatory rhetoric and incitement to
violence. No one should be allowed to use historical
distortion, including the denial of the Holocaust,
for political gains. Such rhetoric, which exacerbates
tensions on the ground, is an insult to the millions of
victims of the Holocaust and to the lessons learned
from the dark hours of history. Communication at any
level, but particularly at high levels by political leaders,
cannot become a competition of hate. Such behaviour
will lead nowhere except to more division, more
violence and confrontation.

16/16

27/09/2023

What is needed is diplomacy, negotiation,
cooperation, mutual understanding and trust to pave
the way for a future where peace and prosperity do not
remain a dream but become a reality and for all.
As a strong supporter of the freedom of religion and
belief, Albania supports the historical status quo of the
holy sites in Jerusalem. We praise the special role of the
Jordan custodianship and call on all parties to refrain
from all provocation and other actions in that respect.
We profoundly believe that achieving a just and
lasting solution requires continued and dedicated efforts
and unwavering commitment from all sides — Israel
and Palestine, but also neighbouring States and the
international community. Therefore, we call on the
parties to abide by their commitments in Aqaba,
Jordan, and Sharm El-Sheikh and seek opportunities
for cooperation on all regional platforms, including the
Negev Forum.
We know it only too well — peace never comes
from outside, but help and support do. Peace never
falls from the sky. It is the fruit of genuine, continued,
relentless efforts, even when the horizon is blurred, as
it is now. Oslo must not remain a moment in history, but
rather it must be the convincing proof that dialogue and
compromise are possible, that peace is possible and that
another future is possible.
It is therefore first up to both sides to engage in
genuine efforts to create an atmosphere conducive
to establishing a robust process that will lead to the
creation of a viable and democratic Palestine and a
secure Israel, with secure borders for both countries
sharing Jerusalem as their capital, living side by side
as two States for two peoples, fully entitled to equal
safety, security and prosperity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

23-27975
