VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

with a view to further promoting ratification of or accession to the Convention;
6. Ca/Is upon ali States parties to implement fully article IV of the Convention by adopting legislative,
judicial and administrative measures to prosecute, bring
to tria! and punish, in accordance with their jurisdiction, persons responsible for, or accused of, the acts
defined in article II of the Convention;
7. Again ca/Is upon ali States parties and the competent United Nations organs to consider the conclusions
and recommendations of the Working Group contained
in its reports 29 and to submit their views and comments
to the Secretary-General;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the Ad Hoc Working
Group of Experts of the Commission on Human Rights
for the compilation of the list of individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives of States deemed
responsible for crimes enumerated in article 11 of the
Convention 30 and calls upon ali States parties to give
this list the widest possible dissemination:
9. Welcomes the efforts of the Commission on
Human Rights to undertake the functions set out in article X of the Convention and invites the Commission to
intensify, in co-operation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid, its efforts to compile periodically the
list of individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives of States deemed responsible for crimes
enumerated in article 11 of the Convention, as well as
those against whom or which legal proceedings have
been undertaken;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, in
preparing the above-mentioned list, to take into account
General Assembly resolution 33/23 of 29 November
1978 as well as the docurnents on this subject prepared
by the Commission and its suborgans reaffirming, inter
alia, that States giving assistance to the racist régime in
South Africa become accomplices in the inhuman practices of racial discrimination and apartheid;
11. Ca/Is upon the competent United N ations organs
to continue to provide the Cornmission on Human
Rights, through the Secretary-General, with inforrnation relevant to the periodic compilation of the abovementioned list as well as with information concerning
the obstacles which prevent the effective suppression
and punishment of the crime of apartheid;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the
above-mentioned list among ali States parties to the
Convention and ali States Members of the United
Natioqs and to bring such facts to the attention of the
public by ali means of mass communication;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assernbly resolution
3380 (XXX) a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention, taking into account the views
and comments of States parties to the Convention called
for in paragraph 7 above.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1980
35/40.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34 /28 of 15 N overnber 1979
on the report of the Committce on the Elimination of
"E/CN.4/ 1328, sect. VI, and E/CN.4 l ~58, sect. IV.
rn E/CN.4/1366, annex 111.

179

Racial Discrimination and 34/26 of 15 November 1979
on the status of the I nternational Convention on the
Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, as
well as its other relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 11
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its twenty-first
and twenty-second sessions, J} submitted under article 9,
paragraph 2, of the lnternational Convention on the
Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, i i
Emphasizing the obligation of ali States parties to the
Convention to take legislative, judicial and other
measures in order to secure full implementation of the
provisions of the Convention,
Convinced that ali Member States should take effective measures, at the national and international levels, to
combat acts or practices of racial discrimination, including the vestiges and manifestations of racist
ideologies wherever they exist,
A ware of the importance of the contribution of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to the implemcntation of the Programme for the
Decade, through its activities within the framework of
the implementation of the Convention,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its twenty-first and twenty-second sessions;
2. Welcomes the readiness of the Committee to continue to contribute to the implementation of the
Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination by, inter alia, intensifying the monitoring of the implementation of the provisions of the lnternational Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, preparing
relevant studies on the Convention and expanding cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the lnternational
Labour Organisation and other relevant bodies within
the United Nations system:
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite the Committee to take, within the context of its activities on the implementation of the Convention, active
part in the preparations for the work of the second
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination in the manner the Committee finds appropriak:
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide necessary assistance to the Committee regarding its activities
connected with its contribution to the implementation
of the Programme for the Decade, as referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 abovc;
5. Commends the Committee for paying greater attention to the question ofthe elimination ofthe policy of
apartheid in South Africa and Namibia, as well as to the
elimination of acts and practices of racial discrimination in Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and in
ali other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies;
6. Further commends the Committee for paying due
attention to the protection of the rights of national or
ethnic minorities and indigenous populations, as well as
the rights of migrant workers, and calls upon ali Member States to take effective measures in protecting fully
" Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), ~nnex.
'' Ofjicial Records ol rhe General Assemhly, Thirry-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 18 (A/3.\ 18).
'Resolution 2106 A (XX), ,mnex.

180

General Assemhly --Thirty-fifth Session

these groups of people from discrimination based on
race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin:
7. Ca/Is upon the United Nations bodies concerned
to ensure that the Committee is supplied with all relevant information on all the Territories to which General
Assembly resolution 1514 (X V) applies and urges the
administering Powers to co-operate with these bodies by
providing all necessary information in order to enable
the Committee to discharge fully its responsibilities under article 15 of the Convention;
8. Notes with appreciation the adoption by the Committee of the revised general guidelines concerning the
form and contents of reports by Sta tes parties under article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention 11 and invites
States parties to supply the Committee, in accordance
with these guidelines, with information on the implementation of the provisions of the Convention, including information on the demographic composition of
their population and on their relations with the racist
régime of South Africa:
9. Urges all States parties to the Convention to extend full co-operation to the Committee and notes with
regret that on one occasion such co-operation was
withheld by one State party:
10. Expresses its grave concern that sorne States parties to the Convention, owing to reasons beyond their
control, are being prevented from fulfilling their obligations under the Convention in parts of their respective
territories;
11. Urges all States which are not parties to the Convention to ratify orto accede to it and. pending such ratification or accession, to be guided by the basic provisions of the Convention in their interna] and foreign
policies;
12. Urges Member States to attend sessions of the
Committee and to encourage their national mass media
to give wider publicity to the Committee. as well as to
the Convention;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements for the Committee to hold. as
part of activities within the Programme for the Decade.
one session in one of the developing countries. preferably in Africa, befare the end of the Decade and to
report in this regard to the General Assembly at ib
thirty-sixth session.

73rd plenary meeting
25 Novemher 1980

35/41.

Report of the lJnited '.\iations High Commissioner for Refugees
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of hi~
Office, 35 as well as the report of the Executive Commit. tee of the Programme of the High Commissioner on its
thirty-first session, 16 and having heard the High Commissioner's statement,"
14
Official Recvrds vf the Cienera/ As.1emhlr. Thirty-fijih Ses.1w1:
Supplement No. IR (A/35/18), annex IV
"/bid., Supp/ement :Vo. 12 (A 115 121.
''!bid .. Supplement No. UA (A,3'.·12,Add.1).
"/bid.. Thirty-fijih Sessiun. /hin./ Commi//e,• '1 ,1 rnccl ""'.
paras. 1-8.

Recal/ing its resolutions 34/60. 34/61 and 34/62 of
:'9 N ovember 1979.
Expressing concern at the persistence and gravity of
the problems of refugees and displaced persons in all
parts of thc: world, particularly in different parts of
Africa and Asia.
Noting with deep appreciation the positive resp?nses of
Governments to the problems of refugees and displaced
persons of concern to the Office of the High Comm_i~sioner through offers of asylum, resettlement, rehab1htation and financia! contributions, as well as the
generous support given to the Office of the High Comm issioner in its humanitarian task,
Reajf1rming the humanitarian character of the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner.
Considering further the continuing and urgent need
for a substantial international humanitarian effort to
promote durable solutions to the problems of refugees
and displaced persons, drawing particular attention to
women and children the world over, and welcoming the
recommendations on this subject in the Programme of
Action for the Second Half of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace
adopted at the World Conference ofthe United Nations
Decade for Women,"
Noting with concern that refugees encounter serious
difficulties in many parts of the world in obtaining
asylum and that they are exposed to the threat of refi¡u/ement. arhitrary detention and physical violence.
Deploring, in particular, the instances ·of physical attacks on asylum seekers at sea and ofmilitary attacks on
refugee camps in southern Africa.
Drawing attention to the problem of refugees rescued
at sea and the difficulties encountered for their disemharkation.
Taking note nf resolution CM/Res.814 (XXXV) concerning the situation of refugees in Africa. adopted by
1he Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at
heetown from 18 to 28 June 1980, '" and of Economic
and Social Council resolution 1980/55 of 24 July 1980
concerning thc organization of an international confcrence on assistance to refugees in A frica,
1. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the dedication they
have continued to demonstrate in discharging their responsibilities for protecting and assisting refugees and
displaced persl1ns throughout the world;
2. l'akes note of the efforts already made by thc
High Commissioner to adapt the managcment of his serv1ces to their vastly increased tasks and encourages
him to continue thesc efforts within the framework of
comprchensive action and 111 close contact with thc
Exe<.:utivc Commíttcc of thc Programme of the High
c·ommissioncr and Lln the hasis of thc principies and
guidelines of the Cicneral Assembly:
3. Cal/supon thc international community to share
the burden nf assisting refugees and displaced persons of
concern to thc High Commissioner the world over. in
partirnlar in the devcloping countries;
4. Reajfirms the esse1111al importance of the High
\ , ,m missioner", ac! iun tP prnvidc international protec" RPporr o{ the World ( ·on/erence o/ the l 1nited Nations Decade fvr
1, ,,men t.qualitr. f>ndopmem and l'eace. Copenhagen. 14-30 Julv
/1.)8/J (linited Na!Hrn:, puhlicat1on. Sale~ No. E.XO.IV .1 and corrigendumj, chap l. secl \.
' :~e" ', J'i '411.' .111.l C,,rr. i. annex 1
