General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

210

3. Requests those specialized agencies and other
interested organizations which are active in the preparation and study of multilateral treaties, and the Unitod
Nations Institute for Training and Research, upon request, to lend any necessary assistance;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Review of the
multilateral treaty-making process".
97th plenary meeting
8 December I 977
32/144.

Computerization of treaty information
and registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements
pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General
concerning the computerization of treaty information
and the registration and publication of treaties and
international agreements pursuant to Article 102 of the
Charter of the United Nations, 1G
Recalling the regulations to give effect to Article 102
of the Charter of the United Nations 16-adopted by
the General Assembly in its resolution 97 {I) of 14 December 1946, as modified by resolutions 364 B (IV)
of 1 December 1949 and 482 (V) of 12 December
1950-as well as its resolutions 254 A and B (III)
of 3 November 1948, 364 A (IV) of 1 December 1949
and 1092 (XI) of 27 February 1957,
Also recalling its recommendation, made on 14 December 197 4 at its 2319th plenary meeting, concerning
the notifications that States and international organizations1 7 depositaries of multilateral treaties are called
upon to send to the United Nations Secretariat, 18
Noting that the United Nations Treaty Information
System, which is expected to become fully operational
at the beginning of 1978, has been conceived as an
open system, capable of utilizing not only the data resulting from the registration process under Article I 02
of the Charter, but all data relating to treaties and
international agreements, regardless of their origin,
Recalling that the General Assembly has consistently
taken the view that treaties and international agreements
should be published with the least possible delay and
that, in this respect, an interval of one year between
registration and publication has generally been held to
be reasonable,
Noting in this connexion that, according to the information provided by the Secretary-General, the interval
between registration and publication of treaties and
international agreements had reached five years as an
average at 31 July 1977, while the delay in the administrative process of registration itself amounted to
twenty months,
15 A/32/214.
16 For the text, see United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 76,
p. XVIII.
1 7 Wherever it appears in the resolution, the term "international organizations" is understood, in the light of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969, as applying to
intergovernmental organizations. For the text of the Convention, see A/CONF.39/11/Add.2 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.70.V.5), pp. 287-301.
1 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631), p. 149, item 87.

l. Emphasizes anew the importance of having
every treaty and every international agreement registered
and published as soon as possible in accordance with
Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the General Assembly regulations to give effect thereto;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate forthwith, within the means available and in co-operation,
as appropriate, with the specialized agencies and other
international organizations concerned, such measures
as would contribute towards the reduction of the current arrears, both in the field of registration and in the
field of publication of treaties and international agreements;
3. Approves, as a temporary measure, the proposals
of the Secretary-General contained in paragraphs 29
to 34 of his note with regard to the publication of
treaties and international agreements; 15
4. Requests the Secretary-General to approach as
soon as possible the Governments and international
organizations concerned, especially those that act as
depositaries of multHateraI treaties and agreements, in
order to ascertain the best means of putting the United
Nations Treaty Information System to full use for the
benefit of the international community;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session an item entitled "Registration and
publication of treaties and international agreements pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations".
I 05th plenary meeting
I 6 December I 977
32/145.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its tenth session, 19
Recalling its resolution 2205 ( XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission,
its resolution 3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973.
by which it increased the membership of the Commission, and its resolution 31 /99 of 15 December 1976,
by which Governments of Member States not members
of the Commission were entitled to attend as observers
the sessions of the Commission and its Working Groups,
as well as its previous resolutions concerning the reports of the Commission on the work of its annual
sessions,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law in
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow' of
international trade, especially those affecting the devel1 9 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (Al
32/17).

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

oping coun.tries, would significan.tly contribute to universal economic co-operation among all States on a
basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of all peoples,
Having regard for the need to ,take into account the
different social and -legal ,systems in harmonizing the
rules of international trade law,
Noting with appreciation that the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law has completed,
or soon will complete, work on many of the priority
items included in its programme of work,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of .its tenth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law has completed
work on a draft Convention on the International Sale
of Goods 20 and that the Commission intends to place
before the General Assembly, at its thirty-third session,
draft provisions on the formation and validity of contracts for the international sale of goods, together with
appropriate recommendations on the action to be taken
with respect to those draft provisions;
4. Notes with regret that the second international
symposium on international trade law could not be held
owing to the insufficiency of voluntary contributions
from Governments and other sources;
5. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue its work on the topics included in its
programme of work;
( b) Contmue its work on training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, taking into account the special interests of the developing countries;
( c) Maintain close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
continue to collaborate with international organizations
active in the field of international trade law;
(d) Continue to maintain liaison with ,the Commission on Transnational Corporations with regard to the
consideration of legal problems that would be susceptible of action by the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law;
( e) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(f) Keep its programme of work and working
methods under review with the aim of further inoreasing the effectiveness of its work;
6. Calls upon. the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law to continue to take account
of the relevant provisions of the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special
sessions that laid down the foundations of the new international economic order, bearing in mind the need for
United Nations organs to participate in the implementation of those resolutions;
20 Ibid.,

chap. II, sect. C.

211

7. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations
Commiss,ion on International Trade Law to review, in
the near future, its long-term programme of work 21 and,
in this connexion, requests Governments to submit their
views and suggestions on such a programme;
8. Expresses the view that both the draft Convention on the International Sale of Goods and the draft
provisions on the formation and validity of contracts for
the international sale of goods, referred to in paragraph 3 above, should be considered by a conference
of plenipotentiaries at an appropriate time;
9. Decides to defer until its thirty-third session,
when it shall have received from the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law the recommendations relating to the draft provisions on the formation and validity of contracts for the international
sale of goods, a decision as to the appropriate time for
convening the conference of plenipotentiaries mentioned
in paragraph 8 above and as to the terms of reference
of such a conference;
I 0. Appeals to aH Governments and to organizations, ins~itutions and individuals to consider making
financial and other contributions that would make possible the holding of symposia on international trade law
as envisaged by the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to study the
problem of how adequate financial resources can be provided for the symposia on international trade law which
are organized biennially by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, taking into account the availability of voluntary contributions and the
relevant recommendation of the Commission adopted
at its 185th meeting on 17 June 1977, 22 and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
l 2. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the thirty-second
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its tenth session.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/146.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law 23 and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations Prngramme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in that report,
Considering that international law should occupy
an appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines
at all universities,
2 1 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17),
chap. VIII, sect. A.
22 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/32/
17), chap. VI.
23 A/32/326.
