General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Page

1902 (XVIII). Report of the International Law Commission (18 November
1963) (item 69) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1903 (XVIII). Participation in general multilateral treaties concluded under the
auspices of the League of Nations (18 November 1963) (item 70)........
1966 (XVIII). Consideratio!1 of principles of i~ternational law ~oncernin~ friendly
relations and co-operatton among States m accordance with the Cnarter of
the United Nations (16 December 1963) (item 71)....................
1967 (XVIII). Question of methods of fact-finding ( 16 December 1963) (item 71)
1968 (XVIII). Technical assistance to promote the teaching, study, dissemination
and wider appreciation of international law (16 December 1963) (item 72)..

1902 (XVDI). Report of the International Law
Commission

69
69
70
71
71

( b) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the views expressed at the eighteenth
session of the General Assembly and the report of the
Sub-Committee on State Responsibility2 and giving due
consideration to the purposes and princ.;ples enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations;
( c) Continue its work on the succession of States
and Governments, taking into account the views expressed at the eighteenth session of the General Assembly, the report of the Sub-Committee on the Succession of States and Governments8 and the comments
which may be submitted by Governments, with appropriate reference to the views of States which have
achieved independence since the Second World War;
( d) Continue its work on special missions and on
relations between States and inter-governmental organizations, taking into account the views expressed at the
eighteenth session of the General Assembly;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussions at the eighteenth session of the General Assembly on the report of the Commission;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide
the International Law Commission with the necessary
technical services referred to in ,+.apter V of its report.
1258th plenary meeting,
18 November 1963.

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its fifteenth session,1
Recalling resolution 1765 (XVII) of 20 November
1962, by which the General Assembly recommen~ed
that the Commission should continue its work of codification and progressive development of the law of treaties
and its work on State responsibility and on the succession of States and Governments,
Emphasizing the need for the further codification
and progressive development of international la~ with
a view to making it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in Articles
1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the work of codification of the topics of
State responsibility, the succession of States and Governments, special missions and relations between States
and inter-governmental organizations is proceeding satisfactorily, as set forth in chapter IV of the report of
the Commission,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fifteenth session ;
2. Expresses appreciation to the Commission for
the work accomplished at its fifteenth session, especially
with regard to the law of treaties ;
. 3. Noles with approval the programme of work for
1964 proposed by the Commission in its report;
4. Recommends that the Commission should:
(a) Continue the work of codification and progressive
development of the law of treaties, taking into account
the views expressed at the eighteenth session of the
General Assembly and the comments which may be submitted by Governments, in order that the law of treaties
may be placed upon the widest and most secure foundations;

1903 (XVIII). Participation in general muld.
lateral treaties concluded under the auspices
of the League of Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of extended participation in general multilateral treaties concluded under the
auspices of the League of Nations, and the report of
the International Law Commission thereon,•
Noting that there are twenty-one such treaties of a
technical and non-political character which by their
2 /bid., annex I.
8 /bid., annex II .
4 Jbid., chapter III.

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eigliteenth Ses-

.rioJJ, Supplement No. 9 (A/5509).

69

70

General All1embly-Ei1hteenth Session

terms authorized the Council of the League of Nations
to invite additional States to become parties, and thus
were not intended to be closed to new States,
Further noting that since the Council of the League
ceased to exist a large number of new States have come
into being and that many of them have been unable to
become parties to the treaties in question for lack ot
an invitation to accede,
Recalling the recommendation made by the Assembly
of the League of Nations at its final session that _its
Members should facilitate in every way the assumption
by the United Nations of functions and powers entrusted to the League of Nations under international
agreements of a technical and non-political character, 5
Further recalling that the General Assembly, in resolution 24 (I) of 12 February 1946, declared that the
United Nations was willing in principle to assume the
exercise of certain functions and powers previously
entrusted to the League of Nations under international
agreements,
1. Decides that the General Assembly is the appropriate organ of the United Nations to exercise the power
;~onferred by multilateral treaties of a technical and nonoolitical character on the Council of the League of
Nations to invite States to accede to those treaties;
2. Records that those Members of the United
Nations which are parties to the treaties referred to
above assent by the present resolution to the decision
set forth in paragraph 1 above and express their r~solve
to use their good offices to secure the co-operation of
the other parties to the treaties so far as this may be
necessary;
3. Request; the Secretary-General:
(a) As depositary of the treaties referred to above,
to bring to the notice of any party which is not a Member of the United Nations the terms of the present
resolution;
( b) To transmit copies of the present resolution
to States Members of the United Nations which are
parties to those treaties ;
(c) To consult, where necessary, with the States
referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) and ( b) above and
with the United Nations organs and the specialized
agencies concerned as to whether any of the treaties
in question have ceased to be in force, have been superseded by later treaties, have otherwise ceased to be
of interest for accession by additional States, or require
action to adapt them to contemporary conditions;
(d) To report on these matters to the General Assembly at its nineteenth session;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to invite
each State which is a Member of the United Nations
or member of a specialized agency or a party to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, or has
been designated for this purpose by the Generai Assembly, and which otherwise is not eligible to become a
party to the treaties in question, to accede thereto by
depositing an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations;
5. Decides to place on the provisional agenda of its
nineteenth session an item entitled "General multilateral
treaties concluded under the auspices of the League of
Nations".
.7 759th plenary meeting,
!8 November 1963.
5 League of Nations, Official .I ournal, S Peciol Supplement
No. 194, p. 57 (resolution of Jf \pri! 1946\

1966 (XVIII). Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly relatiom
and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1505 (XV) of 12 December
1960, 1686 (XVI) of 18 December 1961 and 1815 ·
(XVII) of 18 December 1962, which affirm the importance of encouraging the progressive development
of international law and its codification and making it
a more effective means of furthering the purposes and
principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter,
Having decided in paragraph 2 of resolution 1815
(XVII) to undertake, pursuant to Article 13 of the
Charter, a study of the principles of international law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter with a view to
their progressive development and codification, so as
to secure their more effective application, and accordingly to study at the eighteenth session the four principles enumerated in paragraph 3 thereof,
1. Decides to establish a Special Committee on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States--composed
of Member States to be appointed by the President of
the General Assembly, taking into consideration the
principle of equitable geographical representation and
the necessity that the principal legal systems of the
world should be represented-which would draw up a
report containing, for the purpose of the progressive
development and codification of the four principles so as
to secure their more effective application, the conclusions
of its sturly and its recommendations, taking into account in particular :
(a) The practice of the United Nations and of States
in the application of the principles established in the
Charter of the United Nations;
( b) The comments submitted by Governments on this
subject in accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution
1815 (XVII);
( c) The views and suggestions advanced by the
representatives of Member States during the seventeenth
and eighteenth sessions of the General Assembly;
2. Recommends the Governments of the States designated members of the Special Committee, in view
of the general importance and the technical aspect of
the item. to appoint jurists as their representatives on
the Special Committee;
3. Requests the Special Committee to start its work
as soon as possible and to submit its report to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate with
the Special Committee in its work, and to provide all
the services and facilities necessary for its meetings,
including:
(a) A systematic summary of the comments, statements, proposals and suggestions of Member States
on this item ;
( b) A systematic summary of the practice of the
United Nations and of views expressed in the United
Nations by Member States in respect of the four
principles;
( c) Such other material as he deems relevant;
