TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 27 AUGUST 1969
NE W-YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1505) . . . . . . I , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda , . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 18 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9397) .

SIPV. 1505

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Jaime DE PINIES (Spain).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/lW)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 18 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9397).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
Letter dated 18 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/9397)1
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): This meeting of the Council has been convened at the request of the
representative of the United States of America. Members
will recall that several communications concerning this
matter have been received by the Council and circulated in
the following documents:
S/8296,2 S/8316,2 S/8376,3
S/8437,3 S/8520,4 S/9327’ and S/9397.’
2. The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda. The first speaker on my list is the
representative of the United States, on whom I now cdl.
3. Mr. YOST (United States of America): The United
States has requested this meeting of the Security Council to
deal with an important problem which has long been
foreseen in the evolution of the United Nations, but on
which the first practical step has yet to be taken, with the
consequence that a solution to it is now urgently required,
That problem is to find a way by which the growing
number of very small independent States, often called
“micro-States”-many
of which may soon seek to become
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth
Year, Sup.ulement for July, August and’September 1969.
2 Ibid., Twenty-second Year, Supplement for October, November
and December 196 7.
3 Ibid., Twenty-third Year, Supplement for January, February
and March 19$8,
4 Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1968.

MEETING

27 August 1969, at 41p.m.

Membersaf the United Nations-can find an appropriate
place and statuswithin the United Nations family. Such a
statusshould respondto their needsand rights, yet should
not do violenceeither to their nature andinterestsor to the
natureand interestsof the United Nationsitself.
4. Membersof the Councilarewell awarethat Article 4 of
the Charterprovidesthat
“Membershipin the United Nationsis opento all other
peace-lovingStates which accept the obligations contained in the presentCharterand, in the judgementof the
Organization, are able and willing to carry out these
obligations.”
5. To put this matter in its most concrete terms: should
even the smallestindependent State be eligible for full
memberhsipin the United Nations,no matter how few its
people or how limited its resourcesmay be? What would
be the consequencefor the authority and effectivenessof
our Organizationif during the comingyears, 40 or 50 very
small States, so small as to be unable to carry out the
obligations of membership,should neverthelessapply and
be admitted asMembers?What alternative methodsmight
be devised for associatingsuch States with the United
Nations, for assuringthem of its benefitswithout imposing
upon them burdens they could not bear, and for giving
them a status within the United Nationsfamily appropriate
to their independence,their capabilitiesand their needs?
6. This problem did not becomeurgent for the United
Nations until recentyears, when the progressiveendingof
the colonial age began to bring into being independent
States of widely varying size-some very substantialbut
others very small indeed, Our Secretary-Generalwas :he
first to mark the problemofficially for our attention when,
in the introduction to his annual report for 1965, he
referred to “the recent phenomenonof the emergenceof
exceptionally small new States [whose] limited size and
resourcescan pose a difficult problem asto the role they
should try to play in international life”.5 The SecretaryGeneral went on to suggestthat “. , . the time hascome
when Member Statcsmay wishto examinemorecloselythe
criteria for the admissionof new Membersin the light of
the long-termimplicationsof presenttrends”, [Ibid,/
7. Later, in the introduction to his annual report in
1967, the Secretary-Generalagain raisedthe samequestion6 and discussed
it in more detail, He urged that in the
5 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Session, Supplement No. IA (A/6001/Add.l),
page2.
6 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Supplement No. IA (A/
6701/Add.l),

para.162.

decisions which are becoming increasingly necessary and
urgent.

matter of memberhsip, “the line has to be drawn somewhere” and noted that the Charter itself limits United
Nations membership to States which are not only peaceloving, but in the judgement of the Organization “arc able
and willing” to carry out the obligations laid down by the
Charter. In the light of this rule of the Charter, he pointed
to the problem posed by emerging micro-States, some of
which contain only a few thousand or, in one case, fewer
than 100 people.

12. The importance of such decisions becomes even more
obvious when we consider the entire category of very small
dependent Territories which may obtain independence in
future years-and may then, in the absence of any decision
to the contrary, seek full United Nations membership. The
exact number of such States cannot be predicted because
some may combine together, some may divide still further,
and others may opt for some status other than full
independence. But the facts available to us show a total of
nearly 50 Territories which may gain-or, in one or two
cases, have already gained-juridical independence, each of
which has a population of less than 100,000. In addition,
there are about 15 somewhat larger Territories, all of which
would not necessarily be considered micro-States.

8. From those considerations the Secretary-General drew
certain conclusions which, in my Government’s view, are
entirely sound and which I commend to the Council: first,
that full membership in the United Nations “. , . may, on
the one hand, impose obligations which are too onerous for
the ‘micro-States’ and, on the other hand, may lead to a
weakening of the United Nations itself’. Second, that
“
it appears desirable that a distinction be made between
thd ’ right to independence and the question of full
membership in the United Nations”. Third, that “. . . it
may be opportune for the competent organs to undertake a
thorough and comprehensive study of the criteria for
membership in the United Nations, with a view to laying
down the necessary limitations on full membership while
also defining other forms of association which would
benefit both the ‘micro-States’ and the United Nations”.7

13. But these Territories together would have a grand total
population between them of about 4.5 million people. That
means that all of these potential candidates for United
Nations membership added together muster fewer people
than any one of the 69 most populous States now Members
of the United Nations. It means that they possess 0.2 per
cent of the total population of the present membership.
Yet, if they were added to the present membership, they
would comprise one third of the votes in a General
Assembly of about 190 Members. Their combined votes
would nearly suffice to defeat an otherwise unanimous
Assembly resolution.

9. Those observations by the Secretary-General sum up
perfectly the essence of the problem and the steps which
we believe are required to deal with it.
10. A number of Members, my own country among them,
have from the first supported the Secretary-General in his
efforts to gain attention for the micro-State problem. I
myself, speaking for the United States in this Council on 20
September 1965 [1243rd meeting], pointed out the problem and urged members of the Council to seek an answer to
it. ln December 1967, following the Secretary-General’s
later initiative, the United States representative formally
proposed action in the Council on this subject.8 That
moment was particularly opportune for such action, since
no applications for membership were then pending and the
matter could therefore be dealt with-as it should be-on
the basis of general principles. Unfortunately, our consultations on the subject were still under way when, in the
summer of 1968, further membership applications were
filed, and the opportune moment for action thus passed.
But the problem itself did not pass, and it was again the
subject of comment by the Secretary-General in 1968 in
the introduction to his annual report.9

14. Those are the facts which we presume the SecretaryGeneral had in mind when he urged that such a general
influx of micro-States would “lead to a weakening of the
United Nations itself’ and that “the line has to be drawn
somewhere” .I 0
15. The United Nations is, in the words of the Charter,
“based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its
Members”. That is a necessary and historically valid
principle; for the community of nations has long included
States widely varying in population and in power. It is right
that all Members, though unequal in size, should have equal
rights in the General Assembly. It is right that Members
other than the major Powers should have a voice and a Vote
here in the Security Council.
16. But that very same principle will remain valid only as
long as it is not carried to an ultimate extreme. The United
Nations can no longer afford to waive that judgement of an
applicant’s ability to lulfil its Charter obligations that the
Charter itself provides the Organization shall exercise. A
line must indeed be drawn; otherwise the United Nations,
which has truly been called the hope of the world, risks
losing its relevance to the real world of nations and being
reduced to an absurdity. That cannot be allowed to happen.
We therefore believe that Members of this Organization
must hereafter take into account the pertinent capabilities
of an applicant for membership in determining whether it is
in fact able to carry out the obligations of the Charter,
however willing it may be to do so.

11. Now again we have a brief opportunity to act on the
basis of general principles, because, again, at this moment
no applications for membership lie before the Security
Council. The major question of principle can thus be
addressed in the proper perspective, without the distraction
and controversy that are likely to arise from debate over
individual cases. This moment is not likely to last long. I
urge that we do not again let slip this opportunity to make
7 Ibid., paras. 164 and 165.
8 S/8296, see footnote 2.
9 Official Records of the General
Supplement
No, IA (A/7201/Add.l).

Assembly,

Twenty-third

Session,

10 Ibid.,

and 162.
2

Twenty-second

Session,

Supplement

No. IA,

paras.164

a universal sign and symbol of the independence of the
State concerned, and of the recognition of its independence
by the community of nations.

17. But I do not only urge the interests of the United
Nations in this connexion; I also urge the interests of these
very small States themselves. The Charter requires that
applicants for membership be “able and willing”, in the
judgement of the Organization, to bear the obligations of
the Charter. It is not enough to be willing; the applicant
must also be able. This ability depends on having certain
minimum resources of money and manpower. Ideally, it
means that a Member should be able to take its turn in
serving on the various parliamentary bodies, commissions,
committees, and so on, on whose deliberations the work of
the Organization so largely depends. Even excluding such
service, a Member, if its membership is to have any practical
meaning, must maintain a permanent mission of highly
qualified officials at the seat of the United Nations; and,
when the General Assembly is in session, a delegation
sufficient to cover the work of the plenary meetings and
seven Committees of the whole. Such representation, even
on the most modest scale, is likely to cost well over
$100,000 a year. In addition, the minimum assessed
contribution of every Member State is now $57,295 a year.
For an independent State whose professional cadres are
extremely small, and whose entire annual revenue comes to
only a few million dollars, these commitments of highly
qualified manpower and money to even a minimum level of
representation at the United Nations are certain to be a
heavy burden and may well prove impossible. Yet without
such a commitment of resources, membership would risk
being reduced to an empty symbol.

21. Let me make it clear that, in our concept, a State
enjoying associate membership would in no way be
precluded from applying for full membership at any time
when it believed itself qualified for that step. Nor would
the competence, under the Charter, of the Security Council
to recommend and the Genera1 Assembly to vote admission
to full membership be in any way affected.
22. This status of associate membership may, in our view,
be created by the General Assembly. Such an act by the
Assembly is within its general powers as set forth in Articles
10 and 11 of the Charter, as well as its power over its own
rules of procedure as set forth in Article 21. Such past
practice as exists, particularly ‘in the Main Committees,
confirms this view. The Assembly may create a category of
associate members and define for States enjoying that
status whatever duties, privileges and benefits fall within
the purview of the Assembly itself or of those organs that
function under its authority. As for those benefits that
involve other organs, such as the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice, it would be appropriate for
the General Assembly to recommend to those organs that
they each give suitable recognition and privileges to
associate members; it would then be up ta those organs to
act on that recommendation.

18. However, this does not conclude the matter. Even the
smallest newly independent State, merely by virtue of its
independence, is sure to feel in need of, and entitled to,
certain of the benefits of the United Nations system
appropriate to its independence-and no longer available to
it by way of the former ruling Power. Independent
micro-States should particularly share the benefits of the
various United Nations agencies concerned with development, trade, technical assistance and the quality of the
environment. Likewise, they might participate in the
regional economic commissions; they might be admitted to
membership in some of the specialized agencies; and they
should certainly all have access to the International Court
of Justice. Those able to do so might also maintain offices
at United Nations Headquarters.

23. Although the General Assembly would, as we conceive
it, be the prime mover in this step, it seems to us entirely
appropriate that the Security Council, in view of its
co-responsibility
with the Assembly in the matter of
membership, should take the initiative in placing this
matter before the Assembly. Certainly the Council, as the
organ which must act first on membership applications, has
a most important interest in any move to create a category
of associate membership; for the existence of such a
category would afford the very small States an entirely new
alternative to full membership and would thus enable them
to examine their relation to the United Nations in the light
of their own best interests and capabilities.
24. Therefore, the United States now proposes a draft
resolution which, if adopted by the Council, would ask the
Secretary-General to place this question on the agenda of
the General Assembly at its forthcoming twenty-fourth
session. The resolution is short and 1 shall read it:

19. Some of them might also arrange with the SecretaryGeneral to attend United Nations meetings of particular
interest to them and, when their interests are directly
involved in a United Nations debate, they should doubtless
be invited to participate without vote in the debate. Those
are examples of the kinds of benefits and privileges of the
United Nations system which, as the Secretary-General has
suggested, ought to be open to micro-States. And they are
entitled, I think, to be assured in advance that such benefits
and privileges would be available to them in cases where full
membership was not the right solution.

“The Security Council,
‘Bearing in mind that membership in the United
Nations is open to all peace-loving States which accept
the obligations contained in the Charter and which are
able and willing to carry out these obligations,
‘%urther bearing in mind the increasing emergence of
States so small that they would be unable to carry out the
obligations of full membership,

20. The best solution to this problem, in the view of my
Government, is the creation of a new status of association
with the United Nations which might be called “associate
member”. A status such as that of associate member would
carry with it the kind of benefits and privileges that I have
just indicated. Perhaps equally important, it would stand as

“l)esirous
of ensuring that all such States should
nevertheless be able to associate themselves with the
3

his Government on the problem posed by the association of
small States with the United Nations.

United Nations in order to further the principles and
purposes of the Organization and to derive benefits from
such association,

32. This is one of the problems which is arising in
connexion with the elimination of the remnants of colonialism and the emergence in the world of new States which
formed or still form p’art of colonial empires. Essentially, it
is thus being proposed that the Council consider the
qtiestion, which involves the attitude of the United Nations
towards small States, of the type of relationship to be
established between these emerging small States and the
United Nations. In the opinion of the Soviet delegation,
these are highly complex questions for which there are no
simple or quick answers. A serious and thorough study
must be made of all aspects of the matter.

“Requests the Secretary-General to inscribe on the
provisional agenda of the twenty-fourth session of the
General Assembly an item entitled ‘Creation of a category
of associate membership’.“1 1
25. The adoption of this draft resolution is one of two
steps which my delegation recommends to the Security
Council.
26. The second step which I suggest is that i.he Security
Council itself should make its own substantive contribution
to a solution of this problem, and thereby facilitate the
General Assembly’s consideration of it, by referring the
problem for study to a committee of experts of the
Council. That committee of experts should be asked to
consider the entire problem. The committee should report
the results of its study and its recommendations to the
Council within two months, which would bring us to the
beginning of November, in time for the Council in turn to
make recommendations to the General Assembly during the
twenty-fourth session.

33. The Soviet delegation is therefore ready to reconsider
favourably the proposal by the United States representative
that a committee of experts of the Security Council be
established to study the question of associate membership
in the United Nations and make appropriate recommenda.
tions to the Security Council, At a later stage, the Security
Council could resume its discussion on the possibility of
creating a category of associated membership in the United
Nations and examine the substance of the question in the
light of the conclusions and recommendations of its
committee of experts. Only after such careful preparation
and study would it be possible to raise the question of the
inscription of an item on the provisional agenda of the
General Assembly.

27. Accordingly, I do now make a formal motion that a
committee of experts be convened promptly to examine
this question and to report its recommendations to the
Council not later than 1 November 1969.

34. In the meantime, it would be premature and unwarranted for the Security Council to do as the United States
representative proposes and request the Secretary-General
to place the question of the creation of a categov of
associate membership in the United Nations before the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session. There are no
reasons for such haste. At this time, therefore, the Soviet
delegation is opposed to a recommendation of the kind
proposed by the United States. Haste in placing this
question before the forthcoming session of the General
Assembly is all the more unjustified inasmuch as the United
States itself, evidently recognizing the complexity and
novelty of the problem, considers that it should first be
studied by a committee of experts of the Security Council.

28. Such are the proposals of the United States on the
problem of micro-States and their relation to the United
Nations. Unless some action such as we propose is taken
promptly, the results for the United Nations could be
disastrous. This great institution is not immortal. It could
die of various diseases: political indifference, financial
neglect, the tdo-rigid pursuit of the narrowly perceived
interests of each Member. Or, in the p!esent case, it could
fall victim to a simple structural ailment which, because the
Members were unwilling to repair it, might doom the
institution to die of creeping irrelevance.
29. It is up to us, the Members, to perserve the United
Nations from any and all of these disasters, so that it may
live to fulfil the great destiny which,, I devoutly hope and
pray, history has reserved for it,

35. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Sir, this may be
my last opportunity this month to pay my respects to you
as our President. Allow me to say that there is no
Ambassador here who has a more extensive knowledge and
understanding of United Nations practices and procedures,
or a greater personal regard for the best principles of OUT
United Nations parliamentary diplomacy, Perhaps I might
add that when you speak under instructions as the
representative of your Government, I sometimes permit
myself the right of reservation; but when you direct our
proceedings as our President, we rejoice in confidence that
your decisions flow from your own personal a.ld impartial
judgement.

30. Mr. ZAKI-IAROV (Union of Sovie’t Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, the Security
Council is meeting at the request of the representative of
the United States of America in connexion with his letter
dated 18 Augu’st 1969 addressed to the President of the
Council [S/9397/. The letter requested the Security Council to consider submitting a proposal to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for the inscription of an item
entitled “Creation of a category of asspciate membership”
on the provisional agenda of the twenty-fourth session of
the General Assembly.

36. I turn from such comforting reflections to the serious
business before us today.

31. We have heard the statement by the United States
representative, Ambassador Yost, setting forth the views of
11 Later

distributed

as doclrment

37. The subject which has been brought for our considera.
tion by the United States delegation is certainly one of the

S/9414.

4

greatest interest and importance to us all, and to the United
N&ens Organization itself. I say at once that we welcome
the initiative which the United States delegation has taken,
and we fully agree that the time has come to consider this
matter further amongst ourselves in the Security Council,
and also, in due course, in the General Assembly,

46. All of us here in the United Nations know what an
outstanding contribution has been made by some of the
smallest countries represented in the United Nations. We all
know that we profit by their presknce and their influence
and their initiative. Mandatory power may be concentrated
in many ways in this Council, but it is well to remember
that the very foundation of our Organization as a whole
rests, to quote the Charter, on the “equal rights” of
“nations large and small”. Let me also say that I am sure
that none of us would accept any suggestion that because
countries are small and sometimes isolated and often poor
they need be of little concern to us. On the contrary the
fact that they cannot easily by themselves achieve security
and prosperity and that they often cannot see how they can
stand alone makes it especially incumbent on us to seek to
appreciate their peculiar needs and to be sensitive to their
individual aspirations.

38. We are also grateful, I am sure, for the thoughtful and
thorough way in which the representative of the United
St&es has raised the matter with us today.
39. Since the question raised is of such importance to
every Member of the United Nations, it is a question on
which we should seek the widest measure of general
agreement. We should decide and act, so we would hope, in
full concord. Clearly, this is a subject in which there need
be no dispute or disagreement between us. All of us wish to
apply the test of what is best for the United Nations and
best for every nation, large and small.

47. I recognize the difficulty of contriving exact qualifications of universal application. The main characteristic of
small countries is that they are all different. This we must
consider together, but my present view is that what we
need is agreement on guiding principles rather than rigid
and uniform stipulations.

40. While I agree that the question should be further
considered by the members of this Council, and while I
would also be prepared to agree that we should ask the
Secretary-General to place the question before the General
Assembly, I feel sure that it will be wise not to prejudge or
prejudice the main question at issue by the terms we use.
Therefore, I would welcome the opportunity of informal
discussions between the members of the Council so that we
can reach full agreement on the description of any item
which we wish to refer to the Assembly.

48. I was consequently pleased to hear Ambassador Yost
speak of the need to deal with this question before us by
the application of generalprinciples.
49. I was much struck by the comment made in the
excellent study carried out by UNITAR on the subject of
the status and problems of very small States and Territories.
The report of that study in its introduction says:

41. We would consequently wish to have the opportunity
of discussing-and if necessary, revising-the terms of the
draft resolution which Ambassador Yost has today proposed.

“The international problems raised by the existence of
small territories can be examined from two different
angles. On the one hand, from the point of view of the
international organizations, the question arises whether
they are really fully qualified as members and participants, and whether their proliferation is a reason for
concern, particularly in regard to the decision-making
procedures of these organizations. On the other hand,
from the point of view of the small territories themselves,
it is necessary to examine if international action is
required to protect their rights, define their.duties and
solve some of their difficulties.“1 2

42. I do not always wish to associate myself with the
cautious and perhaps negative attitude of the distinguished
representative of the Soviet Union, but in this case, if I may
respectfully say so, I would agree with him that we need to
proceed in this matter after the fullest consultation
together, and I would not wish to accept immediately the
terms of the draft resolution which has been suggested.
43. SO much for the action which is now required. It
would be a mistake, I am sure all of us would agree, to
attempt to debate here and now the many issues which
must be so carefully considered later on.

SO. I think that sums up our problem very well. Certainly
we do not wish to see th2 options open to small States
unduly limited, We do not wish to force upon them
commitments and obligations beyond their capacity. We
would wish to offer them help and guidance without any
suggestion of discrimination or condescension but with a
realization that the problem we consider calls for unusual,
original, imaginative action.

44. I would say now, however, that I regard this question
as a much wider one than merely a question of membership
of our Organization, important though that is.
45. We must consider the whole question of the relationship of the United Nations to small States and also small
Territories still dependent. The relationship must be not
negative but positive. It is not a question of exclusion or
discrimination. It is a question of how the United Nations
can best meet the positive needs and aspirations of small
countries-countries
which may be remote and small in Size
and population, but which have just as much right to
freedom and prosperity as the peoples who live in the
polluted congestion of great States.

5 1. It is with those general considerations in mind that we
look forward to participating in a discussion with our
brother members of this Council and then, if it is so agreed,
with the wider membership of the Assembly. I trust that
that discussion will lead to agreed conclusions which are
12 Small

States

and Territories:

Status

SeriesNo, 3 (New York, Arno Press).
5

and Problems,

UNITAR

not by any means negative but which will enable the United
Nations to perform a unique task in bringing to the peoples
of small countries the benefits of international agreement
and international co-operation.

problem and aretherefore in a much better positionto deal
with it in a constructiveway.

52. I trust that we shall approach the problem with
understanding and fairness and generosity, guided by the
principle of the Charter that the interests of the peoples
concerned should be paramount.
53. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I particularly wish to thank the representative of the United
Kingdom for the kind wordshe hasaddressed
to me.In this
connexion, I shouldlike to saythat I have alwaysmadeit a
rule to try to be completelyobjective.I think that is why it
cost me no effort to achieveobjectivity in the dischargeof
my dutieshere.

57. The great majority of the exceptionally smallTerritories are today part of the colonial system.Their emer.
genceinto self-governmentor independence
will to a large ’
extent be a direct result of the policiespursuedby the
United Nations under Chapter XI of the Charter and
reflects in fact the successof that policy. The Declaratiion
on the Granting of Independenceto ColonialCountriesand
Peopleshas a universalapplication, It doesnot makeany
distinction on the basisof size or population. In fact, the ;
General Assemblyhas subsequentlyreaffimted in speciifis
terms the inalienableright of the peoplesof smallTerritories to self-governmentand independencein accordance
with the Declaration. The Committee of Twenty-four has
reiterated its view that the question of size,isolationor
limited resourcesshould in no way delay the implemen;tation of the Declaration on small Territories. In many
respectsthe micro-Statesabout to emergecanthereforebe
consideredto be creationsof the United Nations.It follu,ws
that they are entitled to specialconcern andconsideration
by this Organization.

i

54. Mr. CAWEN (Finland): The Finnish delegationwelcomesthe initiative taken by the delegationof the United
States in seekingthis meeting of the Security Council to
considerthe problemposedby the associationof emerging
very smallStateswith the United Nations, Weunderstand
that the purposeis to give an opportunity for a general
58. The question has been raised whether the microexchange of views on the subject with the intention of
requestingthe Secretary-General
to inscribethisquestionas States, becauseof their smallness,their lack of resourlces
and so on, are really fully qualified to be membersof
an item on the provisional agendaof the twenty-fourth
international organizationsand particularly of the Unil:ed
sessionof the GeneralAssembly.The representativeof the
Nations. Reference has been made in this context to
United Stateshas furthermore suggestedthat the Council
Article 4 of the Charter, which stipulatesthat membership
should establisha committee of experts to study this
of the United Nations is open to Stateswhich in the
question and to report its recommendations
to the Security
Council at a later date, in time to transmit theserecom- judgementof the Organization arenot only willing but also
able to carry out the obligations of the Charter. The
mendationsto the GeneralAssembly at its twenty-fourth
suggestionhasbeenmadethat micro-States,because
of the
session.
heavy financial and other burdensinvolved in membership
55. For many, the considerationof this problemseems of the United Nations, might chooseto availthemselves
of
overdue. As early as 1965 the Secretary-Generaldrew the
other forms of participation in international co-operation
attention of the Organizationto the long-termimplications short of full membershipof the United Nations.
of the phenomenonof the emergenceof exceptionally
59. The examination of the relationshipbetween the
small new States in the international arena. And in the
micro-States
and the United Nations and international
introduction to his annual report in 1967 the Secretary
organizationsin generalwill, of course,proceedfrom the
Generalsuggested
that “the competent organsundertakea
basisof the particular needsand interestsof theseStatm.
thorough and comprehensivestudy of the criteria for
Foremost amongtheseis the need for security. Because
of
membershipin the United Nations with a view to laying
their weaknessthe micro-Statesmust look to the United
down the necessarylimitations on full membershipwhile
Nations for protection of their sovereigntyand territorial
also defining other forms of associationwhich would
integrity.
benefit both the micro-Statesand the United Nations”.*3
60. Another problem common to the majority of micro56. Despitevariousefforts in this direction, the Secretary
States is that of economic under-development.Although
General’ssuggestiondid not at that time lead to the desired this problem is, of course,not limited to microStates,it
result. In the meantimethe problemhasbeen an object of
causes,as far as they are concerned,peculiardifficulties
study and debateoutside the United Nations. Within the
arisingfrom their small size and population,their limited
United Nations the Committee of Twenty-four14 has natural and human resources,and sometimestheir geegraphical isolation. The Secretary-Generalhasemphasized
continued to pay specialattention to the problemof very
smallTerritories which will in the future attain self-govern- that as membersof the international communitymicroStates are entitled to expect that their security and
ment or independence.Recently, UNITAR completed a
territorial integrity should be guaranteedandto participate
most valuable study on the statusandproblemsof the very
to the full in international assistancefor economicand
small States and Territories. Thanks to those efforts, we
socialdevelopmentr s
have today a much clearerpicture of the dimensions
of the
61. It is the hope of the Finnish delegationthat thestu’dy
of the particular problem of the relationshipof the

13 See Official Records of the General Assembly,
Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. IA (A/6701/Add.l),
para. 165.
14SpecialCommittee
with regardto the Implementation
of the

Declarationon the Grantingof Independence
to Colonial
Countries
andPeoples.
6

15 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentwcond
Session, Supplement
No. IA (A/6701 /Add.1 1, para. 166.

micro.States to the United Nations will be based on these
considerations and will lead to results which will benefit
both micro9tates and the United Nations.

States representative-the Soviet delegation has objected to
the one concerning the inscription of the question on the
agenda of the General Assembly-they would prefer for the
time being to deal only with the one concerning the
establishment of the committee of experts, as was suggested
by other speakers, including the representative of France.

62. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Thanks to the vast decolonization movement which has
developed in the world during the last twenty years, a large
number of States have acceded to national sovereignty. It
was natural that the attainment of independent statehood
should have led young countries to request admission to the
United Nations, where their contribution has constantly
been effective and beneficial to the international community .

67. Under these circumstances, I should be glad if the
members of the Council would advise me as to how we may
proceed. As I see it, the alternatives are either to adjourn
the meeting until a later date, so that all the members of
the Council may have an opportunity of explaining their
views, or, if the Council agrees, to proceed to the
establishment of the committee of experts at this meeting. I
should like to have your opinion on this matter.

63. However, for some years the Secretary-General has, in
the introduction to his annual reports, drawn the attention of Member States to the problems which might be
raised by the entry into the Organization of “. . . entities
which are exceptionally small in area, population and
human and economic resources . . ,“.I 6 In 1967, he suggested that the competent organs might examine this
question and, if necessary, define forms of association with
the United Nations other than full membership.

68. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I have been
considering what has been said so far in the Council, and it
seems to me that already certain results are obvious. First,
we are grateful to the representative of the United Stat&
for having brought this subject to our notice, and brought it
in a manner which enables us to consider it in all its aspects.
And so, first of all, I am sure that it is in all our minds that
we are grateful to him, and that has been reflected in every
statement made. Secondly, it does seem to me that there isa general view among those who have spoken that it may be
wiser to proceed-and all of us, I am sure, wish to proceed
to consider this matter-in two stages rather than by taking
two steps at the same time, and that there is a wish that we
should first of all refer this for further discussion to a
committee of experts, which would be composed no doubt
of all members of the Council. That does seem to be agreed
in all the discussions which have taken place. But there is
also a third point which is in the minds, I gather, of some of
my brother members of the Council. That point is that it
would be well, having heard the important statement from
the representative of the United States, and indeed the
initial reactions and comments of other members of the
Council, that we should adjourn, not necessarily for a long
period, but for a day or two, and give ourselves an
opportunity of coming together. It may be then that there
would be other members who on reflection would wish to
speak on this important subject, and it would also be
necessary to allow ourselves a little time in order to proceed
in this matter at each stage in complete agreement.

64. I do not with to go into the substance of this question
today and shall speak only of procedure. Our Council has
been convened at the request of the United States
delegation to consider a proposal whereby the SecretaryGeneral would be requested to inscribe on the agenda of
the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly an item
entitled “Creation of a category of associate membership”
and a committee of experts would be established to study
the matter.
65. In the view of the French delegation, both the legal
and political aspects of any alternation of the criteria for
the admission of Member States raise important and
delicate problems, since they affect the very foundation of
our Organization. We cannot lose sight of the fact that the
principle of the sovereign equality of States gives any
territorial entity recognized as a State the right to become a
Member of the United Nations, if it meets the criteria laid
down in Article 4 of the Charter. The Security Council and
the General Assembly also have discretionary power to
judge the ability of a State requesting admission to carry
out all the obligations imposed by the Charter. The Council
must therefore bear in mind the fact that the creation of a
special status, if it were accepted, would necessarily require
a substantive amendment of the Charter. Consequently, my
delegation considers it advisable that, before taking any
other decision, the Council entrust to a committee of
experts the task of making a thorough study of thjs
important question.

69. Therefore, I would suggest-and naturally I wish to
hear the views of others-that we might agree together that
we will proceed with this matter without delay, but that at
the same time we will adjourn to a time-in the near
future-to be fixed after consultations when we could take
the next step in the consideration of the matter before US.
70. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I would agree
in general with the remarks that Lord Caradon has just
made. I am sure that everyone would like to reflect a little
further on this matter. We do, as we have said, consider it
an urgent matter. We consider particularly urgent the first
step, the establishment of a committee of experts, on
which, as Lord Caradon has said, we would expect that all
members of the Council would serve. We would hope there
could be prompt agreement on that initial step. But if it is
desired to hold another meeting of the Council in a day or
two, we would be quite prepared to wait for that. We

66. The PRESIDENT (translatedfiom Spanish): I have no
other speakers on my list. I have the impression, however,
that on a subject of sych importance other members of the
Council may wish to participate in the debate. That being
the case, I should like to know whether representatives wish
us to adjourn this meeting now an!, after consultations,
reconvene at a date acceptable to everyone; or whether,
alternatively, of the two proposals made by the United
---_

7

It seems perfectly in order for us to adjourn this nlcetj:.z,
What we could do, if the members of the Council agret,i
to reconvene the Council on Friday morning. If therl: $ :,>
objection, I shall adjourn the meeting on the understabndi:;
that we shall meet again on Friday, at 10.3Oa.r~., :a
continue the debate on this question.

would hope that it would be possible, after consultation, to
have another meeting of this Council within the next day or
two for the express purpose of setting up the committee of
experts.
71, The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I believe
that the explanation given by the United Kingdom representative assesses correctly the situation facing this Council.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consulf
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

St PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from booksfores
ond distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publicalions
der Nations
Unier
sont’en
vcnle
dons
ler libroiries
et ler agencer
diposilaires
du monde enlier.
Infarmez-vous
auprbr
de votre librairie
ou adrersez-vou.s
b:
Nations
Unier,
Section der ventes, New York ou Genive.

Litho

in United

Nations,

HAM

IlOIlY’iHTb

M3AAHCIIR

OPTAHHIA~HH

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicocioncs
en lodar
parler
Venlas, Nueva

de lar Nacioner
del mundo.
Conrulle
York o Ginebro.

New York

Price: $U.S.

06bEAHHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidos erlirn
a su librcro

HAuHti

UNIDAS

en venla en libreriar
y cosas dislribuidoras
o dirljase
a: Nociones
Unidas,
Seccl6n

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

82210-December

1972-2,050
