S/PV.8929

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8929th meeting

Tuesday, 14 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Ndung’u
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39512 (E)
*2139512*

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

districts of Al-Hudaydah were highly contested, with
the parties employing heavy artillery and air strikes.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: As I recently expressed in my
call for restraint, I am deeply alarmed by the ongoing
military escalation and continued violence in Yemen.
Since I last addressed the Security Council (see
S/PV.8878), the conflict has escalated considerably.
There is a risk that this could open a new chapter of
war in Yemen that is even more fragmented and bloody.
That risk is acknowledged by a wide range of Yemeni
and regional interlocutors.
Yet, even as the parties to the conflict all profess
to me their desire for peace, the focus remains on
military options. I have been clear that military options
will not result in sustainable solutions. Restraint,
de-escalation and dialogue are urgently needed now.
Before continuing to elaborate on my engagements and
conclusions, allow me first to recapitulate some of the
major events since my last briefing.
In Al-Hudaydah, on 12 November, the joint forces
affiliated with the Government of Yemen evacuated
their positions from large parts of the governorate.
Ansar Allah forces immediately took control of most of
the vacated areas. That led to a major shift of the front
line in the governorate. In the first two weeks following
the withdrawal, the new front lines in the southern
2/19

14/12/2021

While hostilities have seen a noticeable decline
since the start of the month, the impact on civilians has
been of concern, with reports of civilian casualties and
thousands of displaced families since the withdrawal.
As confrontations on the west coast temporarily took
centre stage, the pivotal battle for Ma’rib continued.
Fighting has intensified, with Ansar Allah renewing its
push for the city and oil fields in the governorate and
the coalition increasing its air strikes in support of the
Government of Yemen. I remain concerned about the
possibility of urban warfare in the city, which would
have terrible consequences for the civilians.
Ansar Allah’s offensive on Ma’rib is having
worrying ripple effects across other front lines. In my
meetings with the parties, I have stressed the urgent
need for the escalation and immediate measures to
protect civilians. But the intensification of the fighting
and shifting front lines is endangering civilians and, in
many cases, forcing them to flee for a second or even
a third time.
I am alarmed by the military escalation by all sides
of the conflict in Yemen. The increased use of artillery,
missiles and air strikes endanger civilian lives,
infrastructure and services. I am also concerned about
attacks against Saudi Arabia, targeting civilians and
commercial infrastructure. The summary execution
on the west coast of 10 individuals belonging to local
security forces on 13 November, which the United
Nations has condemned, is another example of the
worrying disregard of international law in this conflict.
I therefore reiterate that wars do have rules. All
actors in the conflict, whether directly or engaged or in
a supporting role, are accountable and have obligations
under international humanitarian law. That includes
the protection of civilians and the humane treatment
of prisoners of war. In that respect, we have seen the
rising number of detainees held by the parties to the
conflict. My Office remains in regular contact with
the parties in order to convene them and facilitate the
fulfilment of their obligations to release all conflictrelated detainees, as per the commitments under the
Stockholm Agreement.
Allow me to highlight a topic that continues to top the
agenda of all my Yemeni interlocutors — the economy.
I heard a strong sense of frustration and despair in
Aden, Taiz and everywhere I met with Yemeni men and
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

women. In Aden and the surrounding governorates, the
value of the Yemeni rial reached an unprecedented low
against foreign currencies, further depleting people’s
purchasing power. The exchange rate is more controlled
in Sana’a, but the economic hardship is severe. Inflation
still poses a challenge and people need salaries. The cost
of transferring Yemeni rials from Aden to Sana’a has
soared, placing immense burdens on the private sector
and on people supporting families in various parts of the
country. In recent informal consultations with Yemeni
businesswomen, they described the severe challenges
they are facing in conducting business. I would like to
remind everyone of the drastic regression of women’s
rights as a result of the conflict — a situation that is
made even worse by the economic collapse.
As will also be underscored by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Ramesh Rajasingham, there is an urgent
need for economic de-escalation and wide reforms to
improve livelihoods, lower the cost of goods and protect
the currency.
The Government of Yemen has recently undertaken
some reforms, including with respect to the Board of
Governors of the Central Bank in Aden. I hope these
steps will open the door for further badly needed
reforms. There is an urgency to address the economic
needs of the country as a whole, and for that we need
genuine engagement from the Yemeni stakeholders and
close coordination within the international community
to find solutions.
On the subject of massive challenges Yemenis face in
going about their daily lives, I regret to have to highlight
yet again how restrictions of freedom of movement for
both people and goods continue to impose significant
hardship on the Yemeni population, especially women.
In Taiz, I heard about and saw first-hand how road
closures and checkpoints hinder civilians’ ability to
seek medical care, education and trade opportunities.
The roads must be opened. Similarly, Sana’a airport
must reopen. Impediments to imports and the domestic
distribution of fuel also continue to cause hardship for
civilians and should be removed, including by, but not
limited to, lifting restrictions on Al-Hudaydah port.
Movement of people and goods is not a geographically
isolated problem. It is a serious issue across the country
that needs to be addressed by the conflict parties and
supported by the international community.
As a final point with regard to the latest
developments, I would like to add my disappointment

S/PV. 8929

about the detention of United Nations staff members
that Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham
will comment on in his briefing.
Allow me now to come back to my engagement
so far, and the conclusions I draw from them. I have
devoted these first three months of my tenure to efforts
set forth in the outline I presented at my first briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.8854). The primary aim has
been to engage with a diverse array of Yemenis on how
to reverse the current escalatory trajectory and start a
political process. This effort has included numerous
meetings, both inside Yemen and in the region. The
discussions have often been difficult, which highlights
both the complexities and the gravity of the conflict.
An understandable sense of frustration and despair has
been evident in my conversations, as past attempts at
finding solutions have not delivered the desired results.
The other aim of the beginning of my tenure has
been to establish close relations of trust with Member
States in the region to seek their support for a political
process. I have also engaged members of the Security
Council on these matters and am grateful for the support
expressed for my efforts.
The efforts of the past years to reach an agreement
based on the conflict parties’ preconditions have not
yet delivered, and my view is that this is partly due
to the fact that the parties’ conditions are tied up in
political questions that can only be addressed through
more comprehensive talks. Let us therefore be frank.
Given that the parties have not met to discuss a broader
set of issues for over five years, establishing a renewed
political process is a complicated task. The conflict has
continued unabated since the talks in Kuwait in 2016,
and the gaps between the parties have only widened. In
order to have constructive talks about the way forward,
some common understandings should be reached.
On this note, I would like to reiterate that a serious
commitment to peace requires, at a minimum, granting
unconditional and regular access to the Envoy. All
communication channels need to be kept open if we
are to have any chance of finding a durable solution to
this conflict.
As the conflict intensifies, and from my discussions
with Yemenis and others over the past three months, I
am convinced of the need for a comprehensive approach
and have drawn a number of conclusions about the
way forward. First, piecemeal solutions can at best
only provide temporary relief. They will not produce

21-395123/19

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

sustainable peace. Immediate needs and priorities must
be addressed within the context of a process that is
geared towards a comprehensive political settlement.
Secondly, a solution will not be sustainable if it
does not represent the interests of diverse Yemenis, both
those who are involved in the fighting and those who
are not. We need to work towards a just and sustainable
peace, and not merely the absence of war.
Thirdly, structured and coordinated international
and regional support is essential for this process.
External actors have a responsibility to support
Yemenis as they discuss and build consensus on
peaceful solutions. They need to take concrete actions
that support the peace process and broader stability.
The support of the Security Council will be critical.
Based on these conclusions, I am envisaging an
inclusive Yemeni-owned and internationally supported
political process. The process should support near-term
solutions to de-escalate the violence, prevent further
economic deterioration and mitigate the impact of the
conflict on civilians. It should also identify and build
consensus around the elements of a political settlement
that sustainably ends the war, establishes inclusive
governance arrangements and ensures Yemenis’ civil,
political, social, economic and cultural rights.
The process should be designed in a way that
allows for parallel progress on different agenda items
of importance to Yemenis. It will address the parties’
stated priorities in the context of a broader agenda
that represents the interests of diverse Yemenis. I
want to initiate a comprehensive process that allows
for incremental progress. Engagement on this process
has already begun, involving a wide range of Yemeni
stakeholders, including the conflict parties, and it
will be intensified. Clearly this work is challenged by
the intensification of the military conflict. However,
military escalation should not be allowed to stop this
process, and in fact it makes the work that we are doing
all the more essential.
As I alluded to in my introduction, I remain
convinced that warring parties can, and indeed must,
talk, even if they are not ready to put down their arms.
Channels of communication should be open without
precondition, and as a matter of priority. I will continue
looking to the members of the Security Council to
support United Nations efforts to establish an inclusive,
comprehensive process for bringing this conflict finally
to a just and sustainable end.
4/19

14/12/2021

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grundberg for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: The humanitarian crisis in
Yemen continues to deteriorate as a result of conflict
and economic collapse. I will focus my remarks today
on what this means for civilians, what aid agencies are
trying to do about it and, crucially, what the world can
do to help.
Let us start with the war, which, despite repeated
international and domestic calls for a nationwide
ceasefire, has escalated along several fronts. In Ma’rib,
Ansar Allah forces continue their offensive, which has
displaced more than 45,000 people since September.
Indiscriminate shelling by Ansar Allah is being
reported with alarming regularity in Ma’rib, including
missiles that struck a camp for displaced people on
9 December, injuring five civilians.
Fighting also intensified in southern Hudaydah and
Taiz following the redeployment of Government-aligned
forces that the Special Envoy has just described. More
than 25,000 people have been displaced in these areas
since the redeployments. Civilian casualties have also
increased, including five civilians reportedly killed in
an air strike in Taiz on 3 December.
In parallel, hostilities have continued along nearly
50 front lines across the country. In recent weeks,
this has resulted in civilian casualties and damage to
civilian infrastructure following renewed air strikes in
Sana’a, heavy clashes in Sa’ada, missiles landing near
internally displaced person camps and other incidents.
All parties must uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian law at all times,
including obligations to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure and to facilitate impartial humanitarian
relief. We also renew our calls for Ansar Allah to
stop the Ma’rib offensive and for the parties to adopt
a nationwide ceasefire that will end the fighting
everywhere else.
In the meantime, aid agencies are doing everything
they can to help. In Ma’rib, Hudaydah and Taiz,
humanitarian partners have provided emergency aid
to about 80 per cent of recently displaced people, and,
across the country, the wider aid operation is helping
more than 11 million people every month – or about one
third of the population. These programmes are making
an enormous difference, but they also face serious gaps
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

in their ability to provide a comprehensive response to
the most vulnerable people in Marib and elsewhere.
This year’s response plan originally aimed to help
16 million people, or about 5 million more than we have
actually managed to reach.
Funding constraints are one major reason for the
gap and they are about to get worse. Looming shortfalls
mean that the World Food Programme must consider
cutting back food rations for millions of hungry people
in the coming weeks and months. UNICEF may also
have to cut back support for hundreds of thousands of
malnourished children, as well as water and sanitation
activities. Critical sectors such as water, sanitation,
health and shelter have been drastically underfunded all
year, receiving no more than 20 per cent of requirements.
Camp coordination — which in places like Marib
is an absolutely essential service for an effective
internally displaced persons response, including the
protection of women and children — has received
just 9 per cent of requirements. We call on donors to
increase their support for Yemen and especially to
ensure that their support does not decrease next year.
We expect the 2022 response plan to be about as big
as this year’s, which asked for $3.85 billion to help
16 million people. Nationwide assessments are under
way now to support that.
Beyond funding, humanitarian partners are also
thinking carefully about how we can improve our own
operations. An inter-agency evaluation of the Yemen
response is currently under way. Results will be out
in the new year and findings will be incorporated into
the 2022 response plan. Of course, we continue to call
on all parties to facilitate principled aid delivery in
Yemen, in line with international humanitarian law. Aid
agencies continue too often face delays at checkpoints,
visa problems, security threats, harassment and
other obstacles.
Despite some improvements over the past year,
many of the most difficult challenges persist in areas
controlled by Ansar Allah, including restrictions on the
movement of aid workers and unacceptable attempts to
interfere with the selection of partners or beneficiaries.
That has to stop.
We are also extremely disappointed that Ansar Allah
authorities continue to detain two United Nations staff
members in Sana’a, as the Special Envoy mentioned.
That is despite assurances from their leadership, which
we conveyed to the Council last month in consultations,

S/PV. 8929

that they would be quickly released. To date, we have
had no access to the detained staff and have received no
official information concerning their arrest.
In Government-held areas, aid agencies are
concerned about the apparent rise in bureaucratic
hurdles, including visa delays and cumbersome
procedures to approve aid projects. We have raised
those issues with the Government and are working
together to resolve them.
We are also deeply concerned about the arrest
several weeks ago of a United Nations contractor in
Marib. Despite requests to senior Government officials,
the United Nations has not been granted access to the
person in question. Neither have we received any official
information on the arrest, which like those in Sana’a
appear to be violations of the privileges and immunities
of the United Nations. We call for immediate access
to the staff and official information to be shared with
regard to the arrests.
The biggest challenge for the aid operation,
however, is actually not funding, access or security.
It is the fact that despite scaling up assistance, the
underlying problems just keep getting worse. That is
because Yemen’s economy remains in freefall, pushing
millions more people into dependence on humanitarian
aid, but humanitarian aid is not the way to solve
those problems.
As I said last month, there are substantial
opportunities for improving the economic situation
right away, even before the war ends. Everyone,
including donors, Member States and the parties
themselves, should act on those opportunities now.
The United Nations has developed an economic
framework that sets out a way forward. Yemen mostly
relies on commercial imports to meet its survival
needs; therefore, the framework mostly seeks to boost
purchasing power, reduce the cost of imported goods
and improve macroeconomic stability.
That will require a mix of financial and political
investments. For example, funding will be needed
to resume foreign-exchange injections through the
Central Bank. Such injections would, as in the past,
help stabilize the Yemeni rial — a key factor in people’s
ability to afford food and other essential goods. The
Government is keen to work with partners to devise
a feasible programme for those injections. I note the
recent appointment of a new Governor and Board of
Directors for the Central Bank in Aden and I urge

21-395125/19

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen’s partners to work closely with them to improve
economic conditions in the country.
Other measures in the economic framework, such
as lifting restrictions on commercial imports through
the Red Sea ports, will require political commitments.
Ending those restrictions will help lower commodity
prices and import revenue could then be used to pay
civil servants’ salaries, which one quarter of Yemenis
rely on. The United Nations is eager to work with
everyone to find a way to make that happen.
The vision is to roll out those and other economic
framework activities in parallel with the humanitarian
response next year. As the economy improves,
humanitarian needs will start to reduce. Eventually,
the size of the aid operation could start to reduce as
well. To be clear, though, we are not there yet. Yemen
continues requires a massive humanitarian response, at
least through next year. As we deliver that response, we
will need adequate funding for all sectors and we will
need all parties to ensure an operating environment that
facilitates principled aid delivery.
We also call on everyone to do more to help Yemen
end the crisis for good. That means implementing the
United Nations economic framework in parallel with
the immediate humanitarian response, helping people
both to survive and take care of themselves. It also
means moving towards a political solution as quickly
as possible. In that regard, I would like to offer my
unqualified support for the Special Envoy’s call for
regular and unconditional access to the parties. Peace
is the only sustainable solution in Yemen and in order
to achieve peace everyone must be willing to talk.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Rajasingham for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham for their briefings, which were both
informative and very sobering.
The United Kingdom is also deeply concerned
about the further escalation in the conflict in Yemen
over the past month. It pushes the country deeper into a
humanitarian crisis, with increased civilian casualties
and displacement. We are particularly worried by the
impact of fighting on front lines in populated areas,
such as Al-Hudaydah, Taiz and Marib.
6/19

14/12/2021

We also once again condemn the continued
Houthi attacks across Yemen’s border into Saudi
Arabia, including the recent ballistic missile attack
near Riyadh. Such attacks are unacceptable and
diminish the opportunity for real progress towards a
political settlement.
As the military picture worsens, the humanitarian
imperatives increase. Facilitating humanitarian access
across the country to those in need is paramount. The
United Kingdom calls on the Government of Yemen
to facilitate access for non-governmental agency
partners to the country to help deliver much-needed
life-saving assistance.
We are encouraged by the new appointment of
Ahmed bin Ahmed Ghaleb Al-Maabqi as the Governor
of the Central Bank of Yemen, but the Government of
Yemen must commit to carrying out necessary economic
reforms now, as Mr. Rajasingham emphasized. The
international community and international financial
institutions must also continue to assist the Government
of Yemen in the implementation of reform and the
facilitation of immediate external financial assistance.
We should also not lose sight of the humanitarian
urgency of diffusing the threat posed by FSO SAFER
oil tanker, which continues to deteriorate off the coast
of Yemen, risking an oil spill that would devastate the
livelihoods of nearly 4 million people.
Lastly, I should like to express our appreciation
to Hans Grundberg for his continued efforts to chart
a way forward for peace in Yemen. I know that the
international community looks forward to receiving
his road map and we are committed to helping him and
mobilizing behind the United Nations-led approach.
The United Kingdom calls on all parties to work with
the United Nations to reach sustainable peace in Yemen.
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would like
to thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and AssistantSecretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for their
insightful briefings. I also welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of Yemen in our
meeting today.
On the peace process, we welcome Mr. Grundberg’s
diplomatic efforts to engage more partners and
stakeholders for an inclusive political process in Yemen.
We encourage regional partners and concerned parties
to continue supporting his work.
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

On the security front, we are gravely concerned
about the situation in 2021, which has shown no sign
of improvement in comparison with the previous year.
Intensified military fighting and cross-border attacks
have caused severe casualties on both sides, including
civilians in Yemen. Those acts undermine peace efforts
in Yemen and stability in the region, while causing
more suffering for the Yemeni people.
We therefore stress the urgent need for the cessation
of hostilities in all parts of Yemen, especially Marib,
and a return to talks and support for the Special Envoy’s
efforts to reach a comprehensive political settlement
to the conflict. We also encourage concerned parties
to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement and the
Riyadh Agreement. In that process, it is necessary for
the international community and regional partners to
create a conducive environment for United Nations-led
mediation and negotiations among parties.
On the humanitarian issue, we cannot stress enough
how much we remain worried about the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen. The protracted conflict, the economic
crisis, food insecurity, the collapse of essential services
and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
inter alia, have posed enormous challenges to the
already deteriorating situation in the country. Due to
those challenges, many Yemeni people are unable to
access basic services.
We condemn the recent attacks that killed civilians,
especially women and children, in Aden and Marib. It is
also frustrating to learn from the findings of the recent
UNICEF report that four Yemeni children have been
killed every day since the escalation of the conflict
in March 2015. We are also very concerned about the
detaining of United Nations staff.
In that context, we call for full compliance with
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law, the protection of civilians, including women
and children, and the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2573 (2021), including the protection
of civilian infrastructure.
We also reiterate our call for predictable funding
for humanitarian aid and other adequate support for
Yemen. It is also essential to ensure the free movement
of people and goods into and across Yemen and provide
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance.
Last but not least, we urge the Houthis to provide
the United Nations team with access so they can carry

S/PV. 8929

out the necessary assessments and repairs on the FSO
SAFER oil tanker without delay.
Like their peers elsewhere in the world, Yemeni
children deserve the right to live in peace, go to school
and forge a bright future for their country. We hope that
their dreams will come true.
As our term in the Council comes to a close, we
remain hopeful that United Nations-led comprehensive
political solutions to the Yemen will be reached in the
near future. We stand ready to support the goal of peace
and stability in Yemen.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I wish to thank our briefers, Mr. Hans
Grundberg and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for their
briefings. I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen and look forward to his
statement later.
As we have heard this morning, the humanitarian
situation in Yemen remains dire and the needs of the
Yemeni people clear. With continued conflict, Yemen’s
economy will deteriorate further and with it the
livelihoods of millions of Yemenis. Lives will continue
to be endangered and generations of Yemenis to come
will bear the scars.
I once again wish to thank Special Envoy
Grundberg for his briefing. As alarming as it was, we
are encouraged by his efforts to consult a broad range
of Yemenis as he develops his new framework for the
inclusive political process so urgently needed in that
conflict. All parties must meaningfully engage with him
in that political process. To that end, the Council has an
important voice. We must continue to urge all parties to
work in good faith with Special Envoy Grundberg and
we must speak out if and when any party fails to do so.
Unfortunately, we have seen a series of Houthi
actions in recent months that undermine peace. Last
month, the Council came together to condemn in the
strongest terms the detention by the Houthis of local
staff of the United States Government in Sana’a, as
well as the breach by the Houthi security services
of the compound formerly used as our embassy. The
Council’s statement was followed by similar statements
from nearly two dozen countries and multilateral
organizations. I wish to thank those countries and
organizations for their support and clear messages
that such action represents an affront to the entire
international community.

21-395127/19

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

Yet still the Houthis continue to detain and harass
our local Yemeni staff and intrude in the former
embassy compound. The Houthis must immediately
release — unharmed — all current and former Yemeni
employees of the United States. They must immediately
vacate the United States compound and return all seized
property and cease making threats against their own
fellow citizens simply for being employed by us.
Similarly, the Houthis have ignored repeated calls
from the Council and the international community to
cease their offensive in Marib province. The offensive
endangers thousands of civilians and the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
has warned that it could lead to the displacement
of half a million people. The Houthis must stop that
offensive immediately.
On 9 December, a Houthi missile hit an internally
displaced persons camp managed by the International
Organization for Migration. Five children were among
those injured. That is unacceptable. We condemn, in
the strongest terms, that and similar all too frequent
attacks against civilians.
We also condemn the intensification of Houthi
cross-border attacks on Saudi Arabia in recent months,
including three ballistic missiles launched at Riyadh
just last week. The Houthis have conducted well over
350 such attacks this year — a staggering number and a
shocking increase over last year’s total.
Those provocative and dangerous actions are
impediments to peace. They also underscore the
need for Iran to end its lethal support to the Houthis,
which contravenes Council resolutions and enables the
Houthis’ reckless attacks. Each of those Houthi attacks
on its own is unacceptable, but together they send a
chilling and unmistakable signal about the Houthis’
unwillingness to participate in a peaceful political
process or in a future Government that upholds the rule
of law.
While the Houthis continue their escalatory
actions, we welcome the efforts of other parties to
improve conditions in Yemen, including the United
Nations initiative to scale up its approach in addressing
the drivers of food insecurity throughout Yemen.
In addition, like the United Kingdom, we are
encouraged by the appointment on 6 December of a new
Governor and Chair of the Board of the Central Bank of
Yemen, as well as other new Board members. We hope
8/19

14/12/2021

that those appointments serve as a step forward towards
addressing the economic instability that is deepening
humanitarian suffering and that they will advance the
needed reforms. However, true progress cannot be
sustained without additional resources. We hope that
countries can seize this moment to support Yemen’s
economy and bring urgently needed relief to its people.
The Special Envoy’s strong appeal for action has been
heard loudly and clearly by the Council.
Finally, the FSO SAFER tanker remains an
environmental, humanitarian and economic threat of
vast proportions. The Houthis bear responsibility for
the situation, and the United States supports discussion
of any solution that can safely and urgently address it.
The Yemeni people deserve peace and prosperity.
In the face of Houthi provocations, harassment and
violence against its own people, I want the Houthi
to know that the United States will never give up on
the people of Yemen. I again thank Special Envoy
Grundberg for his proactive efforts during his first
few months to kickstart the peace process. I hope that
the Council will continue to stand united as we do
everything in our power to bring this conflict to an end.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We thank our briefers for their presentations this
morning. We welcome our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Yemen.
It is unfortunate that we have to begin our remarks
today with a statement of condemnation of the
continued hostilities in Yemen, including the recent
indiscriminate strikes that landed on an internally
displaced persons camp in Ma’rib and the bombing in
Hajjah, both of which resulted in loss of life. We echo
the calls for an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire
and for the parties to engage in political dialogue.
For years, the conflict in Yemen has continued
unabated, leading to consequences that will reverberate
even after a political solution is achieved. Lives and
livelihoods have been lost, critical infrastructure
destroyed and the health-care system fractured. The
economy has been decimated and food insecurity
has intensified, with many lacking the purchasing
power to access basic food and essential services. The
multifaceted nature of this conflict demands that a
solution be equally multifaceted.
In that regard, a political solution to the
armed conflict must be pursued in parallel with a
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

comprehensive plan to reinvigorate the economy. Those
two factors, that is, the lack of a political solution and
the decimated economy, are drivers of the conflict and
are deeply connected to the catastrophic humanitarian
situation. That has left millions in need of assistance,
including nutrition, health care and critical Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene for All supplies. To that end,
we appeal to donors to disburse funds and increase
pledges with a sense of urgency to ensure a sustained
humanitarian operation, and we call on the parties to
honour their obligations under international law to
ensure and facilitate the safe and unhindered delivery
of humanitarian aid to those most in need.
While we underscore the indispensable nature of
humanitarian aid, we also note that that is merely a
palliative response to the symptoms of the conflict, not
a solution. Our ultimate goal is a durable end to the
daily suffering of the people in Yemen, which can be
achieved only through an inclusive political solution.
This is the final statement that Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines will deliver on this file in the Security
Council. Since our assumption of responsibilities on
1 January 2020, we have repeated our appeals monthly
for the parties to commit to a sustained cessation of
hostilities and the resumption of an inclusive political
process that is Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned and
reflective of all groups within Yemeni society. Women
cannot be excluded from the process, but must instead
be afforded the opportunity to meaningfully participate
in decision-making and in shaping the agendas
and practices.
While there exists diplomatic momentum within
the international community for an end to the conflict,
that momentum will not be translated into concrete
action on the ground without the political will of the
parties. We appeal to stakeholders with influence to
engage constructively with the parties to the conflict
to encourage an end to the violence and a resumption
of dialogue.
To our counterparts in the Security Council, as we
take our leave, we urge them to remain united on this
file, with the well-being of the Yemeni people and the
peace, security and prosperity of their nation and the
region at the forefront of all discussions and actions. On
that note, we reiterate our support for all efforts made
in good faith to address the ongoing threat posed by the
FSO SAFER oil tanker.

S/PV. 8929

In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
will continue to stand in solidarity with the Yemeni
people as this organ works towards the discharge of
its mandate, in line with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is time for the people of
Yemen to experience the state of peace that they
inherently deserve.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Grundberg and Acting Assistant
Secretary-General Rajasingham for their briefings. I
also welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen
to today’s meeting.
This is the last time that the Security Council will
consider the issue of Yemen this year. In the past year,
the situation in Yemen has not improved; instead, in
general it has deteriorated. Military hostilities in
Ma’rib and on other fronts have caused a large number
of casualties. Frequent attacks on civilian facilities
in Saudi Arabia have seriously threatened the safety
of civilians. China is deeply concerned about such
developments. As the Special Envoy rightly said in
his briefing just now, what has been happening on the
battlefield fully demonstrates that no one side can be
a winner, there is no way out by military means and a
political settlement is essential.
China supports the peace process in Yemen
mediated by the United Nations and welcomes the
peace initiative proposed by Saudi Arabia in March.
Special Envoy Grundberg just mentioned a number of
preliminary conclusions based on his earlier contacts
with all parties. We hope that the Special Envoy can use
that as a starting point and put forward an actionable
road map for peace as soon as possible. All parties in
Yemen must put the country’s future and the people’s
interests first, return to the right track of dialogue and
negotiation without delay and facilitate the work of the
Special Envoy through support and cooperation.
With regard to matters such as achieving a ceasefire
in Ma’rib and the lifting of the blockade on Sana’a
airport and Al-Hudaydah port, all parties to the conflict
must demonstrate political will, continue to move in the
same direction and find solutions to the key issues that
are acceptable to all. The countries concerned should
also create an enabling external environment for the
restoration of peace and stability in Yemen.
During the six-year conflict in Yemen, food
prices have more than doubled, employment has
shrunk and the population’s purchasing power has

21-395129/19

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

declined, repeatedly pushing the country to the brink
of famine. While Yemen’s humanitarian needs are
becoming increasingly urgent, in the context of the
coronavirus disease pandemic and increasing global
humanitarian needs, the humanitarian resources that
can be mobilized and allocated to Yemen are declining.
We in the international community must provide more
effective and sustainable means in response to Yemen’s
economic and humanitarian crisis to protect and save
more lives.
In that regard, the United Nations recently
launched the Yemen Economic Framework, which
seeks to provide short-term and medium- to longterm assistance in a phased manner. It is committed
to ensuring emergency food aid to Yemen, improving
local food productivity and the population’s purchasing
power, reducing the prices of imported food and
promoting market liquidity. China commends that.
We encourage the international community, including
donor countries, to increase bilateral and multilateral
assistance to Yemen and coordinate more closely with
the United Nations system.
We welcome the recent adjustments made by the
Yemeni Government to its financial and fiscal sectors,
which enable them to function in a more professional
and efficient manner, thereby bolstering international
confidence in Yemen’s economy.
I would also like to emphasize that the parties
to the conflict must guarantee safe and unhindered
humanitarian access, maintain the operation of all
ports and ensure immediate delivery of humanitarian
goods to those in need.
The issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker must be
addressed without delay. We hope that the Houthis will
fulfil its commitment to allowing the United Nations
team to board the vessel to conduct inspections and
repairs without delay.
Mr. Ndung’u (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg and Acting Assistant Secretary-General
Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. I also welcome
the participation of the representative of Yemen.
The recent withdrawal of coalition forces from
Al-Hudaydah and the inability to build cohesion
between the Government and the Southern
Transitional Council forces showcase a serious
challenge to the full implementation of the Riyadh and
Stockholm agreements.
10/19

14/12/2021

The growing internal divisions among the parties
have further fragmented Yemen. There is a need for
dialogue to enable a national reconciliation that will
further a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned peace process
and recovery. We encourage the Special Envoy to work
with relevant stakeholders to develop a framework that
furthers dialogue and reconciliation.
Increasingly, armed groups in multiple countries,
including Yemen and Somalia, are using the Red
Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean off the
coast of Somalia to smuggle weapons that directly
feed the conflict. There have been multiple captures
of smuggling vessels, indicating that more could be
traversing the area unimpeded.
That undermines existing arms embargoes and
increasingly threatens peace and security in the
Middle East and the Horn of Africa. It also undermines
the decisions of the Security Council, and should
therefore be met with stronger actions to tighten the
implementation of the existing embargoes. It is for the
Security Council to make clear its determination to
deal with those supplying arms to the conflicts in the
region and benefiting from the suffering of the people
of Yemen.
We remain deeply concerned about the deteriorating
economic situation and welcome the appointment of the
Governor of the Central Bank and the proposals for a
recovery framework as positive steps. For that initiative
to succeed, it will need to integrate the operations of
the Central Bank.
We also recognize and support the need for
increasing humanitarian assistance. However, the
people of Yemen should not be solely dependent on
international assistance; such aid should be structured
in a way that stimulates local economies and enables
the growth of livelihood that further promotes growth.
More should also be done to grow livelihood activities,
with an important focus on women and children.
We remain concerned at the situation of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker anchored off the coast of Al-Hudaydah.
We continue to urge the Houthis to demonstrate that
they have a sense of responsibility, not only to the
people of Yemen but also to the regional as a whole. A
spill under their watch would have catastrophic impacts
on the millions of people in the region who depend on
the sea for their livelihood and survival.
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8929

With regard to the violence in Ma’rib, there have
been a large number of casualties. We note that the
capture of Ma’rib will provide only access to resources
but will not end the conflict in Yemen.

the human rights situation in Yemen in order to promote
accountability and the fight against impunity.

In conclusion, Kenya supports the efforts
undertaken by the Special Envoy and all relevant
stakeholders aimed at seeking security and stability
in Yemen.

We repeat our call upon the parties to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian aid and agree on the impact
of fuel and commercial imports through Al-Hudaydah
port. We also commend the efforts of the United Nations
efforts to develop a strategic approach to improving
Yemen’s economic situation and urge all parties to
engage with those efforts constructively.

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Acting Assistant Secretary-General
Rajasingham for their briefings.
Estonia is deeply concerned about the continued
hostilities in several parts of Yemen.
The situation is particularly worrying around
Ma’rib, where the Houthis have continued their
escalation, resulting in civilian casualties and further
displacement. It is alarming that since September
alone, 45,000 additional people have been displaced
in the Ma’rib area. Special focus should be placed on
the protection of women and children, who make up
80 per cent of the 1 million internally displaced persons
currently located in Ma’rib.
It is also worrisome that after the withdrawal of
pro-Government forces from Al-Hudaydah, the fighting
has also intensified on the Red Sea coast, leading to the
displacement of more than 25,000 people.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of the
Houthis’ cross-border attacks on Saudi Arabia. All
parties should refrain from escalating hostilities and
indiscriminate attacks against civilian objects.
We fully support Special Envoy Grundberg and
urge all parties to engage without preconditions in the
United Nations-led efforts to achieve peace. Only an
inclusive political process can bring a lasting solution
to the conflict. In that context, we welcome the Yemeni
Tribal Forum, which was held last week in Amman. It is
also essential to increase the meaningful participation
of women and young people in the peace negotiations
and involve them more widely in politics.
Estonia calls for placing more focus on the issue of
human rights, including by ensuring better coordination
among different United Nations agencies. While the
Human Rights Council failed to extend the mandate of
the Group of Eminent Experts, it is more vital for the
Security Council to intensify its calls for monitoring

Additional efforts are also needed to improve the
humanitarian situation.

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to convey our
thanks to our briefers, even if the news we received is
far from good.
As the Council convenes to consider Yemen for the
final time this year, I would like to make four points.
First, with regard to the military situation, I deeply
regret that despite all efforts to secure peace this year
has seen a further deadly deterioration on the ground.
The truth is that Yemenis want to wake up from this
nightmare. Just last week, more than 40 tribal leaders
convened and called for a comprehensive and immediate
ceasefire. Each month in this Chamber, Ireland calls for
the same. We will continue to do so until the parties to
the conflict finally bring the unconscionable violence
to an end.
We call on the Houthis to immediately halt their
offensive on Ma’rib. The International Organization
for Migration estimates that since September 46,000
people have been displaced in Ma’rib, many for the
fourth or fifth time. Vulnerable civilians, especially
women and children, continue to bear the brunt of the
hostilities. Just last week, we saw further deplorable
attacks against the internally displaced person camps
where the most vulnerable seek refuge.
We are also deeply concerned about the recent
deterioration in and around Al-Hudaydah, in particular
the humanitarian consequences of the further
displacement of 25,000 people. We call on all parties to
respect the Stockholm Agreement and we reiterate our
full support for the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement.
We strongly condemn cross-border attacks into
Saudi Arabia, such as the missile attack targeting
Riyadh last week. All parties must respect international
humanitarian law and protect civilian lives.

21-3951211/19

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, I turn to the political process. We deeply
appreciate Special Envoy Grundberg’s ongoing efforts
to consult with actors in Yemen and beyond, as well as
the priority he affords to inclusivity, which we believe
is critical. However, we know that those efforts must be
matched by decisive political will from the parties to
engage seriously with the Special Envoy. More than six
years of crisis in Yemen have shown that no one party
can hold a monopoly on governance. All parties must
accept that reality in order to move towards an inclusive
and diverse political landscape.
As we have repeatedly stated and as others today
have said, women and young people must be an integral
part of that endeavour. We have heard from Yemeni
women peacebuilders in the Security Council and their
message is clear and consistent — all aspects of Yemen’s
peace negotiations must be gender-mainstreamed and
women’s participation must happen in all diplomatic
tracks and at all stages of the peace process. We stand
with the women of Yemen in seeking their places in
those forums.
Thirdly, I want to address the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. It is abundantly clear that the
economic impact of the conflict is one of the most
significant drivers of the humanitarian crisis, with
truly severe consequences for the levels of hunger
across the country.
Ireland welcomes the economic framework
for Yemen proposed by the United Nations and
we encourage all parties, including international
financial institutions, to constructively engage with
those proposals. We really cannot condemn Yemen’s
population to yet another year of catastrophic food
insecurity and poverty. We have an obligation to do
everything we can here in order to avert that.
We also appeal for the immediate release of the
three United Nations agency staff detained in Yemen.
Such actions are totally unjustifiable here, as they
are everywhere else, and we look forward to positive
developments soon in that regard.
Finally, let me conclude with a message to the
people of Yemen — Ireland will not tire in its efforts to
strive for the accountability they deserve and to address
impunity for violations, which have been widely
documented throughout the conflict years. We believe
that evidence-based monitoring and an independent,
international and impartial capacity to follow the
12/19

14/12/2021

deteriorating human rights situation are absolutely
essential. The people of Yemen deserve nothing less.
Looking ahead to 2022, all actors bear a heavy
responsibility to ensure that next year finally marks the
end of this deadly conflict. The international community,
including the Council, bears its own responsibility
to stand firmly united behind such efforts. Ireland is
certainly committed to playing its part.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Hans Grundberg, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham,
Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their important briefings on the latest
developments in the Yemeni conflict. I also welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative of
Yemen in today’s meeting.
Tunisia expresses its concern about the escalation
of the fighting in Yemen. We stress once again that no
military solution be can be a solution to the protracted
Yemeni crisis. The past few years of fighting have only
brought about destruction, killing, displacement and
the unprecedented deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, in addition to a collapse of the economy,
livelihoods and an escalation of tensions and instability
in the entire region.
We therefore stress that there is no alternative to a
comprehensive political solution based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions and other agreed terms
of reference. That solution should also be based on
constructive and peaceful negotiations that uphold the
national interests of the Yemeni people and must put an
end to their suffering and restore security and stability.
Moreover, the solution must guarantee the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Yemen. That in turn cannot be achieved unless
there is an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire;
a resumption of political negotiations, with the active
participation of women and young people; and the
facilitation of humanitarian access in order to save lives
and deliver unimpeded assistance to those in need, who
constitute more than half of the population of Yemen,
including millions of women and children.
In that context, we renew our support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy and welcome his comprehensive
approach. We would also like to commend all
regional and international parties for their efforts to
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

put an end to the violence and reactivate the political
settlement process.
We also commend the communiqué of the Yemeni
Tribal Forum, which was held in the Jordanian capital
with the participation of more than 40 Yemeni tribal
leaders. The conference underlined the need to reach
a comprehensive and immediate ceasefire agreement,
open all roads and humanitarian corridors, and
secure the release of detainees and prisoners. It also
called upon all parties to immediately engage in
the initiative sponsored by the United Nations and
adhere to the implementation of the Riyadh and
Stockholm Agreements.
We also call upon the Houthis to announce their
commitment to a political solution and we condemn
their attacks on the Ma’rib and Taiz governorates,
among others, as well as their attacks against the
territories of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, with the
targeting of civilian installations. We reiterate the need
for all parties to respect international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We reiterate our deep concern about the seriously
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen. That
trend will continue as long as the fighting continues.
There are many indicators of the difficulties faced by
the population in obtaining access to basic food and
health services and there are signs of worsening food
insecurity, which call for increased and concerted
efforts to support humanitarian relief operations.
We therefore call for increased financial support for
humanitarian activities in Yemen and the lifting of all
related restrictions.
Maintaining the status quo with regard to the
FSO SAFER oil tanker without a solution threatens
an unprecedented environmental, economic, maritime
and humanitarian catastrophe — not only in Yemen
but also in the entire region. In that regard, we once
again call on the Houthis to take a positive approach to
the matter and facilitate the access of maintenance and
repair teams.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg and Acting Assistant Secretary-General
Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. I welcome the
Permanent Representative of Yemen to this meeting.
We are deeply concerned about the ongoing
escalation of hostilities in Yemen. The military campaign
of Ansar Allah and the consequent intensification of

S/PV. 8929

fighting in Ma’rib governorate and the surrounding
areas have caused large-scale displacements and
restricted the movement of civilians and humanitarian
access to the people in need in the governorate.
Another development of concern is the shift in the
front lines in Al-Hudaydah because of the redeployment
of forces aligned with the Government of Yemen away
from the Al-Hudaydah port city, which has resulted
in Ansar Allah taking up key positions in those
territories and the alteration of the political-security
dynamics in Al-Hudaydah. The civilian population
has been displaced as well. We encourage the parties
to coordinate all future redeployments with the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement.
We also condemn cross-border attacks on Saudi Arabia.
Yemenis continue to bear the brunt of the
protracted conflict in their day-to-day lives. While the
Yemeni Government and international and national
aid organizations have exerted considerable efforts
to alleviate their plight, the underlying causes of the
humanitarian crisis have not been addressed. The
considerable economic decline and the coronavirus
disease pandemic have only compounded the dire
situation for the Yemeni people, especially children.
We support the call of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
for concrete short-term and long-term measures that
could help improve the economic situation in Yemen,
and we welcome OCHA’s efforts aimed at establishing
an economic framework to address the issue. Such
measures as regular payment of salaries of Government
employees, removing restrictions on essential
commodities and humanitarian goods, and foreign
exchange injections through the Central Bank can
have quick and transformative impacts. International
support — political and financial — is an essential
requirement for the framework to be successful.
I also underscore the urgent need to address the
issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which represents
a serious threat that could cause an unprecedented
environmental, economic, maritime and humanitarian
crisis in the region. Ansar Allah should prioritize a
solution for the repair and maintenance of the FSO
SAFER with a sense of urgency.
As a long-standing friend of Yemen, India reiterates
its call for an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire
across Yemen, followed by a robust and inclusive
political process with full respect for Yemen’s unity,

21-3951213/19

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. I
call upon all parties to the conflict to end the fighting
and engage unconditionally with Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg in his efforts to seek a political solution to
the conflict. We support his inclusive approach aimed
at getting all the parties in Yemen to the negotiating
table. Such an inclusive approach must not only extend
across parties, but within them as well, through the full
and meaningful participation of women. We encourage
him to continue his coordination with the countries in
the region, as their cooperation would be critical to
reaching a long-lasting solution to the Yemeni conflict.
We also call on countries in the region with influence
on Yemeni parties to exert sincere efforts aimed at
restoring peace and order in Yemen, as this is in the
shared interests of everyone.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Mr. Grundberg and Mr. Rajasingham
for their briefings.

14/12/2021

release. While the needs are immense, it is essential
to allow humanitarian operators to deliver aid. This
is essential for speeding up the vaccination campaign
against the coronavirus disease. In this respect,
we call for the immediate issuance of visas for
humanitarian personnel.
France supports the efforts of the Special Envoy
aimed at relaunching the political process. It calls on
all Yemeni parties to cooperate in good faith with
him and recalls that there should be no preconditions
to meeting him. Only a comprehensive and inclusive
political process can bring stability to the country. The
international parameters, including the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, are well known.
Actors from the region have an important role to play.
They must be able to contribute, within the framework
set by the Special Envoy, to facilitating negotiations
between the parties, in the spirit of the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council.

The dynamics on the ground in Yemen are
very worrying. The security situation continues to
deteriorate. France shares the concern expressed by
the Special Envoy, namely, that the escalation on the
ground is serious. Since the beginning of the conflict,
we have been saying that the military option will lead
nowhere because it locks the parties into a cycle of
murderous violence.

The FSO SAFER tanker continues to be an
environmental time bomb. The Houthis must allow
immediate access without preconditions. Their
blackmail is unacceptable.

The manifestations of this violence are visible
everywhere on the ground: deadly clashes, bombings and
displacements of people. France strongly condemns the
Houthi attacks on Saudi Arabia. They must stop. They
threaten the security of Saudi territory and constitute
an attack on the stability of the region. France reiterates
its call for a nationwide ceasefire. In the south, the
deterioration of the situation, particularly economic,
is worrying. We reiterate our support for the Yemeni
Government and call for the full implementation of the
Riyadh Agreement so that tensions can be brought to a
lasting end.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and the
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham, for their substantive briefings.

The unbearable suffering inflicted on the Yemeni
people continues. In Ma’rib, rocket fire recently hit
camps for displaced persons, which is absolutely
unacceptable. We cannot repeat it enough: international
humanitarian law is an obligation for all. I am
thinking in particular of the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
We condemn the arbitrary arrest by the Houthis of
two United Nations staff and call for their immediate
14/19

I assure the Special Envoy of our support. France
remains fully prepared to help bring this conflict to
an end.

We are closely following developments in the
situation in the Republic of Yemen. For more than seven
years now, there has been an ongoing bloody conflict
with no end in sight. The political process remains
stalled under the Stockholm and Riyadh Agreements.
This is coupled with a widespread uptick in violence
and increased hostilities on all fronts, including Ma’rib
and Shabwah provinces.
Stagnation in the political process is nearing the
point of no return. After that, piecing the mosaic of the
Yemeni State back together will simply not be possible.
Given this, the international community should
recognize that the reality is that the parties have dug
their heels in and are not prepared to relaunch direct
negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations. In
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

this context, the mediation efforts of the Special Envoy
aimed at bringing the parties to the Yemeni conflict to
the negotiating table are and will remain unsuccessful.
We heard Mr. Grundberg’s views, especially with
regard to his future plans, and we are prepared to
support his efforts. However, it is becoming clear that
making progress within the existing framework for a
Yemeni settlement — and by that, I mean resolution
2216 (2015) — is no longer possible. The resolution,
adopted in 2015, has nothing whatsoever to do with
the situation on the ground in the Yemeni theatre
of hostilities.
The new reality is that the political landscape and
the balance of powers in the country have undergone
significant changes, which resolution 2216 (2015) quite
simply does not reflect. In this regard, we see a real
need for Council members to review the bases for
political settlement while maintaining the central role of
United Nations mediation efforts and the constructive
contribution of States of the region. Only in this way
can we help Mr. Grundberg, not just in words but in
deeds, develop a new road map for settlement that
would reconcile the numerous competing interests
of the various players in the Yemeni domestic
political conflict.
We would urge the members of Security Council
to think about a much-needed solution to this longstanding problem — a solution that would turn the
conflict into a peaceful political situation and provide
necessary assistance to millions of Yemen inhabitants
who desperately need humanitarian help. However, we
see that our ultimate aim is to reach a comprehensive
and long-term settlement of the numerous problems
facing Yemen, which are also felt to a significant extent
by Yemen’s neighbours. Unfortunately, we have to note
that, time after time, our Western colleagues prove how
quick they are to sacrifice the unity of the Council on
Yemen, guided purely by their own selfish interests.
They use the language of sanctions, thus rejecting the
possibility of finding any other kind of solution. Once
again, we reiterate that Security Council sanctions
should be used only to push the political process in
Yemen forward. Sanctions should not seek to increase
pressure on any one party to the conflict.
A source of grave concern is the serious
humanitarian situation in Yemen. As we heard from
Mr. Rajasingham, the situation, which is worsening
on a daily basis, increasingly resembles a full-scale

S/PV. 8929

humanitarian disaster. We are seriously concerned
by attacks on civilian facilities. We strongly urge
the warring parties to strictly comply with the
provisions of international humanitarian law and to
swiftly and fully refrain from hostilities, which are
destroying non-military infrastructure and causing
civilian casualties.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Acting Assistant
Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham and Special
Envoy Hans Grundberg for their valuable briefings.
As we heard from both briefers and as we approach
the end of the year and look back over the past 12 months,
in which we have grown increasingly concerned about
the situation in Yemen, we regret to see no signs of
de-escalation. We also continue to be concerned about
the recurring cross-border attacks into Saudi-Arabia.
Lately, we have also seen an increase in air strikes by
the coalition.
Increased violence in areas such as the governorates
of Ma’rib, Shabwa and Al-Hudaydah has had huge
consequences for the civilians in those areas. We
strongly urge all parties to show restraint. Norway has
repeatedly condemned the ongoing Houthi offensive
in Ma’rib. As fighting intensifies, we witness an
increasing number of displaced people living in camps
in Mar’ib governorate in difficult conditions. They
now total 45,000 in number — a tenfold increase since
September according to the International Organization
for Migration.
Just last week, there was also an attack on the
Al-Hamma camp in which four children and one
woman were injured. Unfortunately, that is not the first
attack on a camp for internally displaced persons. We
condemn such attacks. We urgently call on all parties
to respect international humanitarian law and protect
civilian lives.
Children continue to bear the main burden of the
conflict in Yemen. We are appalled by the latest report
by Save the Children, which documents Yemen as one
of the three countries in the world in which children are
most at risk of being recruited for use in armed conflict.
That is unacceptable.
I must also raise the recent developments in the
Al-Hudaydah governorate. Since the withdrawal of
coalition-supported forces, the condition for civilians
has worsened. We are concerned about the report
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

21-3951215/19

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

Affairs (OCHA) of the displacement of 25,000 people
in November alone.
We encourage the parties to the Stockholm
Agreement to accept the offer of the United Nations
Mission to support the Hudaydah Agreement and
facilitate discussions among the parties.
As stressed previously, the economic situation in
Yemen must be addressed and there is an urgent need to
stabilize the currency. In that regard, we join others in
welcoming the recent appointment of a new Governor,
Deputy Governor and Board of the Central Bank of
Yemen. Ambitious reforms and fighting corruption will
be key going forward.
We also echo the calls that OCHA and others have
made to the Houthis to urgently release detained United
Nations and United States staff members.
Lastly, after seven years of destruction and
violence, Norway urges the parties to devote renewed
vigour towards achieving peace. In that regard, I would
like to reaffirm our support for the Special Envoy and
his efforts to reach a sustainable, political settlement
to the conflict through a broad and inclusive political
process in which a variety of voices are heard. We call
on all parties to fully cooperate with the Special Envoy,
without preconditions and without delay.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Grundberg and
Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for
their briefings.
First, I would like to address the violence
prevailing in the country. The offensive against
Mar’ib has intensified, while at the same time we have
seen the re-emergence of other centres of conflict in
Al-Hudaydah and Taiz, as well as air strikes on Sana’a.
That violence has had a severe impact on the civilian
population and has led to new waves of displacement.
In that regard, we condemn the firing a few weeks ago
of two missiles — into a camp for internally displaced
persons run by the International Organization for
Migration in the governorate of Mar’ib and into
Saudi Arabia.
The parties to the conflict must uphold their
obligations
under
international
humanitarian
law, in particular the principles of distinction and
proportionality. We call on the parties to coordinate
with the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement the unilateral withdrawals of
16/19

14/12/2021

military contingents in order to avoid clashes. At the
same time, we underline the outcome of the most recent
conference of tribal Chiefs to reiterate the need for an
immediate nationwide ceasefire.
Moreover, in echoing the recent press statement
issued by the Security Council (SC/14707), my country,
Mexico, strongly condemns the raid on the compound
formerly used as the United States Embassy in Sana’a
and condemns the harassment and detention of many of
the Embassy’s former employees by Ansar Allah.
We also condemn the recent detention of two
United Nations staff members and urge the Houthis
to release them immediately. The parties must
guarantee due humanitarian space. The absence of an
impartial mechanisms to ensure accountability is also
regrettable. Such mechanisms to combat impunity are
imperative for social reconciliation in countries that
are torn by conflicts such as the conflict that Yemen
is experiencing.
With regard to the political situation, we welcome
the consultations that Special Envoy Grundberg
has continued to conduct both in Yemen and with
international partners and we are grateful for his
updates and tireless work. There is no military solution
to the conflict. The only successful solution will be
achieved through genuine political dialogue. It is
clear that without the will and genuine commitment of
the parties, little progress can be achieved towards a
peace agreement. Mexico therefore urges the parties
to engage in a comprehensive and inclusive United
Nations-facilitated political process.
The conflict has undoubtedly been one of the
main causes of the economic collapse. Consequently,
without the laying down of arms it will be impossible
to strengthen State institutions, without which it will in
turn be impossible to implement the needed economic
policies, such as the management of ports, the payment
of salaries to public servants and the collection of taxes.
In that regard, we welcome the appointment of the new
Governor of the Central Bank of Yemen.
We also welcome the proposals put forward by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
to advance the economic recovery. Accordingly,
we commend the efforts to efficiently coordinate
operations among the various United Nations agencies
and donor countries.
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Lastly, we note the discussions under way with a
private company that could lead to mitigating the risks
posed by the SFO SAFER. Once again, we call on Ansar
Allah to cooperate with the relevant United Nations
agencies and facilitate the operation.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.
I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Hans
Grundberg and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their
excellent briefings.
For more than seven years, the civil war in Yemen
has exhausted the country and plunged its people
into one of the worst ever humanitarian catastrophes,
exacting a toll of death, destruction and suffering.
Opportunities to end the tragedy have not been lacking.
They have presented themselves on many occasions
but have just as soon faded away, leading to further
deadly confrontations and displacements of civilians,
including women and children.
My delegation remains convinced that a solution to
the crisis in Yemen cannot be a military one. The battle
of Ma’rib, which has been raging for some months,
illustrates that reality. If the crisis is to be resolved
in a lasting way, it must be the result of an inclusive
dialogue that is led by the Yemenis themselves, with the
support of the international community.
In order to give every chance to the rapid resumption
of that process, in which my country invites all parties
to participate, the following conditions are essential.
First, the parties must commit to a nationwide
ceasefire by putting an end to hostilities in the country.
A truce remains essential for the resumption of
peace talks.
Secondly, the parties must then act in good faith and
constructively for the return of peace to their country.
Indeed, that long-awaited peace will be achieved only
through the commitment and will of the Yemenis
themselves and the compromises they are willing to
make for the good of Yemen and all its people.
Thirdly, it is equally important that regional actors,
as well as Council members with influence on the
parties, continue to work towards bringing the parties
together and supporting them in the negotiations.
The main consequence of the ongoing war in
Yemen has been the severe humanitarian crisis in

S/PV. 8929

which the country has been immersed for several years.
As the fighting has continued over the years, the living
conditions in the country have continued to deteriorate
unbearably, causing the Yemeni people great despair.
The report of the United Nations Development
Programme stresses, among other things, that nearly
60 per cent of deaths in Yemen are due to indirect
consequences of the conflict, such as the lack of
drinking water, hunger, disease, the deterioration of
basic services, economic collapse, extreme poverty and
the lack of a means of subsistence. That bleak picture is
compounded by a number of other aggravating factors,
including natural disasters and the coronavirus disease
pandemic, as well as interruptions of the delivery of
humanitarian aid and the growing food insecurity.
The risk of large-scale famine continues to grow in
Yemen due to the absence of household income and the
lack of predictable and sustainable funding to provide
vital assistance to thousands of families in need. We
therefore call on donor countries, in particular those in
the region, to be more generous in their contributions to
alleviate the suffering people of Yemen by funding the
Yemen humanitarian response plan, in keeping with the
commitments made at the recent conference organized
by the United Nations in October.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to express
its concern at the situation of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, on which inspection work is still delayed, while
the advanced state of disrepair of the vessel continues
to expose Yemen and the countries bordering the Red
Sea to serious risks of an environmental disaster with
incalculable consequences. To avoid such devastating
damage to the environment due to the explosion of
the tanker, we call on the Houthis to demonstrate
responsibility and honour their commitments by
issuing the necessary authorizations to the United
Nations team in charge of the FSO SAFER oil tanker
inspection operations.
The Niger commends the tireless efforts of
Mr. Grundberg and reaffirms its full commitment to
support all efforts by the international community
aimed at bringing the crisis in Yemen to a
successful conclusion.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

21-3951217/19

S/PV.8929

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Grundberg and
Mr. Rajasingham for their briefings.
Since the last open briefing of the Security
Council on Yemen two months ago (see S/PV.8878),
the humanitarian suffering of the Yemeni people has
increased as a result of the persistent and brutal Houthi
attacks on cities, population and internally displaced
persons (IDPs), including in the governorates of Ma’rib,
Al-Hudaydah and Shabwa, in addition to the difficult
humanitarian conditions in the governorate of Taiz
caused by the siege, systemic shelling, sniper fire,
roadblocks and the kidnapping of civilians.
As a result of the recent Houthi attacks and
escalation of hostilities, more than 17,000 families
comprising more than 101,000 IDPs have been displaced,
including more than 25,000 civilians displaced as a
result of the recent Houthi offensive in the governorate
of Al-Hudaydah in flagrant violation of the Stockholm
Agreement. The Houthi militias have sought to obstruct
the implementation of the Agreement and to undermine
the ability of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement to carry out its mandate in line
with Security Council resolution 2452 (2019).
The Mission has been held captive in Houthicontrolled areas and we question whether the Mission
should continue to operate as it remains silent in the
face of all the Houthi violations.
The Houthi militias have continued their offensive
in Ma’rib, targeting civilians and IDP camps with
ballistic missiles and drones. Most recently, the Houthi
militias launched two Iranian-made ballistic missiles
on the Al-Huma camp in Ma’rib — home to 1,264
families — which led to the death of a number of women
and children. Just yesterday, the Houthis launched
another ballistic missile against the city of Ma’rib as
the Yemenis were celebrating a win in a football game.
The continued Houthi attack on Ma’rib, which is
the final and safe refuge for millions of IDPs, is part
of the Houthis’ attempts to claim as many civilian lives
as possible and to cause new waves of displacement
in a retaliatory action that proves that those militias
are bloodthirsty terrorists. It will require an urgent
humanitarian intervention and an emergency response
to meet the people’s basic needs in order to bridge
the significant humanitarian gap caused by those
forced waves of displacement. We call on the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities to end the Houthi
18/19

14/12/2021

offensive on Ma’rib and save the lives of millions of
civilians and IDPs.
As Mr. Rajasingham said in his briefing, the
economic collapse has had a significant effect on the
humanitarian situation. That is why support must be
given to the efforts of the Yemeni Government in the
temporary capital of Aden to overcome the economic
and humanitarian challenges and implement structural
reforms to improve the Government’s performance.
Led by His Excellency Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi, President of the Republic of Yemen, the
Government is determined to confront the current
exceptional challenges, mobilize resources, regulate
the financial sector, stabilize the currency and take
all necessary measures to end the economic collapse
and improve living conditions. A case in point was the
recent appointment of the new Governor of the Board of
the Central Bank of Yemen, which should spur recovery
efforts and economic stability.
We call on the international community and all our
friends and brothers to help the Yemeni Government to
overcome the difficult economic challenges resulting
from the war that has been imposed on our people,
including by providing urgent support to Government
plans to implement reforms and build State institutions.
Ending the suffering of the Yemeni people will not
be possible without an immediate ceasefire, followed by
the adoption of economic and humanitarian measures
and a resumption of the political process towards
achieving a sustainable and lasting peace.
That process must be conducted in line with the
agreed terms of reference for a political solution,
namely the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and
its implementation mechanism, the outcome of the
comprehensive national dialogue and relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216
(2015). As my colleague the representative of Russia
noted, we reiterate that resolution 2216 (2015) remains
the basis for a solution in Yemen in order to achieve a
sustainable and lasting peace.
Developments on the ground do not change the
facts. The Houthi militias led a military coup against
the national consensus, the outcome of the national
dialogue and the political process. The Houthi militias
have disregarded all relevant Security Council
resolutions to reach a settlement for ending the conflict.
Resolution 2216 (2015) remains the basis of a solution.
21-39512

14/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The Houthis do not believe in a political partnership;
they believe in their ethnic and divine supremacy. They
do not believe in dialogue and peace.
The Yemeni Government has responded by
welcoming all initiatives and suggestions aimed at
achieving peace. We have engaged positively and in
good faith with the United Nations efforts, through the
Special Envoy, to end the conflict. However, the Houthi
militias view these peace efforts as a tool to continue
the war in order to impose a fait accompli, because they
believe in their divine supremacy. They have illusions
that draw them to political domination and ethnic
superiority.
These militias have impeded all diplomatic efforts
to resolve the conflict. They have used all international
and regional initiatives and efforts as a tool to buy time
and pursue their war and aggression against the Yemeni
people. They target cities and civilians in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia with ballistic missiles and drones, in
addition to their provocative behaviour and aggressions
against international organizations, humanitarian
workers and diplomatic property in areas under their
control. The Yemeni Government condemns the Houthi
militias’ breach of the American Embassy compound
in Sana’a, detaining a number of local staff and looting
and destroying property.
The Iranian regime continues to interfere in the
internal affairs of my country and to destabilize security
and stability in Yemen and the region. It continues to
protract the war and exacerbate the humanitarian crisis
by violating relevant Security Council resolutions and
the arms embargo. This regime continues to provide
the Houthi militias with arms and military expertise, as
well as various kinds of missiles, most recently Iranian
weapons that were intercepted on their way to the
Houthi militias, including 171 surface-to-air missiles,
8 anti-tank missiles, cruise missile components,
anti-shipping devices, thermal weapons optics and
drone components, as well as 1.1 million barrels of oil
derivatives. These Iranian practices will continue until
the international community, the United Nations and
the Council take a decisive and deterrent stance. The
main obstacle to peace in Yemen is Iran’s insistence on
maintaining its aggressive and blackmailing behaviour
through its sabotaging agents represented by the
Houthi militias, which aim to serve Iran’s dangerous
project leading to chaos, terrorism and threatening
international navigation in the Red Sea and the Bab
Al-Mandeb Strait.

S/PV. 8929

Millions of Yemeni children live in Houthicontrolled areas. They are at risk of being recruited and
used in combat operations. They are deprived of their
right to education and to live a normal life, just like all
children around the world. The Houthi militias continue
to take tens of thousands of children from their homes,
neighbourhoods and schools to camps, without regard
for their fate or suffering of their families. They subject
them to brainwashing with hostile slogans and imported
extremist ideas. They drag them into crematoriums of
death in the most extensive exploitation and recruitment
of children in the history of humankind. The Houthi
militias have also taken schools and educational
institutions and turned them into military barracks
and weapons depots, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We call on the
international community and human rights institutions
to shoulder their responsibilities and bring pressure
to bear on the Houthis to end their violations, protect
children from their abusive behaviour and provide
support to the Yemeni Government in implementing its
national strategy to prevent the recruitment of children
and their use in armed conflict.
The Houthi militias have not spared Yemeni women
from their crimes either, subjecting them to kidnapping,
forced displacement, psychological and physical torture
and sexual harassment. They issue judgments based
on false accusations against women, as in the case of
Intisar Al-Hammadi and her colleagues.
The Security Council holds the Houthi militias
accountable for any economic or environmental disaster
resulting from the FSO Safer oil tanker. The tanker has
received no maintenance or repair, making it a ticking
time bomb and potential disaster that threaten Yemen
and the regional countries. If that disaster occurs, it
would be one of the worst economic and environmental
disasters in the world. We call on the Security Council
once again to pressure the Houthi militias to stop using
the tanker as leverage and to allow the United Nations
technical team to access the tanker in order to spare the
region and the world a grave disaster.
In closing, I would like to express my thanks to the
Council members that will be leaving at the end of the
month. I thank them for their efforts to end the conflict
in Yemen and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
people. We wish them every success and their people
peace and prosperity.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-3951219/19
