United Nations

S/PV.4528

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4528

th meeting
Tuesday, 7 May 2002, 1.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahbubani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Singapore)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Raytchev
Mr. Ngoubeyou
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Cheick Ahmed Tidiane Camara
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Ms. Johnson
Mr. Karev
Mr. Mekdad
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Children and armed conflict.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-37035 (E)

*0237035*

S/PV.4528

The meeting was called to order at 1.55 p.m.
Representation and welcome to Ministers
The President: At the outset, I should like to
acknowledge and welcome the presence at the Council
table of the distinguished Minister of State in charge of
External Relations of Cameroon, His Excellency Mr.
François-Xavier Ngoubeyou. I believe he is going to
join us later.
I should also like to acknowledge and welcome
the presence at the Council table of the distinguished
Minister for International Development of Norway, Her
Excellency Ms. Hilde F. Johnson, accompanied by the
Minister of Children and Family Affairs of Norway,
Her Excellency Ms. Laila Daavoy.
I should also like to acknowledge and welcome
the presence at the Council table of the distinguished
National Coordinator for the Mexican Child and
Family Protection System, Her Excellency Ms. Ana
Teresa Aranda.
And while I am issuing special words of
welcome, I also want to acknowledge the presence of
young people in the Chamber, including young students
from the Collegiate and Sacred Heart Schools in New
York City, where my children happen to be studying.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict.

agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Graça Machel,
former Minister of Education for Mozambique, former
Independent Expert of the Secretary-General on the
Impact of Armed Conflict on Children, and author of
the recent book entitled “The Impact of War on
Children” — which I highly recommend to everyone
here.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Graça Machel to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF).
It is so decided.
I invite the Executive Director of UNICEF,
accompanied by the three children who will be
speaking to us — D. Wilmot Wungko, Eliza Kantardzic
and José Cabral — to take their seats at the Council
table. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the children.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
I shall now make some opening remarks on
behalf of the Security Council.

I invite the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
take a seat at the Council table.

On behalf of the Security Council, I am pleased
to welcome Ms. Graça Machel, former Minister of
Education of Mozambique and former Independent
Expert on children and armed conflict; Mrs. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of UNICEF; and Mr.
Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as
the three child representatives: Wilmot from Liberia,
Eliza from Bosnia and Herzegovina, and José from
East Timor.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council

The Security Council is pleased to hold this
meeting in order to demonstrate support for the
General Assembly special session on children. Indeed,

It is so decided.

2

S/PV.4528

we had planned to hold this meeting last September,
under the presidency of France, but 11 September
caused its postponement. At the same time, this session
provides a valuable opportunity for the Security
Council to reaffirm its collective and firm commitment
to the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict,
which
has
become
progressively
mainstreamed into the work of the Council.
In the early years of the history of the United
Nations, there were a number of international
instruments
containing
important
child-specific
provisions, such as the 1949 Geneva Convention and
Additional Protocols of 1977 and the 1989 Convention
on the Rights of the Child.
The real breakthrough came after Ms. Graça
Machel’s groundbreaking study, issued in 1996
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 48/157 of 20
December 1993. The study suggested a comprehensive
agenda for action by the international community to
enhance the protection of children during armed
conflict.
She also recommended that
“the Council should therefore be kept continually
and fully aware of humanitarian concerns,
including child-specific concerns, in its actions to
resolve conflicts, to keep or to enforce peace or to
(A/51/306,
implement
peace
agreements.”
para. 282)
A year later, Mr. Olara Otunnu was appointed
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, and both his Office and UNICEF have
worked hard to push this issue.
In 1998, the Security Council held an open debate
on the subject and issued a landmark presidential
statement. This was followed by three significant
Security Council resolutions — 1261 (1999), 1314
(2000) and, most recently, 1379 (2001).
Resolution 1379 (2001) lays out most
comprehensively the Council’s extensive support and
guidance for international efforts to protect and assist
children in armed conflict. Notably, the resolution
identifies concrete steps to be taken by States, nonStates and international actors to protect children
affected by armed conflict.
Another recent development on the subject was
the statement by the President of the Security Council

before the Executive Board of UNICEF in December
2001. In his statement, the then Council President
referred to the situation of children affected by armed
conflict in West Africa and highlighted this as an ideal
case for cooperation between the Security Council and
UNICEF, and proposed the creation of a joint
mechanism to make this cooperation possible.
More recently, in March 2002, as part of the aidemémoire on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Council drew attention to the importance
of addressing the specific assistance and protection
needs of children, including, inter alia, prevention of
the recruitment of child soldiers in violation of
international law, family reunification of displaced
children and the provision of a secure channel for child
refugees and internally displaced children, who are
especially vulnerable to exploitation and to abuse.
In recent years, the Council has also included
child- protection provisions in several specific Security
Council resolutions, including 1260 (1999) on Sierra
Leone and resolution 1279 (1999) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition, the Council is also
engaged, through Arria-formula meetings, with nongovernmental organizations, which often provide
valuable insights and perspectives into the problem of
children in armed conflict.
At the same time, through various Security
Council missions to the field — and, I am sure,
including Ambassador Levitte’s recent mission, which
he has just returned from this morning — Council
members have also had to opportunity to witness
firsthand the conditions of children in conflict and
post-conflict situations around the world.
In a similar vein, members will recall the moving
statement made by 14-year-old Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
from Sierra Leone, who related his experiences here in
this Chamber last November. We believe that the
personal testimonies of the three young persons in our
meeting today will help us better to understand what
children go through in situations of armed conflict and
thus underscore the importance of provisions for
children under such circumstances.
We hope that today’s meeting will make a further
contribution towards raising awareness of a major
concern of the international community.
That ends my opening remarks as President of the
Security Council.

3

S/PV.4528

I shall now give the floor to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara
Otunnu.
Mr. Otunnu: On behalf of children affected by
war all over the world, I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this particular meeting devoted to the
protection of children in war situations. I also thank the
Ambassador of France for having set in motion this
initiative last September.
It is a particular honour to have in our midst Ms.
Graça Machel of Mozambique and South Africa. Her
groundbreaking work, commitment and passion laid the
foundation for this work. We are watering the plant, the
seed of which she planted.
How wonderful to have young people at this
table. The door has finally been opened to those who
are most affected by conflict.
When we adults wage war, the highest price is
paid by children. They are killed and maimed, orphans
and refugees, traumatized and sexually abused, denied
education and exposed to malnutrition and, of course,
exploited as child soldiers.
I greatly appreciate the commitment of the
Security Council and its work over the past several
years to incorporate the protection and well-being of
children into the peace and security agenda of the
United Nations.
With regard to the efforts under way today to
mainstream this activity, what do I ask of the Council
in particular? I ask that, working together with you, we
should ensure that the protection and well-being of
children is included in negotiations to end conflict and
in every peace accord in a systematic way; that the
protection of children becomes truly part of the raison
d’être of peace operations, expressed in mandates and
reports to the Security Council; that effective training
and codes of conduct be provided for peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel, so that they, by their conduct,
might set the best example for the respect and
protection of children and women. I ask that child
protection advisers be included on the staff of
peacekeeping missions to strengthen the capacity for
advocacy and protection on the ground; that we
actively promote the participation of young people
themselves in peace processes, so that they thereby
become actors and advocates on their own behalf and
on behalf of other children — that is why I am so glad

4

that the young people are here today; and that the
demobilization and rehabilitation of former childsoldiers are an important component of any
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programme on the ground.
As for countries that are emerging from conflict,
we ask that the rehabilitation and well-being of
children should be a centrepiece of any reconstruction,
healing and rebuilding programme, and that this be
expressed as a matter of urgency in policy-making,
priority-setting and, above all, in resource allocation
for the benefit of children and young people. We can
already point to this commitment today in Afghanistan,
Sierra Leone, the Balkans and, we hope, in Angola.
Finally, I ask the Security Council to spare no
effort to ensure that the wonderful and very impressive
norms, rules, obligations and commitments, including
Security Council resolutions, are translated into reality
on the ground — reality that can provide protection to
children and women exposed to war. This is the best
gift we could give to the children who are here with us
this afternoon and who, on behalf of millions of other
children around the globe, will spread the good news
emerging from the Council’s deliberations this
afternoon.
The
President:
I
thank
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for his statement. I am confident
that his appeal has been heard by all members here.
I now give the floor to Ms. Graça Machel.
Ms. Machel: Thank you, Mr. President, for
having invited me to attend this meeting of the Security
Council. It is a measure of the progress that we have
made in moving children to the centre of the
international peace and security agenda that the
meeting today is the second Security Council meeting
in the past few months to focus on children and armed
conflict. In a historic moment last November, the
Council invited a young person to address a meeting.
Today, as the General Assembly prepares for its
first-ever special session specifically on children, the
Security Council is enabling children themselves to
interact directly with one of the most important organs
of the international community. In addition, in the past
few months and years the Council has held discussions
and adopted significant resolutions aimed at promoting

S/PV.4528

the protection of children and women in situations of
armed conflict.
Placing children at the centre of political agendas
at the highest levels of the international community is
an important shift in our attempt to promote the wellbeing of the world’s children. Other encouraging
developments since the 1996 United Nations report on
the impact of armed conflict on children was presented
to the General Assembly include the introduction of the
Ottawa Convention against landmines and the
subsequent destruction of millions of stockpiled
landmines; the
strengthening
of international
legislative frameworks, including the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; the
introduction and strengthening of child protection
mandates in peacekeeping missions; and the
appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Yet there is so much more to do. In too many
countries throughout the world, war continues to tear
apart children’s lives. The prevention of conflict is the
primary mandate of the Security Council — indeed, of
the United Nations. We know that the best way to
protect children in armed conflict is to prevent such
conflict from beginning. It is essential that the Security
Council increase its efforts to develop and implement
mechanisms that enforce its decisions and guidelines
on the prevention of conflict. Otherwise, the cycle of
conflict will never end and millions of children will
continue to die from preventable diseases, continue to
be forced from their homes and continue to be maimed,
tortured and killed.
The implementation of the measures promoted in
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions is
slow at best, and the improvements we have been
pushing for are still only intermittently and dimly
reflected in the everyday lives of children. Six years
after the original United Nations report highlighted the
dangers of sexual abuse and sexual exploitation for
children caught up in armed conflict, we are still only
just beginning to implement effective protection
measures, as highlighted by the recent distressing
reports coming out of Sierra Leone.
We can point with pride to the demobilization of
3,500 child soldiers in southern Sudan last year —
the result of the tireless work of the United Nations
Children’s
Fund,
several
non-governmental

organizations and concerned Governments. Yet
children in as many as 85 countries continue to live
with the reality of abduction and forced recruitment
into military groups. Even as we meet today, the might
of the international community seems unable to stop
the criminal situation in which tens of thousands of
children from northern Uganda are being abducted and
forced into military and sexual slavery — a situation
that has continued for a period of more than a decade.
In refugee camps throughout the world, education
remains out of the reach of large numbers of children,
instead of being the protective, guiding and
empowering force that it has the potential to be.
Every day that a child lives in fear or pain or is in
danger from the violence of war is another day on
which we have not done enough. As the Security
Council of the United Nations, you are in a stronger
position than most to ensure the protection of children.
Monitoring of the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on children and armed conflict must be
strengthened.
When you see — and you will — that
implementation is too slow or ineffective, please use
your power to promote new measures to admonish
those who break international law or fail to carry out
your initiatives and, when necessary, to instigate
disciplinary measures to force Governments, United
Nations agencies and international organizations into
better and more urgent action to prevent conflicts in
order to protect children.
The Security Council is to be commended for its
vision of and commitment to social justice, which has
moved it to invite children to address this meeting. I
hope that hearing from the people most directly
affected by conflict will be a regular occurrence in this
important forum. Listening to their stories, their
questions and their concerns will surely motivate us to
act more urgently to prevent conflicts and to protect
children. There can be few catalysts that will more
effectively shatter the political inertia that has allowed
armed conflict to ruin the lives of millions.
The President: I thank Ms. Graça Machel for her
statement and the kind words she addressed to me. I
would also like to thank her for the tremendous work
that she has done in this field.
Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I
should also like to acknowledge and welcome the

5

S/PV.4528

presence of Mrs. Mariama Aribot, the Minister for
Social Affairs of Guinea.
I now give the floor to Ms. Carol Bellamy, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund.
Ms. Bellamy: As we speak, leaders from every
corner of the world are gathering in this House to
reaffirm their obligations to promote the rights of every
boy and every girl and commit themselves to creating a
world fit for children. It is an occasion at which we
seek a global consensus to mobilize resources and
political will to promote the survival and health of
every child, to assure the right of basic quality
education, assistance in combating HIV/AIDS and
protection from harm and exploitation.
I commend the Council for its role in
strengthening the protection of children in conflict
situations. Indeed, I would report that the draft
outcome document has drawn on the Council’s
exemplary work in this area. Let me also echo the
comments of my colleague Olara Otunnu in thanking
you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting and calling
this meeting, building on the work of the French
presidency from last September.
I would also like to pay my tribute to my fellow
speakers, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Olara
Otunnu, for his tireless advocacy and Madame Graça
Machel for her wonderful, exemplary leadership in
placing this vital issue on the international agenda.
Let me also acknowledge the critical work and
effort of numerous international and national nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), some of which
are present in the audience today. We at the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) welcome the
Council’s engagement with NGOs. It is only through
strong partnership that UNICEF is able to advance
policies and programmes and strategies to strengthen
the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict.
We recently supported, with other United Nations
agencies, the Afghan Interim Administration in
conducting the largest-ever back-to-school programme
for boys and girls in Afghanistan. We will continue to
invest in education, in particular education for girls, as
a means of ensuring the long-term well-being and
sustainable protection of the rights of war-affected

6

children. Education also protects children from
recruitment as soldiers and helps them reintegrate
themselves
into
their
communities
after
demobilization.
In this connection we will continue our efforts to
support the demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers in countries such as Angola, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Colombia and, as
was mentioned before, the Sudan.
One of the biggest challenges in conflict
situations continues to be the difficulty of ensuring
children’s full and unhindered access to essential
services. In an effort to promote access to children in
conflict
situations,
the
International
Football
Association (FIFA) and UNICEF will urge all parties to
conflicts to observe days of immunization during the
2002 World Cup. These days of immunization will
build on the experience of the long-supported and
highly successful “days of tranquillity”. Further, we
hope that football — indeed sports generally — will
help these children make a start in reclaiming their
childhood.
Children, especially girls, are extremely
vulnerable to abuse, sexual violence and rape
perpetrated during armed conflicts. The allegations of
sexual abuse and exploitation against refugee and
internally displaced children by humanitarian workers
in West Africa are of great concern to us. UNICEF
remains unwaveringly committed to ensuring the
highest standards of conduct for our staff, to improving
our accountability to the beneficiaries of humanitarian
assistance and to ensuring that humanitarian assistance
is provided in a manner that protects children and
prevents sexual exploitation and abuse.
In giving Wilmot, Eliza and José an opportunity
to contribute to its meeting today, the Security Council
has again set a high standard for leadership. The
experiences of these young people remind us of the
daunting challenges that still lie ahead.
In conclusion, it is my pleasure to introduce the
young people that the Security Council has so kindly
invited to address it today. Wilmot Wungko is 16 years
old and is from Liberia, where he works actively with
radio programmes and child-rights networking. Eliza
Kantardzic is 17 years old, and she is from Bosnia. She
works as a volunteer with refugee children. José Cabral
is 18 years old. He comes from East Timor. He works
through a local NGO and the Catholic Church to assist

S/PV.4528

children living on the street. All three of them are
delegates to the almost 400-person Children’s Forum
that is now taking place. I know that they are keen to
share their thoughts with the Security Council.
The President: I thank the Executive Director of
the United Nations Children’s Fund for her statement
and for the kind compliments she paid to Council
members, including especially those paid to the French
presidency for initiating this idea.
Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I
should like to acknowledge and welcome the presence
at the Council table of the distinguished Minister of
State in charge of external relations of Cameroon, His
Excellency Mr. François-Xavier Ngoubeyou.
We shall now hear probably the three most
important voices in the debate this afternoon. I now
give the floor to the young man Wilmot.
Wilmot Wungko: My name is Wilmot, from
Liberia. I am 16 years old. At age five, I fled from
Liberia with my mother to Sierra Leone. I was too
young at the time to really understand what was
happening. I heard the sounds of guns. I saw people
running. I saw people shooting. I saw people being
killed. I saw people dying. People as young as I was
were dying. On two occasions, I saw a man being
killed because of his tribe. Another man was
slaughtered right in front of our family. I could not
stand the sight and hid in my mother’s arms.
I saw schools and buildings destroyed. I saw
families like mine, in the thousands, leave everything
behind and run. I was later told that a war was going
on. That was 11 years ago, when the war had just
began.
Today, as I speak, the children of Liberia are
suffering again from war. We do not have good
education because of war. We are malnourished
because of war. There are many reports that children
are being recruited. We are dying because of war.
Our hopes and dreams for the future are bleak.
The cry of the Liberian children is for peace. We, as
children ourselves, are involved in trying to put an end
to the war. I am working with an all-children television
programme, Kiddies’ Corner, that discusses the plight
of children along with issues affecting our well-being
and the development of our fullest potential. Another
all-children radio programme, C’est la Vie, run by
children themselves, has been effective in sending out

the message of peace across the country. These are
things that children in Liberia have been doing to find a
way for peace.
Other organizations, like the Children’s
Assistance Program, provide support for war-affected
children. Don Bosco Homes provide homes for street
children. Children against Violence has provided
shelter and education for these kids. The Young Men’s
Christian Association provides recreational activities.
But none of this will mean anything if the war does not
stop.
The children of Liberia appeal to the Security
Council of the United Nations to do everything
possible to stop the fighting in Liberia. We are
experiencing war again in Liberia and want it to end
now. We are dying every day. Our human rights are
being abused every day. These human rights abuses,
including the recruitment of children, will continue
unless the war is brought to an end. Please help stop
the war for the sake of the children. We know that it is
your responsibility to promote world peace. Please do
not forget Liberia now. Help save the lives of the
Liberian children.
I thank you for this opportunity today.
The President: I thank Wilmot for conveying to
us the appeal on behalf of the children of Liberia.
I now give the floor to Eliza.
Eliza Kantardzic: My name is Eliza. I am 17
years old and I come from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
War; it sounds horrible and it is very hard to
describe how awful it is when you actually live through
one. Your whole world falls apart. Everything that you
know disappears. The only thing you can see is fear
and death. You feel trapped in every way. You ask
questions but there are no answers. You are seven years
old and your dad is not home for months. He comes for
a few days and then he goes away again. And the only
thing that you know is that he might never come back.
Complete darkness is everywhere.
This horror hits everybody. If you are lucky
enough you will not lose everything. Sometimes whole
families were split up and nobody knew for months,
and even years, if their parents or children or sisters or
brothers were alive. There was no way to find them.
I was one of the lucky people. My family is alive.
I know where they are. But I am surrounded by people

7

S/PV.4528

who are refugees. They came to my town. But you do
not look at them as refugees. They are new friends, that
is how you see them. Some of them are my best friends
at the moment. They came to school, and school is very
important for us. It is the only thing to do, when war is
going on, to try to forget.
I am a member of a youth centre in Banja Luka.
In that centre there is a group of young people, and we
work on the implementation of children’s rights. We
are trying to help the refugees — to help them fit in.
Being a friend to someone is the best thing you can do.
You do not have to be a member of a youth centre to do
something like that.
But through a group we do things together. For
example, we make crafts and sell them. With that
money we can buy some candies and toys, which we
then give to orphans and refugee children. It is a small
thing, but it means a lot to them. We are also doing
workshops in the schools. Through the workshops the
children get to know what their rights are, like the right
to live, the right to have a home and an education, to
participate, and the right to play. The more they are
aware of what they can do and what they have a right
to do, the more things will be done. Together we can do
it.
When you are in a group and that group is made
up of different people with different experiences, it
helps to get some ideas. That kind of a group is here at
the Children’s Forum at the United Nations. The main
thing I want to do here is to learn from the others here,
the children. That is the way I will get the knowledge I
need, and I will use it when I go home and share it with
others to make some progress.
But we also need your help. The best thing you
can do is to stop war, to prevent it. That is the only way
to avoid the consequences and everything that war
brings. And that is something that the Council has the
power to do. The real question is: Is that power used?
You are making decisions here that affect whole
nations. That is a fact. I hope that you will remember
my words when you get the opportunity to make
another decision that could prevent and stop war.
Finally, I have brought a message with me from
all the children at the Children’s Forum:
“War and politics have always been an
adult’s game, but children have always been the
losers.”

8

The President: I thank Eliza for the appeal she
has made to the Council.
I now give the floor to José.
José Cabral: My name is José. I was born and
brought up in East Timor. I am sure that many of you
are quite familiar with our recent history. I would like
to use my short time with you today to explain my own
part in that history, and also some things that I hope we
can learn from that.
I think and I think again and try to look for the
answer in my past experience to the war in my beloved
country, East Timor, during September 1999. I was at
my school at that time. The directors of my school,
myself and 18 of my friends took care of many people
who came to shelter at my school, Saint Joseph College
High School. There were about 4,000 refugees.
We saw that everyone around us was afraid, and
we tried to do the best for the refugees. It was very
strange, and it seemed terrible, when we found there
was no child playing, there was no singing, there was
only silence or guns. We began to play the guitar and to
sing together to help us forget.
Today in East Timor I am a journalist at my
school. I have learned so many things from talking to
children, especially street children. There are still many
children with no opportunity to get an education. Some
of them spend their time on the street selling
newspapers, compact discs and other things to get
money. Some children just put out their hands to ask
for money. The money that they get may be used to pay
for their school — or they may give it to their
parents — but some of them are forced to give the
money to those people who threaten them on the
streets.
The children do not know anything about war, but
they are the victims of war. And even though it is over,
some of these children still have to face violence
because of things that they were never involved in.
Most of the children around the world were born to
give their smile, which brings happiness. But many of
them were also born only to see and to face the
suffering given to them by those who create war.
On 20 May 2002, East Timor will celebrate
independence. It will stand on its own for the first time
in over 500 years — a great day for the East Timorese
to start a new life and to rebuild our country, which had
been burnt down. When East Timor joins the United

S/PV.4528

Nations this month, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child will be the first convention ratified by the
new Government. I hope that children’s rights will be
given attention by the Government and by everyone
who is responsible for children.
For the future of Timor, we want a Timor that is
clean, beautiful and shiny and where every person’s
dignity and human rights are respected — not a Timor
that is dirty, rough and hypocritical. East Timorese
children, including the children living on the streets,
have dreams to become doctors, engineers, President,
but they do not have the opportunity to get an
education to reach for their dreams. What we need
from you is your help to keep our peace and unity so
that all children in East Timor can get an education and
live in a peaceful country. No more war.
I realize that I am very lucky to have this chance
today to represent children, not only from East Timor,
but also from Kosovo, Bosnia, Afghanistan and other
countries in armed conflict. Because I am here for the
special session on children, today is my chance to ask
you very powerful people here, on behalf of all
children, not just those of East Timor, to please ensure
that our rights are respected. I think we have the laws
and conventions, but we are not so good at doing what
we say. I am sure that, only when children’s rights are
properly respected and children can grow up in safety
and peace, will those children be able to live in peace
together, throughout the world, when they are adults.
Please give us that chance.
The President: I thank José for making an appeal
on behalf not just of the children of East Timor, but
also of children in other armed conflicts elsewhere in
the world.
My last duty this afternoon is to read out a
presidential statement which, following consultations
among members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make:
“The Security Council, recalling resolutions
1261 (1999), 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001) on
children and armed conflict, expresses its
commitment to the protection of children affected
by armed conflict as an essential component of its
work to promote and maintain international peace
and security.
“The Security Council expresses its concern
at the grave impact of armed conflict in all its

various aspects on children and reiterates its
strong condemnation of the continued targeting
and use of children in armed conflicts, including
their
abduction,
compulsory
recruitment,
mutilation,
forced
displacement,
sexual
exploitation and abuse, and calls on all parties to
conflict to desist from such practices
immediately.
“The Security Council reaffirms its call for
the inclusion of provisions for the protection of
children, with particular attention to the special
needs of girls, in peace negotiations and peace
agreements; mandates and reports concerning
peacekeeping operations; rehabilitation and
peace-building programmes; training programmes
for peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel; as
well as the inclusion of child protection advisers
in peacekeeping and peace-building operations, in
accordance with previous resolutions and
presidential statements adopted by the Security
Council, in particular resolution 1379 (2001).
“The Security Council looks forward to a
successful final document concerning the
protection of children affected by armed conflict
on the occasion of the General Assembly special
session on children. The Security Council further
reiterates its call to all parties to abide by their
obligations, as well as concrete commitments
made to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, the United Nations Children’s Fund and
other relevant United Nations bodies, to ensure
the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict in all its various aspects.
“The Security Council welcomes the entry
into force of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and
urges Member States to consider ratification and
States parties to fully implement these provisions.
“The Security Council underscores the
importance of unhindered humanitarian access for
the benefit of children and, in this connection,
calls on parties to conflict to make special
arrangements to meet the protection and
assistance requirements of children, including
where appropriate the promotion of ‘Days of
Immunization’.

9

S/PV.4528

“The Security Council will remain actively
seized of this matter.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2002/12.

10

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 2.45 p.m.
