S/2020/598

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 July 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 29 June 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; and Mr. Jamal Usseni, Director of Save Act Mine, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Russian Federation, South Africa (on
behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security Council — the
Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines), the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam, in connection
with the video-teleconference on the situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo convened on Thursday, 25 June 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-08706 (E) 010720 240720

*2008706*

S/2020/598

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Leila Zerrougui
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Council
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to present the various
challenges that we are currently facing in the country, in a context marked by
political tensions and an upswing of violence in certain parts of the east, amid a
fragile socioeconomic situation. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
introduced an additional layer of complexity and concern into the existing issues
that we face in the country.
The Government has, understandably, been focused these past several months
on the immediate response to the threat posed by the global pandemic. Assisted by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
submitted to the Council (S/2020/554), the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have undertaken a variety of efforts to limit the spread of the virus
and alleviate the additional socioeconomic burden placed on the population by the
movement restrictions, border closures and other measures taken to deal with the
pandemic. That necessary work has nonetheless slowed the pace of the Government’s
programme and reform agenda.
With respect to the overall political situation, to date the ruling coalition,
composed of President Tshisekedi’s Cap pour le changement and former President
Kabila’s Front commun pour le Congo, continues to hold together. I believe that there
has been an understanding on the part of the political leadership that maintaining
this political coalition intact is a fundamental prerequisite for making progress on
the wide array of governance, security and socioeconomic challenges that still stand
in the way of the country’s long-term stabilization.
At the same time, there are indeed serious tensions within the coalition,
which is frequently unsettled by partisan manoeuvring leading to an erosion of trust
between its partners. Unfortunately, over the course of the past days, the coalition has
been put to the test following the introduction of three bills by Front commun pour
le Congo parliamentarians that are considered by both the Union pour la démocratie
et le progrès social (UDPS) and the opposition to undermine the separation of
powers and weaken the independence of the judiciary. Yesterday a large number of
UDPS supporters breached the enclosure of the National Assembly and vandalized
a number of private properties to demonstrate that development. Those actions were
broadly condemned, including by the President.
Maintaining popular support for the Cap pour le changement-Front commun
pour le Congo coalition and the overall political dispensation has also been
challenged by the trial, conviction and sentencing of the President’s Chief of Staff,
Vital Kamerhe, and disagreements over the renewal of the Independent National
Electoral Commission.
I therefore spare no effort in the context of my good offices to remind
interlocutors of the opportunity presented to them by the outcome of the 2018
electoral process and of the fact that the country’s progress rests on the readiness of
actors across the political spectrum to put aside partisanship in order to prevent a
political crisis that could have major consequences for the stability of the country.

2/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

At the same time, many parts of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
continue to be torn by violence as a result of the activities of armed groups and
intercommunity conflicts. That trend has been fuelled by the effects of the political
turmoil and the pandemic, which have an impact on the Government’s ability to
take structured and comprehensive measures against actors perpetrating violence
against civilians.
The situation in parts of Ituri in particular has gravely deteriorated over
the past months. An intensification of attacks on civilians and security forces by
assailants associated with the Lendu community has in turn triggered Hema and
Alur youth to create self-defence groups, sparking fears of a further ethnicization of
the conflict. Equally, reports of incursions by elements of the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces in Aru territory, northern Ituri, have led to additional protection-ofcivilians concerns and the displacement of the local population.
In North Kivu, there is concern over what appears to be the intention of
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) to regroup and intensify attacks, resulting
in increased civilian casualties. On 22 June, a MONUSCO convoy was ambushed
by presumed ADF elements close to Beni town while returning to base after
reconstructing a damaged bridge. One Indonesian peacekeeper lost his life and
one was injured in that tragic incident. This is a stark reminder of the ultimate
sacrifice that our peacekeepers are willing to make to protect civilians and advance
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like to seize
this opportunity to reiterate my condolences and that of the entire Mission to the
Government of the Republic of Indonesia and the family of the deceased.
In the hauts plateaux of South Kivu, ongoing intercommunity conflicts have
further degenerated with the proliferation of militias among all communities. I
condemn in the strongest terms attacks on displaced populations and the use of hate
speech, which incite further violence. Efforts to de-solidarize communities from
those militias and preventing external actors from supporting their agendas will be
vital to addressing the escalation of tensions in the area.
Finally, in Nyunzu territory, Tanganyika province, more than 100 civilians
have been killed in intercommunity conflicts between Twa and Bantu over the
course of the past months, and tensions remain high in neighbouring areas.
To address those issues, MONUSCO continues to pursue a comprehensive
approach that combines active troop deployments to hotspot areas; community
engagement; the development of targeted protection strategies; and the provision
of critical, large-scale logistical support for Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) operations.
I would like to highlight and pay tribute to the soldiers of the FARDC and the
uniformed contingents of MONUSCO, who are performing in an extremely difficult
and dangerous environment. The security forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo need our full support for the work that they do and are indeed in need of
continued significant assistance to improve their logistical, training and operational
capacities. Security-sector reform therefore must continue to be a priority for the
Government and a vital area that the Mission and the international community
must support.
It is important to note that, notwithstanding the increased violence in several
provinces, the Mission continued to actively seize opportunities to support the
Government in its local reconciliation efforts. In southern Irumu territory, for
instance, the security situation has continued to improve since the signing of the
peace agreement with the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI), laying the
foundation to overcome a conflict that has lasted almost two decades.
20-087063/25

S/2020/598

In view of the interlinked nature of political stabilization, security and
socioeconomic development, MONUSCO, along with the United Nations country
team, is giving priority to the implementation of programmes to support transition
in areas moving towards a state of post-conflict. We are therefore looking to
enhance cooperation with the World Bank and other partners to assist with
economic development and social cohesion in the Kasais. I believe strongly that the
implementation of such transition programming is a crucial element of ensuring an
environment that permits the responsible and sustainable exit of the Mission.
I would also like to take this opportunity to underline the synergies that
MONUSCO benefits from in the efforts to improve the political climate in the
broader Great Lakes region.
In that regard, the Mission works closely with the Office of the Special Envoy
on a range of issues, including to promote non-military measures to resolve conflict
in the region. The African Union and regional organizations also continue to play an
essential role in promoting peace and development in the subregion. The Southern
African Development Community, for example, remains a key partner in these
efforts, as demonstrated by its active role in helping to resolve the recent border
dispute between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia.
As I have emphasized in my recent briefings, there remains an opportunity
for long-term progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which can pave the
way for a responsible and sustainable withdrawal of the Mission in the coming years.
While restrictions linked to COVID-19 and the increased violence in the
east have hampered efforts to hold a structured dialogue with the Government, as
requested by the Council, the Mission is pursuing its internal planning and hopes
to build on the constructive relationship to accelerate the development of a joint
strategy as soon as the context becomes more conducive.
In that regard, I ask the Council today for its continued support for
MONUSCO’s work and the United Nations country team, including to stop the
spread of COVID-19 and respond to the multiplicity of humanitarian emergencies
that the population continues to face.
Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to the troop-contributing
countries, which have demonstrated great flexibility in terms of the temporary halt
on troop rotations that have been necessary to ensure that the Mission itself does
not become a vector for the transmission of COVID-19. I also thank the Mission’s
civilian staff, who are carrying out indispensable work in this time of increased
uncertainty and movement restrictions.

4/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

Annex II
Statement by the Director of Save Act Mine, Jamal Usseni
Allow me today to present to Council members my most fraternal greetings,
wishing them and their family members good health during this period marked by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I would like to thank the Council for having given me this opportunity to brief
it on the situation regarding the financing of armed groups operating in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo through the exploitation and illicit
trade of minerals, particularly gold.
In my remarks, I will briefly present the context and the situation of the
activities of armed groups in the areas where artisanal gold mining is taking place.
I will also analyse the facts and their implications for efforts to bring peace to the
region. In conclusion, I will propose possible solutions that can be applied at the
national, regional and international levels.
In order for the Council to grasp the quintessence of what I am saying, allow
me to present the contextual elements of the region evoked here.
The eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is reputed to be very
rich in gold deposits. The area extends from the extreme north-east, in the province
of Ituri, to the extreme south-east, in the province of Tanganyika, in Ex-Katanga,
where important artisanal gold-mining activities have been taking place for decades.
It is estimated that between 300 kilograms and 50 tons of gold are produced in
this area. Unfortunately, there is no official figure to determine the real production
capacity of artisanal gold mines in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, given the
low level of formalization of the sector and the very significant illicit cross-border
gold-trafficking activities between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours, including Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi, Tanzania and Kenya.
Since 1996, the area has experienced several wars, the most important of
which were the so-called liberation wars led by the Alliance of Democratic Forces
for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire (AFDL) and the Rassemblement congolais pour
la démocratie (RCD), with military support from Rwanda and Uganda. After much
effort by the international community through the United Nations Observer Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a semblance of peace had started to return
before being disrupted again between 2004 and 2013 by the actions of rebel groups
such as the Congrès national pour la défense du peuple (CNDP) and the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23), which is still supported by Rwanda and Uganda.
Alongside those movements, there has also been strong activity on the part
of local armed groups, including the Mayi-Mayi, the Raia Mutomboki and other
popular self-defence groups. Those groups have been ruthless and extremely violent
towards the population they claim to be defending.
I cannot fail to mention the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces-National Army for the Liberation of
Uganda (ADF-NALU), which continue to sow death and desolation among the
Congolese civilian population. Fresh in our memory are the images of the victims
of the ADF-NALU in the Beni zone, women and children raped or decapitated
with machetes.
To understand the economic dynamics behind the armed conflicts in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, one must face the evidence of their dual nature:
first, at the socio-political level, the actors justify their actions by identity-based
claims aimed at the conquest of power or the control of a portion of the national
20-087065/25

S/2020/598

territory; and, secondly, at the economic level, those actors take control of rich
mining areas that are exploited by different armed groups.
In my remarks, I will dwell more on the second aspect by dividing the troubled
period in two.
During the 1996-2013 period, the AFDL, the RCD, the RCD-Kisangani/
Mouvement de libération, the FDLR, the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri,
the CNDP, the M-23 and various Mayi-Mayi movements and local self-defence
groups were active in the field of operations.
The strategy of armed groups and their sponsors consisted of three steps: first,
taking control of rich mining areas, exploiting them and exporting raw minerals from
the armed groups’ sponsor countries; secondly, using local and foreign economic
actors to conduct business between the occupied areas and the armed group’s sponsor
countries; and, thirdly, collecting taxes and various payments from local mining
operators. Then, the minerals particularly targeted were coltan, tin and tungsten.
Between 2014 and 2020, the ADF-NALU, the FDLR, various Mayi-Mayi
movements and local self-defence groups were active in the field. Here again, the
economic strategy can be summarized in three points: first, keeping control over rich
mining areas, exploiting them and smuggling the minerals to the countries bordering
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; secondly, using local actors financed by the
outside, who ensure the purchase of minerals, as well as foreign actors, who position
themselves in the countries bordering the Democratic Republic of the Congo to buy
and export minerals under cover of the host countries; and, finally, collecting various
payments from local mining operators. The primary mineral of interest during this
period is gold.
I now turn to initiatives to put an end to the conflict in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. To help the region recover, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1952 (2010), which calls on actors to follow up on the
recommendations on due diligence based on the guidelines of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
The United States of America reinforced that commitment by incorporating
sections 1502 and 1504 into the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act to require all companies listed on United States stock exchanges to
exercise due diligence with regard to their mineral supply chains.
At the regional level, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) launched the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources to combat the illicit trade of minerals in the region.
At the national level, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has launched
the process of qualification and validation of mining sites, with a focus on the
traceability of minerals and the exercise of the duty of care in accordance with the
OECD’s guiding principles.
The European Union has put the finishing touches to the process by drafting
a regulation — expected to enter into force in 2021 — on minerals from conflict or
high-risk zones.
I would like to underline to participants a key element of that assistance.
Those initiatives on the ground have had a largely positive synergistic effect on the
stanniferous minerals coltan, tin and tungsten. However, that is not the case for gold,
which continues to be a secure source of funding for armed groups.
With regard to armed groups' control over mining locations, of the 2,789 listed
stanniferous, gold and diamond mining sites in the eastern part of the Democratic
6/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

Republic of the Congo, 1,746 are gold-bearing, that is 62 per cent. Out of 377,772
listed diggers, 274,004, or 72.5 per cent, are active in gold mining.
Of the 1,746 gold mines listed, 515 are under the direct control of local and
foreign arms groups, or 29.4 per cent. Of those, 69 — 4 per cent — are under the
direct control of foreign armed groups operating on Congolese soil, with 5,169 —
1.8 per cent — of identified miners; and 396, or 21 per cent, of registered gold mines,
are under the direct control of local armed groups, with 67,595 — 24 per cent — of
identified miners.
With regard to illicit trafficking corridors from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo towards member countries of the ICGLR, gold mines not under the direct
control of armed groups fuel the networks of illicit gold trafficking to East African
countries. In the Ituri corridor of the north-east extreme, gold produced in the region
of Bafwasende, Buta and Ituri provinces is transported to Bunia and then on to
Kampala and Nairobi. Is the far-north corridor, the gold produced in Beni territory,
Lubero territory and the northern part of Walikale territory goes either to the city
of Butembo or the city of Kirumba, closer to Lake Albert, and then to Kampala or
Nairobi. In the Little North corridor, the gold coming from the north of Maniema
territory, including Lubutu, from Walikale territory and Masisi passes through the
city of Goma to be transported to Kigali or Kampala. In the Bukavu corridor, the
gold produced in the Walungu, Mwenga and Shabunda territories in South Kivu
passes through the city of Bukavu and is then transported to Kigali or Bujumbura.
In the Uvira corridor, gold produced in the territory of Uvira and in the territory of
Fizi passes through the city of Uvira to be transported to the city of Bujumbura in
Burundi. In the Baraka corridor, gold produced in Fizi territory and in and around
the Itombwe reserve in Mwenga territory is transported to Baraka to be brought to
Kigoma in Tanzania and then to Dar es Salaam. In the Kalemie corridor, gold from
south Maniema and Tanganyika province is brought to the city of Kalemie and then
to Dar es Salaam via Kigoma.
As to the link between gold production and exportation by ICGLR member
countries, the situation described above gives rise to an extremely unbalanced
relationship between gold production and export statistics at the regional level.
Taking just the publicly available data, here is what emerges.
In 2018, Uganda officially produced 12 kilograms of gold and exported
12 tons — 25 tons in 2019. In 2019, Rwanda exported 5 tons of gold, but there is no
data on the country’s gold production. In 2018, Burundi produced 598 kilograms
and exported 1,112.49 kilograms. Unfortunately, Tanzania does not disclose any
statistical data on gold production and exportation on its territory.
Turning to analysis and forecasts, in view of the situation presented above,
the solution lies in the implementation of responsible supply chains that respect
due diligence and ensure the traceability of gold in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
In order to achieve that goal, we must overcome the following challenges: first,
the lack of political will at the level of the major actors in the Great Lakes region
conflict, including Rwanda and Uganda; secondly, the context of the gold trade in
the region and in the world; and, thirdly, the relationship between the availability and
value of gold — low availability results in high prices, which incentivizes smuggling.
It should be noted that the export of large quantities of gold from Uganda,
Rwanda and other ICGLR countries violates resolution 1952 (2010), the guidelines
of the OECD, as well as the requirements of the ICGLR Regional Certification
Mechanism for minerals.

20-087067/25

S/2020/598

From that perspective, it will be very difficult for the United Nations to achieve
a sustainable easing of tensions in the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as long as armed groups continue to play the main role in the extraction
and trading of gold in the region. As to the pathways towards a solution to put an end
to this situation, we must adopt a holitic approach on three levels.
First, at the national level, the export tax rate for the mining and marketing of
artisanal gold must be lowered; secondly, justice mechanisms must hold accountable
the national and foreign gold traffickers involved in the illicit gold trade; thirdly, the
Central Bank of the Congo must purchase artisanal gold; and, fourthly, responsible
supply chains must be established for artisanal gold.
At the regional level, a mine geophysical footprint analysis must be integrated
into the ICGLR certification of origin mechanism.
At the international level, actors involved in the illicit trafficking of gold in
eastern must be sanctioned.
In conclusion, it is time for the United Nations community to speak with one
voice and act accordingly so that those who benefit from the illicit gold trade in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo understand that this region needs
peace and that gold can be traded in other ways without the daily shedding of
innocent blood.

8/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

Annex III

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
We would like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui and Mr. Usseni for their
insightful briefings. They clearly attest to the usefulness of regular discussions on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), especially at this critical juncture of a worsened humanitarian
situation and a quickly approaching deadline for further MONUSCO transitioning.
We also want to seize this opportunity to make a couple of points. First of all,
we are concerned with the overall humanitarian situation. The Secretary-General
most recent report on this issue (S/2020/554) mentions an estimated 25.6 million
people in need of assistance and 5.5 million individuals being internally displaced. It
also refers to recent negative developments, including displacement in Ituri, severe
flooding across several eastern provinces, the re-emergence of the Ebola virus and
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The humanitarian crisis is compounded by the ongoing measles and cholera
epidemics, which have unfortunately claimed even more victims than the combined
death toll of the Ebola and coronavirus epidemics. Moreover, if not properly handled,
the escalating violence in Ituri may degrade the situation even further.
It is therefore essential to fully support the 2020 humanitarian response plan
and the new national COVID-19 multisectoral humanitarian response plan. In that
regard, Belgium and its European Union partners, including France, have taken the
lead, as attested by our recent humanitarian flights to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Secondly, our short-term concerns should not blur the fact that we, collectively,
need to keep working on a realistic, conditions-based and progressive transfer of
MONUSCO’s tasks to the Congolese authorities in the years ahead. In that regard, we
note that several factors have impeded the development of a joint strategy and that
detailed discussions with the Government have yet to begin.
However, MONUSCO’s exit benchmarks are due by 20 October. We therefore
welcome the report’s repeated recommendations to deal with this issue as a matter
of national priority. National ownership of security sector reform and a vision on the
implementation thereof will need to be at the heart the process.
Moreover, it remains essential that the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade
have the means and political willingness to complete its respective tasks. The
recommendations of the report authored by former United Nations Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers, should therefore be fully and unabatedly implemented.
Thirdly, the development of MONUSCO’s progressive exit strategy should go
hand in hand with adequate attention to counter the root causes of conflict, including
the illegal exploitation of natural resources. We therefore highly welcome Mr. Usseni’s
interesting briefing today. We also intend to organize an Arria Formula meeting on
this topic in July, in cooperation with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United States and South Africa. The illegal exploitation of natural resources has
been recognized as one of the main underlying causes and effects of conflict in the
Great Lakes region. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the illegal
exploitation of gold, coltan and other resources has fuelled conflict for more than
20 years, involving a wide variety of national, regional and international State and
non-State actors. We are also convinced that the ongoing development of a new United
Nations regional strategy for the Great Lakes would provide a good opportunity for
further and deeper exchanges on this topic.

20-087069/25

S/2020/598

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
Allow me to express once again our deepest condolences to the Indonesian
delegation and to the families of the fallen peacekeeper in the attack on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) a few days ago. We hope for the swift recovery of the wounded
soldier and expect that the perpetrators will be brought to justice.
We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui for her briefing and Mr. Jamal Usseni for his
valuable information and leadership in the fight against illicit mineral trafficking in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Dominican Republic is pleased that, despite tensions in the political
dynamics in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the main actors have supported
the efforts to contain the impact and spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
However, we are concerned that, in addition to the resulting health emergency
and economic imbalance, the pandemic also affects diplomatic activities aimed
at strengthening regional unity, as well as the search for peaceful solutions to the
border dispute between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia.
The presence of troops from both countries in their respective border
territories and the death of several soldiers as a result of clashes makes for a
sensitive situation that could quickly devolve, with serious consequences. In that
regard, we thank the Southern African Development Community for accepting
to mediate, and, taking advantage of the restated willingness of both States to
find a solution through diplomatic channels, we call for preventive and peaceful
conflict-resolution measures.
The constant level of violence and insecurity in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, triggered by confrontations, looting, kidnappings and ambushes by the
Allied Democratic Forces and other armed groups against the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO, is very disturbing.
It has resulted in ongoing deaths and violence against authorities and innocent
civilians, including women and children, who are disproportionately affected.
The Dominican Republic deplores and condemns those attacks and calls for
the continued strengthening of MONUSCO’s intelligence systems and the FARDC’s
resources, with a stronger and more coordinated joint strategy to more effectively and
efficiently cope with and neutralize the armed groups while minimizing casualties.
Those measures, in turn, would also help prevent other forms of violence
exacerbated by the armed groups such as inter-ethnic and intercommunal clashes
and human rights violations, including extrajudicial or summary executions and
considerable conflict-related sexual violence.
In that regard, it is also essential to continue working with the Government
to develop a comprehensive strategy to definitively eradicate the abominable abuses
against children and conflict-related sexual violence.
Due to the constant displacement of civilian populations, the aftermath of
violence intensifies the humanitarian crisis. An estimated 25.6 million people in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are in need of assistance, and 5.5 million
are internally displaced and living in deplorable conditions. Those vulnerabilities
are multiplied by the recurrence of deadly floods that destroy homes, farmland
and basic infrastructure. They are further overwhelmed by several simultaneous
health emergencies in the form of the Ebola virus, the measles outbreak and the
10/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

current COVID-19 pandemic. In that context, we celebrate that the World Health
Organization declared the end of the Ebola virus in the eastern part of the country.
In conclusion, we thank MONUSCO for its efforts in helping the Congolese
deal with these difficult health and safety circumstances. We also commend the
arrest of Trésor Mputu Kankonde, implicated in the murder of two United Nations
experts, Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp.
In that respect, the Dominican Republic requests that the Under-SecretaryGeneral, as an extraordinary measure, extend the contract of the United Nations
experts assigned to the Democratic Republic of the Congo follow-up mechanism
by six months. These experts already have the case knowledge and experience to
conclude it and bring all perpetrators to justice.
Despite all efforts, the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces security, health
and economic challenges, as well as a lack of development. Those, compounded
by the impact of COVID-19, could trigger a socioeconomic crisis with regional
effects. In that context, the Dominican Republic reiterates the need for an urgent
and coordinated regional and global strategy in response to the current and postCOVID-19 challenges.
Only with comprehensive prevention, resolution and development strategies
can we bring peace and stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region.

20-0870611/25

S/2020/598

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank the President for convening today’s meeting. I would also like to
express my gratitude to Mr. Jamal Usseni Jamael and Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui for their valuable insights.
I would like to extend my condolences to Indonesia for the casualties it
suffered in the recent attack against peacekeepers in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and
to others who have paid the greatest price while working to establish peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite a stable political situation, peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains elusive. The Allied Democratic Forces have carried out dozens of
attacks, which have left over 100 people dead, mostly civilians. Several other groups
have also increased their attacks in Kivu, including the Nduma défense du CongoRénové, whose leader, Guidon Mwissa, remains a fugitive at large. In Ituri, attacks
against civilians and security forces by the Lendu have claimed hundreds of lives.
I would like to commend MONUSCO for its quick reaction to these conflicts,
which has undoubtedly saved many lives. I also understand that the cooperation
between MONUSCO and the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo has been steadily improving, which will hopefully help save even more lives
in future. It is also good to hear that, despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
there has been progress with the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process. I hope that the pandemic will not stop provincial and national
initiatives on DDR, which are necessary to ensuring that former combatants remain
former combatants.
In addition to the security situation, I remain most concerned over the human
rights situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The violence of armed
groups during the first three months of 2020 has been accompanied by some 2,000
human rights violations and abuses, including cases of sexual and gender-based
violence. The fact that the Congolese security forces perpetrated many of these acts
remains a significant problem. Accountability for such violations and abuses must be
established in order to avoid the prevalence of a culture of impunity and build trust
in the country’s security forces. Strengthening the rule of law and justice institutions
is a critical component of efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of conflict.
MONUSCO’s assistance in the investigation and prosecution of those who need to be
held to account is very welcome, as is the assistance towards security sector reform.
The challenges facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo are numerous
and diverse: from armed-group violence and the illicit export of minerals to floods,
the Ebola virus disease and now COVID-19.
I would like to conclude by commending MONUSCO, the Congolese
authorities and all partners for their continued commitment to establishing peace in
the country.

12/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
I thank Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Usseni Jamael for their briefings.
I take this opportunity to address my deepest condolences to Indonesia and its
Ambassador after the tragic death of its peacekeeper.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo still faces many challenges. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) is helping, but the Mission cannot replace the action of
the Congolese authorities. The country’s long-term stability will depend on their
ability to develop the capacity to bring security and stability to the citizens of the
Democratic Republic.
The election of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi has raised prospects
that are encouraging. Progress is being made on the fight against corruption,
on the implementation of certain aspects of the Government’s programme and
on reconciliation.
On the security front, some regions are entering a post-conflict phase, and
the focus must now be put on State-building and development to consolidate their
stability. In these regions, the Congolese authorities can take over from MONUSCO,
enabling the Mission to refocus its efforts on the regions that are still suffering from
the actions of Congolese and foreign armed groups, intercommunal violence, the
plundering of natural resources and numerous human rights violations perpetrated
against civilian populations, particularly women and children.
In these regions, a determined commitment by the national and provincial
authorities is necessary, so that, beyond the military aspect, a socioeconomic
response can be provided to address the root causes of conflict. This is the case in
Ituri, where the re-emergence of a 20-year-old conflict illustrates the long-term risks
to not addressing structural causes. As Mr. Usseni Jamael has shown us, that also
requires strong action to stop the illicit exploitation and export of natural resources.
France calls on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region
to act decisively on this issue.
On the health and humanitarian front, the situation remains worrisome
because of the multiplicity of ongoing epidemics. The Government is engaging in
voluntary action in this area and can count on France’s support, as demonstrated by
the visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the French Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, on 8 and 9 June.
These encouraging prospects and persistent challenges must be taken into
account in the establishment of a joint road map between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations towards an exit for MONUSCO. This work must
be completed as soon as possible. France encourages the Congolese authorities to
commit themselves fully to this exercise.
In the meantime, the constant improvement of MONUSCO’s performance
remains crucial. In particular, an ambitious reform of the Intervention Brigade is
critical. Rapid progress must be made in this regard, and the commitment of the
contributing countries is necessary to that end. We owe it to the populations that are
suffering every day from attacks by armed groups.

20-0870613/25

S/2020/598

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
I would like to express Germany’s deepest condolences to the Government
of Indonesia and the family of the peacekeeper who lost his life in the ambush on
22 June. The incident tragically demonstrates the level of persisting violence.
We remain extremely concerned about the deteriorating situation in the
east and the increasing activities of armed groups, especially in North Kivu and
Ituri. Germany agrees with the Secretary-General, who, in his report (S/2020/554),
observes that a military-only strategy will not lead to lasting stability.
We are particularly concerned about the high number of human rights
violations, most notably sexual and gender-based violence. Although the number of
such violations committed by State security actors has decreased, the overall high
numbers of human rights violations remains alarming.
The dire humanitarian situation continues to hit the most vulnerable groups —
women, children and internally displaced people — the hardest. Given that some
300,000 new internally displaced persons have arrived since the beginning of the
year in Ituri alone, the protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance must
remain the top priority. We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support for the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. We urge all armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to adhere this call.
We would like to reiterate Germany’s support for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui.
MONUSCO remains essential in supporting the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The situation has become even more challenging due to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and the unsatisfactory security situation. We commend Special
Representative Zerrougui and the Mission for adapting to the new conditions on the
ground. We encourage the Mission to further enhance its abilities in the country to
implement the recommendations made in the report by Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz and to put a special focus on fulfilling its mandate to
protect civilians.
On the reconfiguration of MONUSCO, we understand the difficulties posed
by COVID-19. Still, it remains important to ensure national ownership in developing
benchmarks. These benchmarks must be realistic if we want to achieve a sustainable
and conditions-based reconfiguration.
COVID-19 has a worrisome impact on the security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation. For instance, due to limited capacities, as vaccination rates
are low and decreasing, so the vulnerability of children to such diseases as polio,
measles and yellow fever is increasing. This shows that international support and
solidarity is urgently needed.
As part of the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan, Germany
has already provided €300 million in additional funds for COVID-19-related
humanitarian assistance, and is currently the fourth-largest donor to the Plan. The
Plan includes a regional response plan and a humanitarian response plan for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, Germany is very positively disposed
towards providing support to MONUSCO in the form of medical facilities through
its Enable and Enhance Initiative.

14/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

We are concerned that the pandemic might undermine political, security and
socioeconomic reforms in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For this reason,
it is important that the Government continue on its path of reform, especially in
terms of the security sector, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
the justice sector. The population needs a new perspective: powerful democratic
institutions, a strengthened rule of law and the fight against impunity and corruption
are key to achieving sustainable peace, stability and development.
Before concluding, let me also say a word about regional cooperation.
Against the background of severe security, socioeconomic, health and humanitarian
challenges, such cooperation is absolutely crucial. Supply networks empowering
armed groups must be cut off, and illicit war economies must be eliminated.
But regional collaboration creates new legal and sustainable opportunities for
development and economic growth. In this context, Mr. Usseni Jamael’s assessment
is very important: fighting the illicit trafficking in minerals and transforming such
activities into legitimate sources of revenue are an essential part of the reform
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

20-0870615/25

S/2020/598

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
At the outset, allow me to thank the briefers — the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Director of civil society
organization Save Act Mine, Mr. Jamal Usseni Jamael.
I will focus my comments on three points. But before I begin, allow me to
thank the Special Representative, the United Nations and members of the Security
Council for the support and the kind words of sympathy they offered for the fallen
Indonesian peacekeeper from the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
It is a sad time for us in Indonesia, as we had never had a casualty from an
attack since we started joining United Nations peacekeeping missions in 1957. In
our 63-year course of services to the United Nations, we have contributed more
than 44,800 troops, and this is the first time we have experienced a fatality as the
result of an attack. The most difficult and painful task that I have ever had to fulfil
in my years-long service as an Indonesian Ambassador to the United Nations is to
write a personal letter to the family of the fallen, expressing our condolences. I will
convey all the messages of condolences I have received from Council members to
my Government and to the family of the fallen peacekeeper, as well as to the other
peacekeeper who, wounded in the incident, is recuperating.
The fallen Indonesian peacekeeper was an engineer charged with building a
bridge near Beni in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He was there to strengthen
the local infrastructure and support the livelihoods of the people in the eastern part
of the country. Just like us, he was doing his job under the banner of United Nations
idealism with a view to saving and improving the lives of the Congolese.
I pay tribute to all other fallen Blue Helmets who have served with honour in
MONUSCO and in other United Nations missions all over the world and made the
ultimate sacrifice for global peace and security. We shall never forget their service.
This tragedy brings me to my first point, which is the need to ensure the safety
and security of peacekeepers. Increasing numbers of attacks by such armed groups
as the Allied Democratic Forces have claimed numerous civilian lives, and now they
have claimed the life of a peacekeeper. This was the first casualty in MONUSCO
from attacks in two years. To be able to carry out its mandate of protecting civilians,
MONUSCO needs to first protect itself.
We have heard that attacks directed against peacekeepers in United Nations
peacekeeping missions have increased across the board. This is indeed worrisome,
since United Nations peacekeeping missions are the face of the Organization on the
ground. Attacks on its peacekeepers are an attack on the United Nations itself.
It is time for us to seriously look at our peacekeeping efforts and increase
professionalism and performance, as well as funding and capacity. The safety
and security of peacekeepers remains high on Indonesia’s list of priorities. We
will continue our efforts aimed at saving lives and protecting civilians through
community engagement, winning the hearts and minds of the people and building
their trust. Our commitment has helped the Mission’s disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, including facilitating the surrender of more than 300
former combatants and more than 50 weapons.
Secondly, we need to maintain the momentum of peace that began in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last year. The Central African and the Great
16/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

Lakes regions have been positively affected by the peaceful transfer of power in the
country in 2019. This is indeed an opportunity that should not be missed. We call for
all partners to use this momentum to strengthen their support and assistance to the
Democratic Republic.
Nevertheless, having heard the Special Representative’s briefing just now, we
are deeply concerned at the rise of intercommunal conflicts, the proliferation of
militias and armed groups, the killing of civilians and the use of hate speech. We
concur with her assertions that efforts to de-soldier communities from militias is
vital if we are to tackle the escalation of tensions. We condemn all attacks against
innocent civilians.
We need to enhance efforts to ensure that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues on a path of peace so that its people may experience peace, stability
and prosperity. To that end, we recognize the role that the country’s neighbours and
regional organizations have to play to help maintain this peaceful climate.
Thirdly, we need to increase humanitarian assistance in the country. We join
the Secretary-General in commending the Congolese Government for taking swift
and decisive action to limit the spread of the coronavirus. Nevertheless, we also
realize that the pandemic’s socioeconomic impact on the country complicates the
efforts to address the political, developmental and humanitarian challenges facing
the country. The re-emergence of the Ebola virus disease has also presented the
country with additional public-health challenges.
I join the call of the Secretary-General for armed groups to lay down their
weapons so that efforts to combat these public health challenges can continue
unimpeded. We also call for all partners to increase their humanitarian support
for the country. We should ensure that our brothers and sisters in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continue on the path of peace. Indonesia will continue to
support efforts to this end with its own sons and daughters on the ground.

20-0870617/25

S/2020/598

Annex IX
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), for her informative briefing. We
also thank Mr. Jamal Usseni Jamael, civil society representative, for the information
he provided.
Let me start by expressing our sincere condolences to Indonesia for the attack
on a MONUSCO patrol near Beni earlier this week, during which an Indonesian
peacekeeper was killed and another was wounded. We ask our dear friends to accept
our words of sympathy.
We have carefully studied the latest Secretary-General’s report on MONUSCO
(S/2020/554) and have to admit with regret that, despite the coronavirus, violence in
the eastern provinces has not subsided. On the contrary, in an apparent refusal to
adhere to the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, the Allied Democratic
Forces and other armed groups seem to be taking full advantage of the pandemic to
step up their attacks against Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) and civilians.
Particularly concerning is the deteriorating security situation in Ituri
province, where the Lendu and Hema conflict, as well as the increased activity of
armed groups, are seeing a new surge with a heavy toll on the local population. The
situation in Ituri clearly proves the need to broaden support to the disenfranchised
combatants under the framework of the appropriate disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. A national framework policy on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, if prepared, could also play a helpful role.
We commend the measures taken by the FARDC and MONUSCO with a view
to strengthening their presence in Ituri and deepening coordination in the province.
We call upon Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui to continue
her good offices with the aim of facilitating the search for a sustainable solution to
the situation in the eastern provinces.
In these circumstances, we find it crucially important that, despite persisting
tensions, members of the country’s ruling coalition continue to resolve their
differences through dialogue and that the coexistence model remain in place. We
urge both blocks of the coalition to continue to work along those lines. We all need
to support the Kabila-Tshisekedi tandem for the future of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
We note that the work on a joint strategy for a phased, responsible exit
by MONUSCO has slowed down during the pandemic. We should not, however,
overdramatize that. We hope that the Mission will soon be able to resume consultations
with Kinshasa. All decisions on the exit strategy should be made while taking into
account the situation on the ground and carefully considering the priorities of
Kinshasa, States of the region and troop-contributing countries.
We also note that MONUSCO has started implementing the recommendations
contained in the report of retired Lieutenant General Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers. We would like to recall our position on the
document. In principle, we are supportive of the measures being taken to strengthen
coordination between peacekeepers and FARDC and enhance the operational
capacity of the Force Intervention Brigade. We continue to believe, however, that
cooperation on intelligence-sharing should be carried out in strict compliance
18/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

with the peacekeeping principles and the Security Council’s mandate. We urge the
peacekeepers to focus on military reconnaissance and exercise more caution while
using other forms of intelligence, especially those relying on special methods of
obtaining information.
To conclude, I would like to reassure the participants that the Russian
Federation, both as a permanent member of the Council and as a member of the
Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, will continue contributing to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the stabilization of the
overall situation in the Great Lakes region.

20-0870619/25

S/2020/598

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the African members
of the Council, Tunisia, South Africa and the Niger, as well as Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines.
We would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this important and timely
meeting on the Democratic Republic of Congo. We would also like to thank and
commend the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the situation in that
country and the activities of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2020/554). Similarly, we
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO,
Leila Zerrougui, for her comprehensive briefing.
We recognize the encouraging political developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo despite the existing security and humanitarian challenges.
Our delegations commend the governing coalition’s continued commitment
to resolving their differences through dialogue. We are fully convinced that a
constructive dialogue among all Congolese is required for the realization of their
national priorities. In this regard, the African members and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines echo the sentiments of the Secretary-General that dialogue remains the
only solution to resolve differences.
On the security front, our delegations are concerned by the continued
instability in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo owing to the destabilizing
activities of armed groups and persistent intercommunal tensions. We therefore
underscore the centrality of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region as a long-term solution to
create stability in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the wider region.
Our delegations also emphasize the importance of MONUSCO’s role in stabilizing
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and recognize the efforts of the Force
Intervention Brigade in addressing the threat posed by the armed groups. The Force
Intervention Brigade requires the continued support of the Council in this regard and
needs to be fully capacitated in order to remain effective in addressing the threat
against the civilian population in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines condemn
all violent attacks on civilians and MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which often result in casualties, and call for MONUSCO to be more
responsive overall to the requirements to fulfil its protection of civilians mandate
and to effectively address such attacks.
In relation to the recent attacks against MONUSCO, we express our deepest
condolences to the family of the deceased peacekeeper and to the Indonesian
authorities. We also wish the injured peacekeeper a speedy recovery. In this
connection, our delegations reiterate calls on the international community and
partners to mobilize the necessary resources to support the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in its efforts to strengthen its institutions and to advance the security sector
reform (SSR) and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes.
In that regard, we call on the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the country’s partners to include a community-based approach in the SSR and
DDR priorities, especially as relates to the reintegration of demobilized combatants.
On the humanitarian situation, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues to experience a worrying humanitarian crisis, and the coronavirus
20/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

disease pandemic is exacerbating the situation. The unintended consequences of the
pandemic response have increased vulnerabilities to other public health issues, while
the re-emergence of Ebola virus cases are also a cause for concern, as they delay the
progress of the important stabilization work by MONUSCO and other partners of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Nevertheless, we commend the ongoing swift response and decisive efforts
undertaken by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, other United
Nations agencies, the African Union and the World Health Organization. Our
delegations call for sustained international support to the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to mitigate the negative impact of these diseases on its people
and economy. We also emphasize the need for flexible financial arrangements to
bolster development efforts within the country, in line with national priorities and in
accordance with the aims of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Turning to the situation in the region, our delegations wish to underline the
importance of fostering strong and effective regional relations and cooperation and,
in that context, wish to commend President Tshisekedi for his continued outreach to
the regional Heads of State. We support the continued commitment of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) to assist the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in achieving sustainable peace, security and stability. SADC’s response to
recent calls by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia to help mediate
the border issue attests to that commitment. Furthermore, our delegations are
encouraged by the cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations
and by their undertaking to continue engaging in support of the consolidation of
stability and democratic governance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also commend the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region for
its efforts, alongside MONUSCO, in pursuing a regional strategy to address the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. The illicit extraction and trade of minerals remains
a major source of revenue that sustains armed group activity in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Therefore, we commend the recent efforts of Member States
of the region to improve traceability in the gold sector, namely, Rwanda’s adoption
of a national certification mechanism and Burundi and Tanzania’s implementation
of domestic certification processes following the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, in accordance with the Lusaka Declaration. Our delegations
encourage further efforts of the regional and international partners to tackle illegal
supply chains.
Finally, our delegations commend the United Nations, MONUSCO, troopcontributing countries, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
international partners for their commitment and efforts to stabilize the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and protect civilians from ongoing threats despite the
prevailing challenges. It is our considered view that any drawdown of MONUSCO
should be based on the positive evolution of the situation on the ground for the
handover of MONUSCO tasks to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines are of the firm
view that it is imperative for the international community — through the African
Union, the United Nations and international partners — to continue to maintain
solidarity with the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to provide
the necessary political, financial and other support in an effort to ensure that there
is no reversal of the gains made thus far.

20-0870621/25

S/2020/598

Annex XI
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui and our briefers today.
At the outset, I would like to offer the United Kingdom’s condolences
following the death of the Indonesian peacekeeper during the attack on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) on 22 June. Our hearts go out to the families Ambassador
Djani wrote to. Nothing can soften the blow or the anguish they feel, but the thoughts
of the whole Council are with them. I agree with Ambassador Djani that we should
redouble our efforts regarding the protection of our peacekeepers. We also reiterate
our condemnation, as a Council, of the senseless attack and call on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that the perpetrators are
held accountable.
We welcome the response of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak and commend MONUSCO
for its support in responding to the pandemic. It is, however, concerning that
COVID-19 preventative measures are hindering humanitarian access. Reallocation
of resources and expertise is increasing the vulnerability to other health issues, such
as Ebola and measles, of which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is currently
dealing with the world’s largest outbreak. We recognize that the secondary efforts
concerning COVID-19 will also hit the Democratic Republic of the Congo hard,
requiring support to address the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic. That will
require a unified response from the political class of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as support from the international community.
The United Kingdom remains a committed development partner and friend to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its people. In 2019, the United Kingdom
was the second largest donor, providing more than $99 million in humanitarian
appeals. COVID-19 poses a risk not only to health but also to the progress made on
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We remain concerned about the
overall security environment, in particular the deterioration in the security situation
in Ituri, where 333 civilians were killed between March and May.
We are disappointed that no armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have responded to the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and
therefore echo that call and urge all armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to lay down their weapons.
In addition to tackling the threat armed groups pose to civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, sustained efforts must be undertaken to cut the
revenue streams that enable them to operate. We heard a bit about this again today.
In that regard, we commend the work of organizations such as Save Act Mine and
call for the strengthening of regional efforts to address illegal cross-border trade in
national natural resources.
There has been important progress at the regional level in the past year. It
is critical to the stability of the Great Lakes region — in particular, the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo — that the momentum is not lost and that States
resolve their differences through diplomatic efforts. In this regard, we are concerned
by the increasing tension at the Democratic Republic of the Congo-Zambia border
and urge a resolution to be found through diplomatic channels.
22/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

We must not lose sight of the vital work that is still needed to put an end to
instability in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the difficult circumstances
posed by COVID-19, we commend the continuation of MONUSCO’s operations,
and the UK welcomes the progress made to review and tailor protection of civilian
strategies to each province where MONUSCO is present. Delivering protection of
civilians on the ground remains challenging, and we are alarmed by the number of
civilian deaths during this reporting period. We urge MONUSCO and its troopcontributing countries to pursue the reforms set out in the report Improving security
of United Nations peacekeepers by retired Lieutenant General Santos Cruz and to
promptly implement the necessary improvements to its Force Intervention Brigade.
We welcome the continuation of closer working and coordination between the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo and MONUSCO to address
the security challenges in the region. We encourage them to continue to deepen their
cooperation in order to improve civilian protection.
In the spirit of cooperation, we call on the Government and MONUSCO
to resume, as soon as possible, the vital initiatives that have been paused due to
COVID-19. In particular, we call for the resumption of the Government’s engagement
with MONUSCO on security sector reform. We also call for the prompt resumption
of discussions between the Government and MONUSCO on the Mission’s exit
strategy, as well as the development of clear benchmarks for the transition of the
United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In concluding, let me underline what the United Kingdom believes to be the
top priorities for MONUSCO in the coming months, namely, to continue to support
the Government and the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
context of COVID-19; to implement the Santos Cruz report recommendations; to
work on the reform of the Force Intervention Brigade; and the joint development
by the Government and MONUSCO of the Mission’s exit strategy. We will be
monitoring those issues closely and hope to see progress ahead of MONUSCO’s
mandate renewal later this year.

20-0870623/25

S/2020/598

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui and Jamal Usseni for their briefings.
My delegation strongly condemns the recent attack on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) that resulted in the death of a peacekeeper and injured another.
We would like to extend our sincere condolences to the family of the victim, the
Government of Indonesia and MONUSCO. On this occasion, we reiterate the vital
importance of ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel in
accordance with resolution 2518 (2020).
This aforementioned incident, among others, shows how volatile the security
situation still is in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and,
accordingly, how insecure the livelihood of millions of civilians is.
We remain gravely concerned over the deterioration of the security situation in
several parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in Ituri province,
where over 300 civilians have been killed in the past three months and 300,000 have
been displaced since the beginning of the year. Continuing violence perpetrated by
various armed groups and intercommunal clashes are hampering our core mandate
of protecting civilians on the ground.
On a positive note, we welcome the determination of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in maintaining a favourable political climate, as
well as improving relations and promoting reconciliation among countries of the
region. We commend the swift action of the Government to minimize the spread of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This is an important step to avoid
major impacts to the challenging socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in
the country.
In light of the
following observations.

current

situation,

we

would

like

to

make

the

First, apart from military measures that are being undertaken, my delegation
would like to stress the importance of working towards a sustained solution to the
continuing instability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A comprehensive
approach should include promoting dialogue and mediation for the sake of
reconciliation and tolerance, and strengthening State authority in different conflict
areas. It is also important to lay emphasis on the enhancement of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, as well as those for security
sector reform.
Secondly, we have always had confidence in the contribution of regional
cooperation. The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been showing practical outcomes. We praise the efforts
of signatory countries and the guarantors of this framework agreement. Its full
implementation is crucial to eliminating threats posed by armed groups and to
settling the issues of the illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources and
other cross-border illegal activities.
Thirdly, addressing the root causes of instability, including those that fuel
intercommunal conflicts, demands efforts to improve the livelihoods of the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are deeply worried about the high
number of people in need of assistance across the Democratic Republic of the Congo
24/25

20-08706

S/2020/598

and the plight of millions of internally displaced persons and refugees. The already
dire humanitarian situation continues to be aggravated by the current uncertain
security situation in the east, the COVID-19 pandemic and the re-emergence of
Ebola. We therefore call for greater support from the international community for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which should also anticipate the response to
and recovery from COVID-19.
Last but not least, we fully support the important role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and MONUSCO towards peace and
stability for the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also welcome
the good partnership between the Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
and MONUSCO.
Given the current volatile security situation, we feel that there is a pressing
need for the formulation of a most comprehensive and prudent set of benchmarks for
the MONUSCO exit strategy so as to avoid an unwanted relapse.

20-0870625/25
