c

.l.h

MEETING: 22 MARCH 1977

CONTENTS
p”i
J’rovisirmal

i\gctIda (S/Agenda/1989)

.,.. .......... ......,. ........

Arltq?tion of tl~c agenda . . . , , . , , , , . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

kttcr tlatcd 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
Xlni tccl Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 2295) .

, ,.,
1

s/W.1989
-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1989TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 22 March 1977, al: 10.30 a.m.
Plcsi&~t:

Mr- Andrew

YOUNG (United States of America).

~‘~~scnt: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union af Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l989)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permment
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12295)
Tile meeting was called to order at I I. IS a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agendawas adopted.
The Question of South Africa

Council’sagenda.I therefore propose,in accordancewith
the usualpracticeand with the consentof the Council, to
invite theserepresentatives
to participatein the discussion,
without the fight to vote, underthe provisionsof Article 31
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
3. ln view of the limited numberof placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite those representativesto take the
Placesreservedfor themat the sideof the Councilchamber,
on the understandingthat they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they wishto addressthe
Council.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. S,M. Al safSar
(Bahrain), Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar),Mrs. S. Y.
Gbuiama(Sierra Leone)and Mr. D. W. Karnana (Zambicl)
took the placesreserved.tbr themat the sideof the Comcil
chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: The first speakeris the Commissionerfor External Affairs of Nigeria.I welcomehim and
invite him to take a placeat the Counciltableand to make
hisstatement.

5. Mr. GARBA (Nigeria): Mr. President,allow me to
congratulateyou mostwarmly on your assumptionof the
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the PermanentRepresen- presidencyof the Councilduringthe month of March.Your
tative of Nigeria to the United Nationsaddressed
to the
qualities and skills, which are acknowledgedboth at the
Presidentof the Security Council (S/12295)
national and internationallevel, will no doubt enableyou
to guide the deliberationsof the Council in a positiveand
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decision productive manner.Also, you representa country whose
people hold dear the principles of justice, liberty and
taken yesterday by the Council at its 1988th meeting,I
equality-principles which the people of my country
invite the representatives of Egypt, Indonesia, Liberia,
cherishsomuchandprincipleswhich wein Africa hopewill
Nigeria, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yugosooneror later obtainin southernAfrica.
slaviato take the placesreservedfor them at the sideof the
Council chamber, on the usualunderstandingthat they will
6. Permitmeto thank you and, throughYOU, the members
be invited to take a place at the Council table when they
of the Council for having invited my delegationto
wish to addressthe Council.
participatein this debateon the questionof South Africa.
My Government, and indeed all the people of Nigeria,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. B Abdd
considerthis debatecrucialbecausewe cannotCOntinue to
Meguid (Qy~t),
Mr. A. Marpaung (Indonesia), Mrs. A.
remain oblivious to the spillingof innocent blood in the
Brooks-Rando&h (Liberia), Mr, N Garba (fligerla),
streetsof South Africa or to the criesof the anguishedin
Mr. I. B. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. M. Allaf (Syrian Arab
Republic) ami Mr#J. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) took the places that country. This debateis crucial to the SeCUritY Of the
States bordering on South Africa and, above all, to the
reservedfbr thenz at the sideof the Councilchamber.
restorationof our confidencein the Council.
2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I shouldlike to inform
the membersof the Council that lettershavebeenreceived 7. The time has come when we all have to harnessour
from the representatives of Bahrain, Madagascar,Sierra initiatives and channelour efforts towardsone focal point
jn dealingwith the problemsthat plaguethe southerntip
Leone and Zambia, in which they requestto be invited to
of he African continent. For too long we have dissipated
participate in the discussion of the question on the

our thrusts in too many directions. Our archives are full of
resolutions, documents and “non-papers”. We have Preoccupied ourselves with so much debating that some of us
tend to lose sight of the real issues. Meanwhile, as we
remain seized of these problems, the Vorster racist rigime is
being consolidated. It is time to prove to our conscience
that we, as members of the human race, can no longer allow
fellow human beings to be victims of this crime against
humanity.
8. We are not asking too much of ourselves in dealing with
the problems which, as we collectively know, are repugnant
to the basic principles that bind US all to this noble
Organization. On the contrary, nothing is too little or too
big to sacrifice for the future of humanity as, sooner or
later, the repercussions will engulf us all. There is no one
here around this table or belonging to this Organization
who has not condemned what the racist regime of South
Africa preaches and stands for. No State Member subscribes
to the theory that one race is superior to another.
9. Having said all this, we should ask ourselves what is to
be done. My Government, along with all the peoples of
Africa and its friends, is resolved to intensify the struggle
until every inch of the continent and all its peoples are free
from colonialism, oppression, apartheid and all other ills
inherited from the turbulent phasesof our history. We in
Nigeria, and indeed in Africa, insist that no one can be
ambivalentabout theseissues.We know that we shallwin,
as time is on our side,but the time for any meaningful
peacefulchangeis fastrunningout.

the country for which they, the black people, have also
toiled, sweatedand died.
12. The racist regimehasempoweredits military forces,
armedwith weaponsoriginating from so-calledfriends of
Africa, to threaten, harass and terrorize neighbouring
independentand sovereignAfrican States. With borrowed
military might, the racist regime attempted to cripple the
progressivePeople’sRepublic of Angola in its infancy, on
the pretext of a non-existingagreementwith that country’s
colonial master. The sameracist rigime sent its forces
rampaginginto Zambia, molesting and killing the peaceloving people of Zambia and the Namibianswho sought
refugein that country. With the active support of the same
racists at Pretoria, the illegal Smith r@gimeat Salisbury
followed suit with armedincursions,first into Mozambique
and then into Botswana.Lesotho, in its efforts to implement General Assembly resolutions, was subjectep to
economic blackmail and arm tWiStiJlg
by the racists at
Pretoria. Thesefacts are well known to all. How much
longershallwe allow the atrocities to continue?
13. The Lesothoepisodetypifies the attitude of the racist
r6gimein South Africa towards this Organization and its
noble principles. South Africa’s racist rCgimehas persistently failed to implementUnited Nationsresolutions.It has
nurtured and given succour to the illegal regime of Ian
Smith againstall international sanctionsand, in so doing,
acted in contempt and defiance of the decisionsof the
Security Council.

14. Its attitude with regardto Namibiais another casein
10. Wehave, over the pastyears,seenmurderouseventsin
point. There the racist regime of South Africa has consouthern Africa. Wehavewitnessedrepressionand oppres- tinued, in utter disregardof United Nationsresolutionsand
sion of the majority mounted on such a scale,with such the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice
dimensionsand after such a pattern ashave existedat no
of 21 June 1971,’ to occupy a United Nations Territory
time in the history of mankind. Seventeenyears ago illegally. It hasincreasinglyentrenchedits military forcesin
yesterday there wasthe Sharpevillemassacre,That event that Territory in order to prevent the Organization from
jarred the world into turning its attention to the infulfilling its obligationsand responsibility.This is clearly an
equalities and inhumanitiesobtaining in South Africa,
act of war on the part of the racists againstthe United
where the black man has been kept in quasi-slavery,a Nations.How muchlonger shallwe tolerate South Africa’s
servant to the needsand comforts of the criminal racist military occupation of the United Nations Territory of
white minority, wherethe black manis detachedfrom his Namibia? Are we not all collectively responsiblefor that
family and lives in bondage,hunger and poverty. He has Territory andits people?
been exploited and then deprived of the fruits of his
laboursin a landrich in gold anddiamonds.
15. SomeCouncil membersseemto find it convenient to
talk about peacefulmeansfor the solution of the problems
11. After Sharpeville,it seemedthat the world community in South Africa when in and around Namibiathe Pretoria
dropped off to sleep.Even limited actions againstthe
racists have mounted a military offensive against the
racists in South Africa were half-heartedly carried out.
peaceful solutions proffered by the Council, thereby
Resolutionsof this Organizationwere covertly broken or
creating a situation which is anything but peaceful. From
openly disregardedin collaborationwith the racists.Some the north of the Territory of Namibiaan Angolan group, in
Membersaided the racistsin amassing
military equipment collusionwith the racistsof South Africa, is attempting to
to the detriment of the oppressedblack people of South destabilizethe independentRepublic of Angola. Yet, while
Africa and to the horror of innocentpeoplesof neighbour- we will not be allowed to hear the last about the Cuban
ing African States.Sowetois fresh in our minds.Innocent troops in Angola, no reference is made to the military
and peacefulchildrenborn in the wakeof Sharpevillewere build-upin the United NationsTerritory of Namibia.Nor is
mercilesslygunneddownby trigger-happyracistpolicemen. there mention of the massing
of racisttroops in the Caprivi
The world cried out in horror at thosemanifestationsof the
Strip nor of the useof Namibia,a United NationsTerritory,
syndromeof a drowningman.Yet the sameracistrCgimeof
Vorster still continuesits murderousacts of apartheid.It
1 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
has tightened its massiverepressivemachinery, It has South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
herdedthe majority black population into the mostbarren Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
portions of the land, stripping them of the citizenshipof
Repms 1971, p. 16.

to launch aggression against other States. That kind of
thinking shows an utter lack of interest in African problems
as against interest in super-b!Jer “on&upmans~p”
at the
expense of the consideration of global peace and security in
that region of Africa.

are greater. The time has come when we in Africa, and
especially mY country, have seriously to consider which
way we must go in this matter and do so with a clear
conscience. We Cannot continue to have establishments in
our midst which, while they p,rofess certain principles in
their dealings with US, also cater to and sustain a regime
that holds our brothers and sisters in bondage and slavery,
in complete disregard of those same principles. We cannot
in good conscience have those whose hands are stained with
the blood of innocent children in South Africa meddling in
our affairs. We have allowed them sufficient time; the
decision is now ours to take. The imposition of economic
sanctions, especially through the cessation of new invest.
merits in South Africa, is an action we must take. Measures
SUCh as that would indicate to the racists in South Africa
that the world community can no longer be defied.

16. We in Africa are becoming increasingly dissatisfied
with the outcome of debates on issues which are so dear to
our hearts. The resolutions adopted by the Council each
time we seek action against the racist rigime of Pretoria
have always been indecisive. I recall how we bent over
backwards trying to accommodate the wishes of some
members of the Council during the first debate on Namibia
in 1976, in the sincere belief that, when the subject was
taken up again, there would be no hesitation. Nothing came
of our goodwill but further disappointments. Our patience
is running out.

20. WC observed closely the mad rush of loans to South
Africa in 1976, and in particular the series of loans since
the Soweto massacre. There is a school of thought in
Western countries which believes that loans and investments
in South Africa will go a long way towards helping the
black majority. It is argued that cessation of those loans
and investments would have devastating effects on the
blacks. The question is: what is the alternative? What
benefits do the blacks get from the gigantic development in
the South African military and allied sectors? How much
lower below the poverty datum-line can the black peoples
of South Africa fall? What condition of living 2an be worse
than that in the bantustans to which the black people of
South Africa are being confined?

17. Our confidence that the Council will grapple effectively with the injustice, oppression and &eat to international peace and security in South Africa is fast waning.
Our trust in one another would be severely shaken if the
recommendations for action emanating from this debate
were not positive, unanimous and comforting to the
suffering and oppressed peoples of southem Africa. The
oppressed peoples of southern Africa, and indeed the whole
of Africa, look up to the Council and are following this
debate most earnestly. The Council must not let them
down. My Government calls on the members of the Council
to make this debate a turning-point in the history of the
struggle for liberation in South Africa. We have reached a
point where verbal condemnations must be reinforced by
unanimous international action and sanctions against the
racist regime of South Africa.

21. The answers are clear and they make it imperative for
the Security Council to impose the full weight of Chapter
VII of the Charter. Members of the Council must think less
of the temporary economic loss to some Member States and
think a little bit more about the blood of the oppressed
being spilled daily in South Africa. Eventually, it is in a
stable political climate of equity and justice that their
economic investments will thrive.

18. The time is long overdue for declaring the situation in
South Africa a threat to international peace and security
and for the Council to take appropriate action under the
relevant provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. I am
aware that some Council members are still having difficulties in this regard. They acknowledge nevertheless that the
situation is explosive. President Carter said a few days ago
that a “gathering racial conflict threatens southern Africa”
with the danger of “a protracted racial war, with devastating consequences for all”. Only the other day an advertisement appeared in 77% New York Times promoting the sale
of uncut diamonds from South Africa. The agent announccd that the time to purchase was now and that anY
delay might make it too late because of the imminent racial
conflict. That agent would appear to be more up to date
about the situation in South Africa than some Council
menibers. The Government of Nigeria would like to Point
out that not only are the ingredients of international and
racial conflagration present in southern Africa but that a
state OFwar has actually begun to exist.

22. The Nigerian Government is well aware of the strong
measures which some Council members have taken with
regard to certain issues in which they believe. Those actions
have been at both the governmental and the non-governmental levels. Some members of the Council cannot be
calling for stronger and wider sanctions against a baby of
apartlzeid, namely, the illegal r&ime in Rhodesia, and not
taking the same or even stronger measures against the very
system that gave birth to, and nourishes, that baby. Native
intelligence tells us that a fire must be extinguished at its
source. The racist regime of Pretoria is the source of the
problems in southern Africa. South Africa, I repeat, is the
core of the problem.
23. At this point, I cannot but reiterate mY country’s
position on the question of South Africa. We firmly believe
there can be no compromises, no half measures, no dialogue
and no dbtente. There can be no turning back. With the
intransigent articulation of the odious policy of apartheid
the question in South Africa is no longer one of reform, but
one of liberation struggle. Liberation movements have the
&&t, therefore, to free themselves from the shackles of a
minority, racist and oppressive Government. It is their right

10. lt is obvious that the apparent hesitation of some
members about Chapter VII of the Charter is due to the
fear tllclt invoking it would open the door to economic
sanctions. We are all aware of the magnitude of the
investments made by some countries in racist South Africa.
We are equally aware and we know at first hand of the
lnagllitu& of the investments of the same countries in
black Africa. 1 must say without hesitalion that the latter
3

to resort to more means than one in their freedom march.
That right cannot be denied. We in Nigeria fully endorse it.
24. In this respect, we shall not support any formula based
on so-called internal arrangements in neighbouring tenitories to perpetuate buffer States in an attempt to ward off
that liberation march. We oppose any arrangements which
do not comply with Security Council resolutions on issues
bearing on southern Africa. Initiatives taken toivards
solutions to the problems of southern Africa must be
geared towards the implementation of those resolutions.
Above all, we will accept nothing short of the total
abolition of apartheid.
2.5. In working towards these ends, we are aware of the
support and the commitment of the genuine friends of
Africa. They share with us our aspirations, our hopes and
our achievements. Some have laid down their lives and
others have given moral, material and financial assistance,
all in support of the principles and beliefs on which this
Organization was founded and to which Member States
subscribe. We commend some Western European countries,
especially the Nordic States, for their support in the
humanitarian field, Our hope is that other Western European States, as well as Canada and the United States of
America, will match their words with action and look
beyond the vista of economic exploitation. Their protection of, or sometimes collusion with, the racist regime of
South Africa not only frustrates the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa, but, in the final analysis,
narrows the spectrum of options open to the liberation
movements.
26. Nigeria is the nation with the largest concentration of
black people in the world. One out of every five Africans is
a Nigerian. We cannot therefore help being immensely
touched by the sufferings and the cries of our oppressed
brothers and sisters in the southern region of our continent.
Therefore, the Federal Military Government of Nigeria is
sparing no effort and leaving no Stone unturned in our
commitment to the liberation of South Africa, The
Nigerian Government will continue to take measures against
any attempt to frustrate Africa’s commitment to the
liberation of that region of Africa. We will not hesitate ,to
take retaliatory economic action if and when we deem it
necessary.
27. The Nigerian Government contributes to the Organization of African Unity Liberation Fund and whole-heartedly
provides direct assistance to liberation movements. The
unflinching support of the Nigerian people was manifested
in their voluntary and generous contribution to our
national relief fund for southern Africa. That gesture was a
token and an indication of their determination to share
fully in the efforts to rid Africa of the evils that plague us.
28. My Government joins in the call of Africa and its
friends on behalf of all the oppressed black people of
southern Africa for effective action by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter. And that is the minimum. Since
many Council members claim to have imposed a voluntary
arms embargo, to make it mandatory should pose no
difficulty. We are aware that the racist r&ime of South
Africa is dependent on spare parts from abroad for the

maintenance of its military equipment. Therefore, we call
on members to cancel contracts between them and the
racist regime for spare parts. We also call on them to stop
the export of components to South Africa.
29. The practice whereby licences are given to the racists
for the manufacture of equipment has enabled the racist
r6gime to strengthen its oppressive machinery. We call on
all Member States of the Organization to stop the granting
of such licences to South Africa. In the economic field, the
least any Government can do is to prohibit all new
investment in South Africa and refrain from trade promotion and other economic relations with the racist rtgime of
South Africa.
30. These requests are modest and practical. The alternative is ominous for all of us. We seek to build, not to
destroy. Let us therefore conclude this Council debate with
really meaningful and effective action before the volcano
erupts.
31. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Liberia, I invite her to take a place at the Council
table and to make her statement.
32. Mrs. BROOKS-RANDOLPH
(Liberia): Mr. President,
please accept on behalf of my Government and myself
sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. Being
aware not only of your qualifications but also of your
experience in the promotion of the well-beink of mankind
and of your ardent desire for peace and concord in the
world, we have no doubt that you bring to the Council the
spirit which is so vitally needed. It is my hope that at the
end of your tenure you will be able to look back over some
meaningful achievements made by the Council during this
period.
33. Liberia is much gratified by the Council’s invitation to
participate in the debate on the question of South Africa.
Members are aware that a message addressed to the Council
through you, Mr. President, by the President of Liberia,
Mr. William R. Tolbert Jr. was distributed today. I should
like to quote a small portion of that message which
embodies an appeal:
“ . * . the Liberian Government and people appeal to the
conscience of the Security Council and all the Member
States of the United Nations Organization to demonstrate
to the world through positive action that apartheid is
indeed a crime against humanity, an anachronistic and
humanly debased system that contravenes the basic
principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well as
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and which is
increasingly leading to a racial conflagration in southern
Africa. By positive action we mean the application against
South Africa of Chapter VII of the Charter and in
particular Article 41. We call upon those Member States
of the United Nations who continue to supply arms to
South
Africa directly or indirectly to undertake a serious
reassessment of their policy and bring to an end their
disturbing trade in weapons that result in massacres like
Sharpeville and Soweto.” [S/12301, mmx.]

34. We have repeatedly heard statements in the Council to
the effect that the situation in South Africa poses a direct
threat to peace in the area and to international peace and
security as a whole. Time and again we have recalled that
for us in Africa the complete liberation of the continent is
our primary concern, for we firmly believe that, unless and
until the entire continent is completely liberated from
colonialism and racist minority rule as they exist in South
Africa, we cannot by any stretch of the imagination regard
ourselves as free.

the abolition of an educational system designed to keep
them down by means of inferior instruction and training.
39. Africa does not accept that the true owners of South
Africa should be deprived of most of their land by the
South African Government, which is undertaking actions to
huddle 87 per cent of the population into 13 per cent of
the poorest land area. South Africa’s intransigence and
recalcitrant attitude vis-A-vis Council resolutions and decisions remain in the annals of this Organization. What can
the Council, as a united body, do about it? What effective
action will it take?

35. It appears apropos here to ask ourselves a series of
questions. How long can we continue to condone the
practice of apartheid and all its attendant evils? How long
can we accept in frustration and resignation the massive
violence and unprovoked killings of African people, including students, perpetrated by the racist regime of South
Africa simply because the African people in South Africa
oppose a rggime which is discriminatory in theory and
practice and whose national legal Constitution
upholds
racism as a cardinal principle ? How long must we continue
to state that the violence and repressive measures undertaken by the racist rkgime of South Africa have seriously
exacerbated the situation in South Africa and will WIdoubtedly lead to violent conflict and a racist conflagration
seriously affecting mankind? Do we really need another
Sharpeville massacre or Soweto incident before the conscience of mankind will be awakened to the realities of the
situation in South Africa?

40. The situation in South Africa is a crisis which we in
Africa must face as we progress towards total liberation. It
is a crisis in Africa’s determination to lock horns with the
racist minority r6gime in its machinations in order veritably
to extend the frontiers of freedom, justice and human
dignity to the very outer limits of our beioved continent.
41. A cursory examination of Chapter I of the Charter
reveals that the purposes of the Untied Nations are, inter
alia, to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or
humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamentar freedoms for
all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.
My delegation feels deeply concerned that certain of the
Organization’s States Members are not living up to these
lofty objectives of the Charter, and the Liberian delegation
hopes and prays that, before many more Africans are killed,
thousands are gaoled because of their opposition to a racist
minority r&me and thousands more flee into exile, the
conscience of mankind will be moved to take a more
positive stand, particularly through tile Security Council,
with a view to seeing that justice is done to all in South
Africa.

36. My Government believes that it has been made
abundantly clear to the international community that
South Africa is one of the last bastions of everything that is
the antithesis of the Charter of the United Nations, namely
colonial exploitation, the deprivation of elementary human
rights, the blatant practice of racial discrimination, the
dehumanization of the indigenous people in that country,
daily exploitation by powerful economic interests and,
what is perhaps more serious, the perpetration of that
heinous crime against humanity, apartheid. Yet South
Africa remains a Member of the United Nations and
continues flagrantly and without any compunction to
violate the very principles of the Charter, of which it is a
signatory. What a mockery has been made of this world
body!

42. It is therefore to this end that we call upon all Member
States, and particularly members of the Security Council
who have not already done so, to cease forthwith the sale
and shipment to South Africa of arms, ammunition of all
types and military equipment and vehicles and/or materials
for the manufacture and maintenance of arms, ammunition
and military equipment and vehicles and to implement the
provisions of paragraph 4 of Council resolution 282 (19701,
adopted on 23 July 1970, on the strengthening of the arms
embargo. It is also to this end that we request all Member
States and particularly
the members of the Security
Council, to refrain from making any investments in or
granting loans to the South African racist regime; we also
call upon them to take all appropriate measures to ensure
that companies and financial institutions within their
jurisdiction will cease all investments in or loans to the
South African racist regime or companies registered in
South Africa. We do not believe that what we have
requested is too much to ask. We are convinced that the
speedy implementation of those measures will be in our
best interests and those of our Western friends,

37. What is, however, equally baffling to all of us is the
cynicism and hypocrisy of those who should be in the
vanguard of the world Organization’s actions against the
racist imperialists of South Africa but who are the very
Member States which undertake actions tending to render
the United Nations almost irrelevant in the drama that
continues to unfold in that part of the continent.
38. As the Council meets here today there are reports of
torture of political prisoners and the deaths of many of
those detained by South Africa. It must be recalled that
those prisoners are being tortured and killed simply because
they believe in the ideals and objectives of the Charter of
the United Nations. They believe in freedom, justice and
ecluality and the elimination of the cruelty of apartheid
from their homeland,, They want an end to the violence
against their people, the cessation of arbitrary arrests and

43. I wish, before closing, to refer to the continued illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa and the imposition
of the heinous crime of apartheid on that Territory and to
South Africa’s continued assistance to the illegal racist
5

facing those sections of mankind that have long
been underprivileged and discriminated against for one
reason or another. As to your personal qualifications and
previous
experience, they are clearly such as to instil in us
great expectations.

rCgime in Southern Rhodesia, in defiance of Article 2.5 of
the Charter, and of the very resolutions adopted by the
Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter. What is important is that we believe that without
the assistance of some of its powerful allies, South Africa
would not be able to treat the Security Council or the
world body in this way with impunity. Delivering the
keynote address on Africa at Jackson State College,
Mississippi, on 13 February 1977, I had occasion to make
this statement:

problems

46. The agenda item before US is entitled “The question of
South Africa”. We are considering it at the request of the
African Group and also at the request of the General
Assembly, another principal organ of the United Nations
and one which consists of the entire membership of this
Organization. The opinions expressed by the General
Assembly should therefore receive due weight as representing the feelings of the overwhelming majority of nations, as
well as the hopes of the whole of mankind.

“Most unfortunately, another super-Power, the United
States of America, despite her expression of goodwill and
understanding of Africa’s sensitivity to the situation in
South Africa, appears to be taking no concrete action to
discourage or stop her multinational corporations from
trading and investing in South Africa, investments which
amount to hundreds of millions of dollars annually. The
United States and other Western Powers which have a lot
of goodwill as well as economic interests in Africa cannot
continue to presume on Africa’s verbal protests alone in
the ever-growing chain of economic and military contacts
with South Africa in defiance of the international
community.”

47. It is noteworthy that the General Assembly has
specifically requested the Security Council to take urgent
action under Chapter VII of the Charter to ensure the
complete cessation of supplies of all arms, ammunition and
military vehicles to South Africa-in brief, a mandatory
arms embargo-and such other actions as would secure our
common goal. The reason why the Council has been asked
to do this is clearly that it alone has the power to take
action under Chapter VII of the Charter. The executive arm
of the United Nations has thus been requested to act in its
wisdom to implement the will of the majority on the issue
of racial discrimination in South Africa.

I am sure that the statement by President Carter on
Thursday night, 17 March, lifted the spirits of African
delegations when he referred to the fact that the United
States Government had taken action to bring the United
States into full compliance with United Nations sanctions
against the illegal regime in Rhodesia and said: “And I’ll
sign that bill Friday in Washington.”

48. There is a certain irony in this situation, because the
Pretoria Government, a minority rCgime but nevertheless an
executive body, is in precisely the same position in being
called upon to implement the will of the majority of the
people of South Africa, who are opposed to apartheid. The
question that troubles us is this: will the Security Council
do better than the Pretoria r&me in carrying out the will
of the majority? I think that the Council should do very
much better because, for one thing, unlike the Pretoria
rdgime, it is in accord with the majority’s objective-the
abolition of apartheid-and, for another thing, it has the
power to prevail on the Pretoria rigime. Will the Council
continue to dither and delay, pompously adhering to
principles of racial equality but miserably faltering and
failing to take the dreaded step of military sanctions?

44. On the political front, Liberia’s task will be completed
only when the last vestiges of colonialism and racist
minority rule are totally wiped out from the continent of
Africa. As President Tolbert put it:
“ . . . We have drawn a line between the present situation as it exists and the future conditions that will prevail
there. The difference is that while the existing state of
affairs can and will be changed, racial equality, social
justice and African majority rule are inevitable for the
future in southern Africa as elsewhere on the continent.”
The President further said:

49. Every member of the Council is thus on trial on an
issue that is at the very root of the Charter, that is, not only
the equality of rights of Member States but the equality of
those States’ inhabitants, regardless of race, colour or creed.

“ . . . Whether we communicate directly with the South
African Government in an effort to occasion an immediate peaceful change, whether we consistently and
unrelentingly give moral and material assistance to the
African liberation movements, or whether we join in
concerted action at the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity, we remain adamant in our
determination to work positively for the total and
absolute liberation of the whole of Africa.”

50. Let US see how long we have been on trial. The
question of racial discrimination in South Africa was
brought to the General Assembly at its very first session by
my delegation, in 1946. India’s involvement in this question
goes further back in history, to April 1893 when, 84 years
ago, Mahatma Gandhi arrived in South Africa to plead the
cause of a client in a court of law. He was discriminated
against because of his race and colour and stayed on to
organize the first mass movement of people against racist
laws and racist discrimination. India has thus developed a
natural and historical bond of sympathy, support and
solidarity with the African people, born of the shared
exPeriellCe
of common suffering. India broke off relations
with South Africa in 1946, when it became clear to us that

45. Mr. JAIPAL (India): My delegation would like to
associate itself with the sentiments expressed by others in
welcoming you, Sir, as the head of the Permanent Mission
of the United States of America to the United Nations and
as President of the Security Council for this month. We see
in your appointment a new and refreshing attitude towards
the United Nations as a whole, as well as towards the
6

South Africa was impervious to peaceful protestation and
persuasion.

56. We have now established, in the Security Council, that
the arms embargo should be strengthened and that violations of it should be condemned. We have also condemned
the Pretoria r&me’s attacks on the neighbouring countries.
We have reaffirmed that the policy of apartheid is a crime
against the conscience and dighity of mankind and that it
seriously disturbs international peace and security. We have
declared that the liberation of Namibia and Zimbabwe, and
the elimination of apartheid are necessary for the attainment of justice and lasting peace in the region. And, finally,
we have recognized the legitimacy of the struggle of the
people for the elimination of apartheid and racial discrimination.

51. Thirty-one years have gone by and the question
remains the same. The problem, in our opinion, has always
been the validity of Western civilization, that is, whether it
shodd be judged by its own enlightened modern values as
they prevail in Europe or in the United States, or whether it
should be judged by the vicious doctrine of a so-called
master white race in South Africa, based on a distorted
reading of the Scriptures and on mercenary considerations
that stem from a former slave society,
52. The answer, to us, is clear, but the Pretoria regime has
been allowed to grow prosperous on the sufferings and
hardships of the African people, on their segregation,
dcgradntion and humiliation, on the denial to them of equal
opportunities and 011 all the other devices designed for their
permanent subjugation. The Pretoria r&me has today
embarked on a diabolical scheme to create homelands for
the African people in their own country and to confine
them permanently in certain areas, to draw upon them for
cheap captive labour and to offer them a future no better
tlinn the fate of their parents: serving a social order that has
predetermined for the African people a destiny totally
devoid of any promise of equality in the future.

57. Is al1 this enough? Apparently not, otherwise we
would not be discussing the same question now. Where do
we go from here? It would be tragic indeed if the Security
Council were to leave it to the African people to liberate
themselves through their own efforts and supported only
by those who &shed to help them, while others provided,
discreetly and indirectly, comfort, consolation and much
more to the Pretoria rkgime.
58. We are dealing with a problem that does not belong to
this day and age. It is one of the legacies of mankind’s
barbaric past; it is an experience which every Member State
around this table has known at some time in its own
history. There is, therefore, a general expectancy that the
Security Council will now rise to its full stature and fulfil
our common hopes by applying the full measure of its
powers in order to discipline the Pretoria regime and make
it comply with the principles and obligations of the
Charter. Surely, we cannot continue to tolerate a situation
in which 86 per cent of the territory of South Africa is
reserved for the white minority of 14 per cent, which,
furthermore, has increased over the years through emigration from Europe and elsewhere. That monstrous injustice
deserves some form of punitive action.

53. More than five generations of African youth have
suffered the agonies of the struggle for liberation. It is
inevitable, therefore, that an explosion should come after
generations Of frustration of the human spirit’s aspirations
for dignity and self-fulfilment, a frustration that is shared
by the rest of mankind as it watches the failure of the
world community to act. The entire African continent is
justifiably
aroused and incensed, and I feel sure that
elscwhcre in the world, too, there is a great and growing
revulsion against racism.
54. The Security Council will be judged by its actions. It is
interesting to review what the Council has done so far. It
has been considering this question of race conflict since
1960. It declared in its resolution 181 (1963) that the
policies of the Pretoria regime were contrary to the
principles and obligations of the Charter and called upon all
States to cease forthwith the sale and shipment of arms and
ammunition of all types and military vehicles to South
Africa. It also requested the Secretary-General, in resolution 1X2 (1963), to establish a group of experts to examine
peaceful methods of according human rights and fundamentat freedoms to all the inhabitants of South Africa. The
following year, the Council, in its resolution 191 (1964),
endorsed the conclusion of the experts that “all the people
of South Africa should be brought into consultation
enabled to decide the future of [South Africa] at
and...
the national level”.

59. The Pretoria regime maintains that the policy of
apartheid is essentially a matter within its domestic
jurisdiction in terms of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the
Charter. I have never heard anything more preposterous in
law or in natural reason. Here we have a State called South
Africa in which a small minority of the white population
has usurped power by force and governs the rest of the
people according to its own racist dictates. It is a rCgime
which is illegitimate in a country which has not been
properly decolonized. Surely its decrees are unlawful and
cannot be regarded as binding on the people. Apartheid has
been declared a crime against humanity. Can we allow the
criminal to claim national jurisdiction in order to commit
crimes in his home with impunity?
60. What should the Security Council do now? Those
members of the Council which still have diplomatic
relations with the Pretoria rCgime have a special responsibility, inasmuch as they have to decide what they can do
to remove the biggest and the longest-lasting blot on the
conscience of civilized mankind. Will they continue to
support the existence of double standards in South Africa?
Are the lives and properties of the white nlinority
to be
safeguarded only by the permanent subjugation of the
African majority?

55. That was 13 years ago. What followed is interesting. In
later resolutions, in I970 and subsequently, the Security
Council did nothing more than reiterate its told opposition
to a/lart/lcid and condemn violations of the arms embargo.
Those were futile gestures, because in 1976 the Pretoria
regime went so far aa to attack its neighbours, Zambia and
Angola.
7

themselvesmore and more isolated.The racist forceswhich
are trying to maintain their privileged position and to
exploit the African people cannot do soindefinitely.

61, The African Group has proposed the imposition of a
mandatory arms embargo and economic constraints on the
Pretoria r&ime. We support the, African Group’s demand
because other measures have failed so far. However, we
should like to hear from those Member States which have
diplomatic relations with South Africa what steps they
envisage. In our opinion, they should be effective, prompt
and concerted and designed to pressure the Pretoria r6gime
into submitting itself, without further delay, to tile popular
will of the people of South Africa as a whole. If those steps
should prove to be ineffective or unacceptable, I am afraid
that we must rely on the measures set out in Chapter VII of
the Charter for attaining what is after all our agreed and
common goal.

68. This meeting of the Security Council is drawing the
attention of international public opinion to the inhuman
and degradingconditions imposedby the Vorster regimeon
millions of Africans struggling to regain the freedom and
human dignity of which they havebeendeprived.
69. Apartheid is not only the official ideology of a State;
it is also a system of oppressionand exploitation of a
people by a racist minority. It is not only a policy which
deniesto millions of personstheir mostelementaryhuman
rights; it is alsoa form of twentieth-century slavery.

62. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bahrain in his capacity as Chairman of the Arab
Group for the month of March, I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

70. The existence of sucha systemthree decadesafter the
signing of the Charter of the United Nations at San
Francisco and 29 years after the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights is an outright challengeto the
international community and the principles on which the
United Nations was founded. Such a rigime, basedon the
oppressionof the majority by a white minority, cannot be
maintained becauseit contravenesthe principles of freedom, equality and justice, which areinternational principles
consistentwith the Charter.
1’

63. Mr. AL SAFFAR (Bahrain): Mr. President, allow me
to convey to you my delegation’swarm congratulationson
your assumptionof the presidency of the Security Council.
We are confident that under your skilful guidance our
deliberationswill lead to positive results.
64. I should like to thank you and all the membersof the
Council for allowing mc to participate in this debate and
speakfor my country and on behalf of the Arab Group in
my capacity as Chairmanof that Group during the month
of March.

71. We are convinced that the racist rtgime in South
Africa cannot survive without the economicand financial
assistanceand the military support provided by certain
WesternPowers. It is regrettable to note that somePowers
which have great influence in the international community
and, in particular, certain permanent members of the
Security Council, continue to support the Vorster Governtnent in South Africa.

[The speakercontinued in French./
65. It is a privilege and a great honour for my delegation
to take part, on behalf of the Arab Group, in this debate on
the policy of apartheid. Our participation is not only a
manifestation of the Afro-Arab solidarity that was expressed at the historic Afro-Arab Summit Conference
Meeting, held at Cairo at the beginning of this month but
also part and parcel of our joint struggle againstracism,
exploitation and foreign domination.

72. Seventeen years ago, the blacks who revolted at
Sharpeville againstthe discriminatory lawswhich prevented
them from travelling from one place to another without
special authorization, were massacred.The Sharpeville
massacrecontinues to be the symbol of the struggleof the
black people in South Africa against iniquitous and
discriminatory laws. The population, which ismaintainedin
a state of slavery, revolted last year and decidedto give no
respite to the white racist powers. But, whereas the
Sharpeville massacrein March 1960 had the effect of
checking the resistance movement against the apartheid
rbgime, the ferocious repressionof the first wave of rioting
which originated at Soweto on 16 June 1976 and spread
like wildfire through many other black ghettos of South
Africa, merely exacerbated rage, mobilized energiesand
rousedpeopleeverywhere to militancy.

66. After three decades, the United Nations is still
discussingthe question of u~artheid
and taking decisions
condemning the atrocities of the racist policy of the
Government of South Africa. Not only is the policy of
apartheid repugnant to the conscienceof mankind but it
E&O constitutes a real threat to peace and security in the
world. The General Assembly at its last sessionLook up the
report of the Special Committee against Apartheid2 at a
time when the people of South Africa were going through a
very important stage in their struggle for equality and
self-determination.

73. Today the black people of South Africa are not alone.
After the achievement of independenceby African countries and the liberation of many peoplesin the world who
were waginga tenaciousstruggleagainstforeign domination
and exploitation, and especially after the victory of the
peoples of Angola and Mozambique, the struggleof the
people of Azania againstthe racistregimein South Africa is
being strengthened and its resistanceagainstthe policy of
apartheid is increasing.

67. The victories of the peoples of Mozambique and
Angola and of the other peoplesof Africa strugglingagainst
colonialism and racism have shown tlzat the regimes
imposed by terror againstjustice and equality are finding
2 Official
Supplement

Records
No. 22.

of the General

Assemb[y,

Thirty-first

Session,

8

74. The alleged reforms of the Vorster regime are mere
propaganda intended to deceive public opinion, while the
majority of the people are struggling for equality and
justice. That regime refuses to grant the most elementary
rights to the black Africans, thus contravening the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and defying the United
Nations by pursuing its policy of bantustanization. What
are known as bantustans for the indigenous people in no
way constitute a solution to the problem. Bantustanization
is in fact a continuation of the Vorster rkgime’s policies
whose intention is to create black reservations and black
colonies which would ostensibly be independent from the
white areas. This is nothing but a sham independence of
regions in South Africa inhabited by blacks and a probable
strengthening of the racist r&ime. At any rate, it is not a
disguised apartheid or pseudo-autonomy
in a state of
discrimination or gilded prisons that will satisfy the
bantustan and township blacks. The bantustanization programme, which would make Africans foreigners in their
own country, will never be accepted. The world community
is therefore firmly against such a policy.

Namibian people, and that the latter has decided to
continue its struggle until it gains total independence for its
country. The Arab States would like to assure SWAP0 of
their support in its struggle for self-determination and
independence.
79. It is extremely regrettable to note that on 19 October
1976 [1963rd meetingJ, owing to the triple veto cast by
three Western countries, the Security Council was unable to
adopt a draft resolution [S/IZ2llJ
which would have made
it possible to invoke the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter against South Africa. An attempt was made to
justify that veto, but we think that it was an unfortunate
move because it prevented the international community
from assuming its responsibility vis-&vis Namibia.
80. We hope that, during its forthcoming meetings, the
Security Council will be able to reach agreement on the
application of sanctions against the Pretoria rdgime, in
conformity with Chapter VII of the Charter, and specifically concerning an arms embargo on all types of weapon
destined for South Africa, for supplying weapons to the
Vorster rigime, as certain Western countries are doing,
enables it to continue to implement its policy ofapartheid
and terrorize the black people of South Africa. We appeal
to all co;L!ltries, in particular those which have relations
with South Africa, to cease assisting that country economically and militarily, and to respond to the numerous
appeals of the United Nations.

75. The so-called independence of the Transkei is also a
form of propaganda proclaimed with the aim of maintaining the racist regime. We are happy to witness its
unanimous reprobation by the international community, as
expressed in the resolution adopted on 26 October 1976
condemning the alleged independence of the Transkei
(General Assembly resolution 3116 A]. That resolution is
particularly important because it uncovers the true face of
racism in South Africa. Despite that condemnation, that
regime still continues to pursue its policy against the black
majority. The international community has repeatedly
asked the racist r&me to put an end forthwith
to its
discriminatory practices and to the policy ofapartheid, but
those condemnations and international appeals have been
totally disregarded.

81. We support the efforts of the Organization and those
of the Special Committee against Apartheid, as well as all
recommendations aimed at putting an end to the activities
of the racist rBgime in the political, economic, cultural,
sports and other fields.
82. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

76. In a recent interview given to a correspondent of the
weekly publication Time, Vorster stated that he was
convinced that the policy of bantustanization was the only
solution to the racial problem in his country. Now could it
be possible to imagine that a racist system dividing the
whites, blacks and CoIoured peoples and which is applied to
all aspects of economic and social life-it being understood
that the whites were the privileged ones-could comtitutc a
solution to the racial problem? That system is also applied
to transport, health, sports and education. One would have
to be very naive or a Nazi to subscribe to that philosophy.

83. Mr. KAMANA
(Zambia) (President of the United
Nations Co~mcil for Namibia): Mr. President, I should like
to express my appreciation for the opportunity given to the
delegation of the United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate in this debate.
84. I should also like to extend to you my warmest
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council. Your identification with humanitarian
issues in your own society gives us a certainty of your
special concern with the question under debate in the
Council.

77. South Africa continues its illegal occupation of Namibia and persists in carrying out its policy of apartheid and
bantustanization, despite the opinion of the International
Court of Justice and the General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. The Pretoria regime arrogantly refuses
to withdraw from that region and is thus preventing the
people of Namibia from achieving self-determination. South
African forces are even using Namibia as a base for
attacking other neighbouring African countries, such as
Angola and Zambia.

85. The Security Council has had under consideration
South Africa’s violation of the Charter of the United
Nations in two fundamental areas of the Council’s responsibilities. South Africa, by its practices of apartheid and
bantustanization, follows policies which are diametrically
opposed to the purposes of the Charter and an affront to
the international community. South African defiance of
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, which terminated its Mandate over Namibia, has been
recognized by the Assembly as an act of aggression against
the Namibian people and against the United Nations.

78. We are happy to see that Vorster’s policy in Namibia
has had no influence whatsoever on SWAP0 [South West
Africa People’s Organization], the representative of the
9

of Namibia and the plunder of the natural Wealth of
the Territory.
people

86. The contempt which South Africa has shownfor the
decisionsof the GeneralAssembly and the Security Council
constitutes an intolerable challenge to the principles of
justice and co-operationwhich mustguidethe international
community if mankindis to survive on this planet.
87. The United Nations has developedincreasingly cornplex machinery to counter South Africa’s odiouspoliciesof
apartheid, radism and colonialism. The SpecialCommittee
againstApartheid has actively mobilized the international
community in support of the elimination of racial discrimination in South Africa. The Committee on Decolonization3
has strongly supported the liberation strugglein southern
Africa and the legitimacy of the liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity. The
United Nations Council for Namibia, entrusted by the
General Assemblywith the administration of Namibiauntil
independence,has systematically promoted the mobilization of political support to press for South Africa’s
withdrawal from Namibia. It has furthermore firmly supported the activities of SWAPO, the sole and authentic
liberation movement of Namibia. The Council has formulated a programmeof assistanceto Namibia outside the
Territory both for humanitarian reasonsand to prepare
Namibiansfor administrative and professionalactivities in
Namibia after genuineindependenceis achieved.
88. The international community has also respondedto
the appealsof the United Nations for support. A United
Nations Fund for Namibia has been establishedwith
increasing contributions by Member States. The United
Nations DevelopmentProgrammehasestablishedan indicative planning figure for Namibia which makesadditional
resources available for initiatives by the Council for
Namibia in support of Namibia. The Council hasestablished
in Lusaka the United Nations Institute for Namibia for the
training of Namibians in the skills needed to build an
independent Namibia. All these activities reflect the growing commitment of the United Nations and of the
international community to the Namibian people in their
struggle to achieve self-determination, freedom and independencein a united Namibia.
89. The position of the United Nations with regard to
Namibia deservesspecialemphasis.The General Assembly
terminated the Mandate of South Africa over Namibiaand
declared that the Territory came under the direct responsibility of the United Nations, The exercise of that
responsibility requires a seriouscommitment both at the
level of political mobilization as well as at the level of
material resourcesto ensurethat the United Nations will be
willing to implement and capable of implementing its
resolutions with the support of an overwhelming majority
of its Members.
90. In spite of this decisive orientation of the United
Nations and the international community, South Africa is
recklessly bent upon perpetuating domestically its odious
system of apartheid ar.d bantustans and, in its imperial
designs, it wishes to perpetuate its exploitation of the
3 SpecialCommitteeon the Situationwith regard to the Implementationof the Declarationon the Granting of Independence to
ColonialCountries
and Peoples.
10

91. In order to achieveits goals,the illegal South African
administration in Namibia follows a policy of brutal
institutionalized terrorism againstthe Namibian people. It
imprisons
and tortures men, women and children under its
violently
repressive
system.It carriesout massivetransfers
of population,
causinguntold suffering to thousandsof
innocent men, women and children. In its increasingly
aggressive
posture, South Africa has raised its military
contingent iI1 Namibia to over 40,000 men. It haS, ill thC
recent past, carried out ruthless military incursions into
nei&boufing African countries. This increasingmilitarization has also been used systematically to repress the
supportersof SWAPO, the liberation movement of the
Namibian people. Many Namibian patriots have ,been
imprisonedandtortured.
92. South Africa, with the support of certain Western
international economic interests, has not only systematically ignored the decisionsof the United Nations but is
alsoattemptingto perpetuateits ruthlesscolonial and racist
policiesunder falsepretences.It hasbrought together in the
Turnhalle tribal talks the fanatical racist promoters of
apartheid and its tribal puppets to concoct a so-called
charter to misleadthe international community with regard
to its true intentions in Namibia.That charter is to be the
basis for a fake provisional government which would
presideover a shamindependencescheduledfor Namibia.
93. All this manoeuvringis an attempt to maintain control
of the diamondminesof Namibia, the largestin the world.
All this manoeuvring is an attempt to perpetuate the
exploitation of the uraniumdepositsof Namibia, one of the
largestin the world. All this manoeuvringis an attempt to
preservefor South Africa’s own corporations and for those
associatedwith certain Westerncountries the profits of the
exploitation of the large reservesof copper and other
mineralswhich are found in the Territory.
94. The wealth of Namibia is the birthright of the
Namibian people. Their struggle to assumecomplete responsibility for their future and for the development of
their country has today the full support of all progressive
forces in the world. And yet the racist r6gimeof Pretoria
persistsin denying the Namibian people their rightful
participation in the world community.
9.5. What liesbehind so nn~chaudacity on the part of the
racists at Pretoria? What secret covenants inspire the
recklessness
of such racistsand colonialistsin defying the
common decency of mankind? Whatever conspiratorial
delusionssupport the brutal greed of South Africa, that
country will be forced to learn the bitter lessonof historical
inevitability.
96. The peoplesof Africa and aI1peace-lovingforces in the
world will surely and inexorably crush the imperial designs
of the racist supportersof apartheid. The Namibianpeople,
under the leadershipof their soleand authentic liberation
movement, SWAPO, have shown their determination to
overcomethe brutality of South African oppressionand to
deal firm blowsagainstthe illegalSouth African occupation

of their country. The effectiveness of SWAP0 leadership of
the liberation struggle in Namibia has received increasing
recognition throughout the world. The United Nations
Council for Namibia pursues its policies in support of
Namibian self-determination
and independence in full
co-operation with SWAPO. Furthermore, the Council has
systematically denounced the Tumhalle tribal talks as
lacking in legitimacy, and rejects the results of the
conference as not representative of the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people for self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia.

the Namibian people and granted it full observer status
[resolution 31/152J. The United Nations has placed itself
firmly on the sideof the aspirationsof the Namibianpeople
for self-determination, freedom and independencein a
united Namibia.
98. The United Nations Council for Namibia urges the
Security Council to consider the measurescontained in
Chapter VII of the Charter, with a view to forcing South
Africa to end its double challengeto the authority of the
United Nations and to the generalvalues of humandignity
asenshrinedin the Charter, in the UniversalDeclaration of
Human Rights and in the Declaration on the Granting of
Independenceto Colonial Countriesand Peoples.

97. The General Assembly, at its thirty-first session, in a
number of resolutions expressed the decisive commitment
of the United Nations to the liberation of the Namibian
people. All the recommendations of the Council for
Namibia were approved. The General Assembly decided to
launch a nationhood programme for .Namibia /resolution
31/153/ covering both the period of struggleaswell asthe
early years of its full independence.It furthermore recognized SWAP0 as the sole and authentic representative of

99. The promotion of apartheid in South Africa and its
colonial extension to Namibia are a continuous threat to
international peace and security in southern Africa. That
challengemust no longer be tolerated.
The meeting me at 12.50 p.m.

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Lea publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et Ies agences
dipositaires
du mondo entier. ,Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
ICAIC

IlOJIYUiTL

COMO

CONSEGUIR

I1IBAAHHSi

OPFAHH

PUBLICACIONES

3AI&UU

DE LAS

OWLEAMHEHHLIX

NACIONES

HAlWFi

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&An en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

In other

currencies)

70001-December

1977-2,200
