UNITED NATIONS I NATIONS UNIES

•
--W~

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFrlCIAL RBCORDS
FIFTEENTH YEAR

903

Td MEETING: 15 $EPTEMBER 1960
~e SEANCE: 15 SEPTEMBRE 1960

QUINZIEME A1{NEE

CONSEIL DE SiCURITB
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (s/Agenda/903). • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1

Adoption of the agenda • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1

Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/4381):fourth report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960, S/4405 of 22 July
1960 and S/4426 of 9 August 1960 (S/4482 and Add.1-3); letter
dated 8 September 1960 from the Permanent Representative of
Yugoslavia to the United Nations addr 1sed to the President of
the Security Council (S/4485); letter dated 12 September 1960
from the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
(8/4506)
.,
-• . . . . . . . . . .-. . . . . . . .

1

( 20 p. )

S/PV.903

TABLE DES MATIERES
Page

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda!903)•••••••••••••••••
Adoption de l'ordre du jour ••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adresst1e par le Secrt1taire g~­
nt1ral au Prt1sident du Conseil de st1curitt1 (S/4381): quatri~me
rapport du 8ecrt1taire gt1nt1ral sur la mise en application des
rt1solutions S/4387 du 14 jUillet 1960, S/4405du22 juillet 1960
et S/4426 du 9 aoiit 1960 du Conseil de st1curitt1 (S/4482 et
Add.l l 3); lettre, en date du 8 septembre 1960, adresst1e au
Prt1sident du Conseil de st1curitt1 par le reprt1sentant permanent de la Yougoslavie aupr~s de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies (8/4485); lettre, en date du 12 septembre 1960, adress~e
au Prt!sident du Conseil de st1curitt1 par le reprt1sentant de
l'Union des Rt1publiques socialistes sovit1tiques (S/4506) ••••

1
1

Pr

Arge
Pola

Unit
Unit

1
1.
2.

r

J

a
Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings of
the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symool'indicates a reference to a United

f
t

o
84
U
tl

Nations document.

*
*

*

Les. documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
cQmptes rendus des s6ances du Conseil de s6curit6 sont publi6s dans des supple.
ments trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les cotes des documents de I'Organisation des Nations Unies se cOlZJl?OSent de
lettres majuscules et de chiHres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte
slgnifie qu'll s'agit d'un document de l'Organlsation.

Thl

Lettel

oddi
fou
of

S/4
(S/
the

Not

(S/
sen

add
1. T
taken
with
Uves
andB

NINE HUNDRED AND THIRD MEETING
Held In New York, on Thursday, 15 September 1960, at 3 p.m.
NEUF CENT TROISIEME SEANCE
Tenue

a New York, le jeudl 15 septembre 1960, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. E. ORTONA (Italy).

President: M. E. ORTONA (Italie).

Present: The representatives of the following states:
Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France, Italy,
Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Rep'Iblies,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Presents: Les repr6sentants des Etats suivants: Argentine, Ceylan, Chine, Equateur, Etats-Unis d'Am6rique, France, ltalie, Pologne, Royaume-Uni de
Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Tunisie, Union
des R6publiques socialistes sovi6tiques.

Provision~1 agenda (SI Agenda/903)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

Ordre du jour provisoire (SI Agenda/903)

2. Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President ofthe Security
Council (S/4381): fourth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960, S/4405 of 22
July 1960 and S/4426 of 9 August 1960 (S/4482
and Add.1-3) ; letter dated 8 September 1960
from the Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/4485); letter dated 12
September 1960 from the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/4506).

2. Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adress~ par le
Secr6taire glmeral au President du Conseil de securit6 (S/4381): quatri~me rapport du 8ecretaire
general sur la mise en application des resolutions
8/4387 du 14 juillet 1960, S/4405du22juillet 1960
et S/4426 du 9 aodt 1960 du Conseil de securite
(8/4482 et Add.1 ll. 3); lettre, en date du 8 septembre 1960, adressee au President du Conseil de
securittl par le representant permanent de la
Yougoslavie aupr~s de 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies (8/4485); lettre, en date du 12 septembre
1960, aclressEle au President du Conseil de securite
pa.r le representant de l'Unfon des R6publiques
socialfstes sovietiques (8/4506).

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'orore cfu jour est adopte.

Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary.General
addressed to the Presidentof the Security Coimcil (S/4381):
fourth rep!)rt of the Secretary.General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960,
S/4405 of 22 July 1960 and S/4426 of 9 August 1960
(S/4482 and Add. 1·3); letter dated 8 September 1960 from
the Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/4485); letter dated 12 September 1960 from the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President ofthe Security Council (S/4506)

Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par le Secretaire
general au President du Conseil de securite (S/4381):
quatrieme rapport du Secretaire general sur la mise en
application des resolutions S/4387 du 14 juillet 1960,
S/4405 du 22 juillet 1960 et S/4426 du 9 aout 1960 du
Conseil de securite (S/4482 et Add.1 Cl 3); lettre, en date
du 8 septembre 1960, adressee au President du Conseil
de securite pa~ le representant permanent de la Yougoslavie
aupres de I'Organisation des Nations Unies (S/4485);
lettre, en date du 12 septembre 1960, adressee au President du Conseil de securite par le representant de
I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques (S/4506)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings on this question, I shall,
with the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Yugoslavia, Indonesia, Ghana, Guinea, Morocco
and Belgium to take seats at the Council table.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de 1'anglais): Conform6ment aux decisions prises lars des s6ances precedentes consacrEles ll. la mame question, je voudrais,
avec le consentement du Conseil, inviter les repr6sentants de la Yougoslavie, de 1'Indonesie, du Ghana,
de la Guinlle, du Maroc et de la Belgique 11 prendre
place a la table du Conseil.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Thier
(Belgium), Mr. Quaison-Sackey (Ghana), Mr. Caba
(Guinea), Mr. Wirjopranoto (Indonesia), Mr. Aboud
(Morocco) and Mr. Vidi6 (Yugoslavia); took places at
the Security Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. de Thier(Belgique),
M. Quaison-Sackey (Ghana), M. Caba (Guinee), M.
Wirjopranoto (Indonesie), M. Aboud(Maroc) etM. Vidi6
(Yougoslavie) prennent place la table du Conseil.

a

1

2. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translatedfromSpanish):
The situation in the Congo, which in mid-July was a
cause of anxiety to world opinion and of deep concern
to the Security Council, remains so two months later,
in spite of the vigorous efforts of the international
community, acting on an unprecedented scale through
the United Nations, which has done everythingpossible
to direct the situation along the proper lines.

2. M. CORREA (Equateur) [traduit de 1'espagnol]:
La situation au Congo, qui 6tait un sujet d'angoisse
pour 1'opinion publique mondiale et de profonde prlloccupation pour le Consell de s6ourit6 h la mi-juillet,
le demeure deux: mois plus tard malgr6 les efforts
vigoureux, aussi efficaces que possible et d'une ampleur sans pr6c~dent, quIa d6ploy6s la communaut6
internationale, repr6sent6e par 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies, en vue d'orienter cette situation dans
un sens positif.

3. When, in tl\ose first critical moments, the Council
met, on 13 July [873rd meeting], to consider the acute
crisis that had arisen, it was said thatthat crisia was
the result of the vacuum created by the sudden unplanned transition from a colonialist government,
which has failed to prepare the Territory for independence, to self-government without the stable elements required to exercise responsibility for the
maintenance of internal order and the protection of
national security. It was to fill this vacuum, the continued existence of which might have given rise to an
international armed conflict, that the Security Council
authorized the sending of the United Nations Force.

3. Quand le Consell s 'est r6uni d~s les premiers
troubles, le 13 juillet [873~e s6ance), pour examiner
la crise aigne qui existait alors, on a dit que celle-ci
r6sultait du vide dd au passage subit et non organis6
d'un r6gime colonialiste, qui a omis de pr6parer le
territoire h 1'ind6pendance, h un rllgime d'ind6pendance d6pourvu des 616ments stables qu'exige 1'exercice des responsabllit6s qu'imposent le maintien de
1'ordre interne et la protection de la s6curit6 extllrieure. C'est pour remplir ce vide, dont la prolongation aurait pu provoquer un conflit arme international,
que le Consell de s6curit6 a autoris6 1'envoi de la
Force des Nations Unies.

4. At earlier meetings of the Council at which this

4. Lors des dunions antllrieures du Consell pendant
lesquelles nous avons examine cette question, nous
avons d6jh eu 1'occasion de souligner le succ~s de
1'oeuvre accomplie par la Force en ce qui concerne
1'llvacuation des troupes beIges, la prllvention d'un
conflit plus 6tendu, et h d'autres llgards encore.
AUjourd'hui, nous sommes plac6s devant la dure
r6alit6: en raison de facteurs politiques, humains et
6conomiques dllfavorables, aggrav6s par des influences internationales 6galement dllfavorables, la
R6publique du Congo n'a pu encore profiter de l'aide
de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies pour combler le
vide d6plorable qui est h l'origine de la situation critique apparue II y a deux mois.

matter has been discussed, we have taken the opportunity to speak of the successful work performed by
the Force in evacuating the Belgian troops, in preventing the conflict from spreading and inotherways. Today we are faced with the hard fact that, owing to
negative political, human and economic factors, complicated by equally negative international influences,
the Republic of the Congo has not even been able to
make use of United Nations assistance in order to fill
the disastrous vacU'.ml which led to the critical situation of two months ago.

5. The political vacuum still exists. The struggle for
power between opposing forces has produced a real
vacuum of authority. And it would not be too much to
say that there is also a certain constitutional vacuum.
Economic, fiscal and administrative problems have so
impaired the operation of the Congolese "Force publique" that the vacuum there continues in Its worst form.
The economic crisis, which grows worse from day to
day, is a sad part of the existing vacuum. As is to be
expected in such a situation, leading to disintegration,
the psychological atmosphere is not conducive to the
production of any constructive solutions.

5. En effet, le vide politique subsiste. La lutte pour le
pouvoir entre fO:re 13B antagonistes a caus6 un del vide
d'autorit6. n ne serait pas exag6r6 d'affirmer qu'll
;axiste m~me un certain vide constitutionnel. Des prGbl~mes 6conomiques, fiscaux et administratifs ont h
tel point d6natur6 le role de la force publique congolaise que le vide persiste, dans ce domaine, sous sa
forme la plus aigue. La crise 6conomique, qui s'aggrave de jour en jour, est un 6lllment dramatique du
vide existant. nest €lvident que dans une situation
comme celle-ci, qui s 'oriente vers la d€lsint6gration,
le climat psychologique n'est pas favorable h des
solutions constructives.

6. I have seen fit to draw attention to these negative
aspects, which the Secretary-General has described
so vividly in his fourth report and in his statement
[896th meeting], because I think the Council should
not make the mistake of discussing the case as if it
were dealing with abstract problems of political and
administrative science. We must consider the case as
it is, namely as one of painful human problems, hard
to understand and to unravel.

6. J'ai cru devoir souligner ces aspects n6gatifs,
d6crits si clairement dans le quatri~merapport et dans
1'expos6 du Secr6taire g6n6ral [896~me s6ance), car
j 'estime que le Consell dolt 6viter 1'6cuell qui consisterait h discuter de cette affaire comme s'll s 'agissait
de questions abstraites de science politique et administrative. n faut au contraire 1'examiner te11e
qu'elle se pr6sente dans sa r€lalft6, humaine, difficlle,
complexe, impAn6trable et douloureuse.

o

7. C'est en tenant compte de cette r6alit6 qu'll faut
interpr6ter les mesures prises par le Commandement
de la Force des Nations Unies en ce qui concerne les
a6rodromes et la station de radio. L'impossibllit6 daDS
laquelle s'est trouv6le Secr6taire g6n6ral de consulter
p6riodiquement les organes du gouvemement central
doit Btre consid6r6e comme le r6sultat intwitable du
vide dont j'ai par16. Le Consell de s6curit6lui-m&ne

7. The actionwhichthe Command of the United Nations
Force has taken in the matter of the airports and the
radio station should be understood in the light of these
facts. The fact that the Secretary-Generalhas notbeen
able to hold periodic consultations with the organs of
the Central Government must be regarded as an inevitable result of this vacuum. At the moment the
Security Council itself is in the same situation. Only
2

9.
tio
Ge

so
ag
e
1
fl.i

Se

10.
no
in
nat
Re]

in

Sta
~ta

the

de
mu

13.

ey

Thi

&,

8

.-;6

8

.s

s

'r
:i
€l

e

.6

l,

a

It

8

.6

l6

n

I.

a
6

e

e
6

1

est plac€l actuellem.ent devant une situation identique.
L'obligation pour la Force des Nations Unies, II un
moment donn(" de prot6ger les droits individuels des
Congolais et d'empeeher une vaguedeglmocide, mame
en prenant des mesures extr&mes, ne peut se comprendre que si I 'on reconna1t honnetem.ent le vide qui
existe encore.
8. Ce n'est pas la premibre fois qu'il faut adopter
des dllcisions graves en usant d'un crit~re politique
pour mesurer 1'impo~nce relative de principes apparemment contradictoires. Dans les incidents que j 'a!
mentionn.6s, on peut considerer qu'il y a eu conflit
apparent entre d'une part la dllfense de la paix, de
1'existence mame et de 1'autorite de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies,reprllsentant la communaute internationale, et d'autre part des considerations deforme
nlles de conditions exceptionnelles. Je me demande,
II cet 6gard, si 1'on eilt pu prllf(,rer voir les consid('rations de forme prendre le pas sur l'urgElnce qu'il y
avait II ce que les troupes beIges soient retirees.

by an honest recognition of the vacuum that still exists
can we understand the fact that at any given moment
the United Nations Force may be obliged to protect
the human rights of the Congolese people and prevent
a wave of genocide, even by taking extreme measures.

8. This is not the first time that important decisions
have had to be taken in which the greater or lesser
importance of apparently conflicting principles has had
to be measured on political grounds. In the incidents
I have mentioned the protection of peace, of life itself
and of the authority of the United Nations, the representative of the international community, may have
appeared to conflict with formalistic considerations
arising from exceptional circumstances. I wonder
whether anyone would have placed those formalistic
considerations above the urgent necessity ofwithdrawing the Belgian troops.
9. We have carefully analysed the Council's resolutions, the spirit of its discussions, the SecretaryGeneral's reports and other information from various
sources. We find that the Secretary-General and his
agents have acted correctly and wisely and that, in
extraordinarily difficult circumstances, they have followed an impartial line of conduct in the internal conflicts, as required in the various resolutions of the
Security Council.

9. Nous avons analys6 avec soin les r6solutions du
ConseU, 1'esprit de ses d€lliberations, les rapports du
Secr6taire glln€lral et les donn.€les compl€lmentaires
r8Ques de diverses sources. Nous sommes parvenus II
la conclusion que le Secr€ltaire g€ln€lral et ses collaborateurs ont agi de fac;onloyale et avis€le et que, dans
des circonstances extraordinairement difficUes, Us
ont reussi II suivre une ligne de conduite impartiale
au milieu des conflits internes, ainsi que le ConseU de
securit6 1'a 6tabli dans ses diff6rentes resolutions.

10. Looking towards the future, we feel that there is
no denying that in view of the gravity of the situation
in the Congo the presence and authority of the international community will have to be strengthened. The
Republic of the Congo needs international co-operation
in order to start on the right lines as an independent
State. As has so wisely been said here, the circum!>tances are such that, if this external aid is to strengthen the independence of ~he Congo and not make it
dependent upon those who provide the assistance, it
must be channelled through the United Nations.

10. Si l'on consid~re l'avenir, il ne fait pas de doute,
selon nous, qu'en raison meme de la gravite de la
situation au Congo, la presence de la communaute
internationale doive etre renforcee et son autorite
affermie. La R6publique du Congo a besoin de la
collaboration internationale pour s'engager sur la voie
de l'independance et, comme on l'a dit si justement
dans cette salle, les circonstances sont telles que, pour
que cette aide exterieure affermisse 1'independance du
Congo et ne le rende pas dependant des donateurs,
elle doit etre fournie par. 1'intermediaire de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.

11. In normal, healthy relations between States there
should clearly be a free exchange of co-operation at
the international, regional and bilateral level. In the
present circumstances, however,. the interest of the
Congolese people will be better served if external aid
is sent through the United Nations. The alternative is
at present encouraging the forces of dissension within
·the Congo, thus endangering the unity of the country,
intensifying the disagreements between the Congolese
and hampering the work of the international community.

11. nest 6vident qu'en temps normal, U estd'usage,
il est salutaire que la cooperation se fasse librement
entre Etats, sur les plans mondial, regional et bilat6ral, mais, etant donne les conditions qui existent au
Congo, les int6rets du peuple congolais seront mieux
servis si l-'aide exterieure est fournie par 1'interm(,diaire de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies. Sinoll, on
encouragera les forces de dissension III'interieur du
Congo, lesquelles mettent en danger l'unite du pays,
aggravent les d6saccords entre Congolais et rendent
plus difficile la tache de la communaut6 internationale.

12. No one can deny that foreign aid prOvided outside
the United Nations operation tends to sway the balance
in the constitutional and political struggle in the Congo
and therefore constitutes an illegal interference in the
internal affairs of the Congo. In our opinion, both the
support given to a certain group which is striving to
gain control of tl.d Central Government and the support
given to the Katanga authorities by another country
constitute an unpardonable interference in the internal
affairs of the Congo.

12. n ne fait pas de doute que 1'aide extllrieure apport6e en marge de l'operation des Nations Unies tend
II faire pencher la balance dans la lutte constitutionnelle et politique qui se deroule lll'interieur du pays
et constitue par cons6quent une intervention il16gitime
dans les affaires int6rieures du Congo. Tant 1'appui
donn6 II un groupe dlltermin6 qui lutte pour s'assurer
le contrl:l1e du gouvernement central quel'appuifourni
par un autre pays aux autorites du Katangs, constituent, ~ notre avis, une intervention reprehenSible dans
les affaires int6rieures du Congo.

13. The Belgian Government is closely involved inthe
events that led to the lamentable situation inthe Congo.
This is yet another reason why we may hope that every

13. Le Gouvernement beIge est intimement mele aux
faits qui sont ~ 1'origine de la situation deplorable qui
existe au Congo. C'est III une raison de plus d'esperer

~

a
u
n

,
s

s
r
t

e

It
Lt

s
s
r
il
u

e

3

.
effort. will be made to ensure that Belgian elements
and Belgian supplies are not allowed to influence the
problem of the unity of the Congo or the results of
the constitutional processes in the Congo.lrepeatthat
Belgian interests will be fully protected if the United
Nations is allowed to perform its work effectively.

qu'll s'efforcera par tous les meyens d'eviter quedes
elements beIges et du material d'origine beIge n'mfluent sur le problbte de 1'unit6 du Congo et ::fur
1'tlvolution constitutionnelle du pays. Les inter~ts
beIges, je le rtl~te, seront dOment proteges si 1'on
permet Il. 1'Organisation des Nations Unies d'agir efficacement.

14. On the other hand, it seems paradoxlcal that one
of the great Powers, which is interfering illegally in
the internal affairs of the country by supporting one
group in the fight for control of the Central Government, presumes to question the impartiality of the
Secretary-General, his agents, and the Command ofthe
United Nations Force in dealing with situations connected with political problems in the Congo. This
destructive campaign is not in conformity with the
truth and is creating a psychological atmosphere which
is not conducive to a solution of the Congo problem.

14. D'autre part, II est paradoxal, cm moins en apparence, que ca soit precistlment 1'une des grandes
puissances, qui en appu,yant un groupe determine dans
la lutte pour le contr81e du gouvernement central du
Congo intervient lllegalement dans les affaires int6rieures de ce pays, qui pretende mettre en doute
l'impartiallt6 avec laquelle le Secretaire general, ses
collaborateurs et le Commandement de la Force ont
fait face Il. des situations d6coulant des probltmles
politiques do Congo. Ces attaques sont inconclliables
avec les faits et creent un climat psychologique qui
est loin d'~tre favorable Il. la solution des probl~mes
congolais.

15. I think it can truly be said that if foreign aid
outside the United Nations were to cease and this
unjustified and dangerOllS psychological campaignwere
to be brought to an end, it would be a tremendous
step towards improving the situation in the Congo and
solving its constitutional and pOlitical problems.

15. On peut sans crainte affirmer que, sil'aide exttlrieure fournie en margo de I 'Organisation des Nations
Unies prenait fin, de m~me que la campagne psychologique, d'autant plus nuisible qu'elle est injustifiee,
qui eat menee actuellement, un grand pas serait fait
dans la voie du retablissementdelasituationau Congo
et de'la solution de ses probl~mes constitutionnels
et politiques.

16. For this reason, we consider that the Security
Council should make another appeal to all States to
a~stain from any act which might impede the restoration of law and order or which, in the circumstances,
might hamper the peaceful settlement of the internal
conflicts in the Congo. In particular, the Council should
appeal to States to send all military aid through the
United Nations. My delegation therefore fully endorses
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution submitted by the
delegation of the United States of America [S/4516],
as also the draft resolution as a whole.

16. En cons6quence, nous estimons que le Consell de
s6curittl doit adresser un nouvel appel rt tous les Etats
pour leur demander de s'abstenir de toute action qui
risquerait d'empeeher le r6tablissement de 1'ordl-e
public et qui, dans lea circonstances actuelles, mettrait obstacle a la solution pacifique des conflits internes. En particulier, le Consell devrait adresser un
appel aux Etats pour que toute aide mllitaire soit
fournie par 1'interm€ldiaire de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies. C'est dans cet esprit que ma d€llegation
juge parfaitement acceptable le paragraphe4duprojet
de resolution present€l par la d61egation des EtateUnis d'Amerique [8/4516], projet qui nous paraft
d'allleurs egalement acceptable dans son ensemble.
17. J e voudrais, Il. cet egard, rappeler que le Secrbtaire general propose, dans son quatri~me rapport, la
creation d'un fonds des Nations Unies pour le Congo
qui serait alimente par les conti"ibutions volontaires
des Etats Membres [S/4482, par. 6]. La necessite de
cette mesure semble imperieuse et nous sommes
certains qu'un appel adresse par le Consell de securit6
aux Etats Membree serait accuellU avec gllnerositll
et clatrvoyance. Le maintien de la paix exige des
sacrifices et nous pouvons compter que les Etats qui
sont en mesure de fournir des contributions volontaires
r6pondront Il. 1'appel du Consell de securitll avec la
meme promptitude qu'ont montree ceux auxquels le
Secr6taire general a demand6 des contingents mili-taires et d'autres formes d'assistance.

17. In his faurth report, the Secretary-General proposes that a United Nations fund for the Congo should
be set up, financed by voluntary contributions from
Member States [S/4482, para. 6]. There seems to be
an urgent need for 'this arid we are sure that an appeal
to Member States by the Security Council will meet
with a generous and imaginative response. The maintenance of peace c;:Llls for sacrifices and we ~ay be
confident that those States which are able to make
voluntary contributions will respond to the Security
Council's appeal as promptly as did those from which
the Secretary-General requested military forces and
other assistance.

18. I thought it best to limit my remarks to these
basic points. This does not meanthatIam overlooking
the vital importance of the Katanga problem and the
constitutional and political problems, all closely re-lated, but, as has been said many times, these are
matters within the exclusive competence ofthe Congolese people.

18. J'ai cru devoir limiter mes observations 11. ces
aspects fondamentaux de la question. Cela ne veut pas
dire que je m€lconnaisse 1'importance capitale que
presente la solution du probl~me du Katanga et des
probl~me8 constitutionnel et politique - qui sont tous
intimement li6s - mais ces probl~mes, je 1'ai d6jll dit
11. plusieurs reprises, rel~ventde la competence exclusive du peuple congolais.

19. The co-operation of the CongoleseGovernmentis
essential if the United Nations is to succeed in carry-

19. La collaboration du Gouvernement congolais est
indispensable au succ~s de 1'muvre Il. long terme que
4

2
o
m
o
.ci

A
2
I

d
S

m

les
iniur

~ts
Ion

1tOrganisation se propose de mener h bien dans I'mt6r8t du peuple congolais et de la paixmondiale. Nous
formoM des vreux pour que la crise politique soit
surmont6e aussit6t que possible et pour que le Goll-"
vernement congolais puisse nous pdter son concours
le plus total ainsi que 1'exige son propre int6ret.

ing out its· long-term plan to help the Congolese people

and to preserve world peace. We hope the political
crisis will soon be overcome and that the Congolese
Goyernment will be able to giTe the full c~operation
that is essential in its own interests.

fi..

,plel!l

:ns
du
;6-

Ite

:es

>nt

:es
.es

IUi

.es

,ns

.0-

38,
aft
go

~ls

de

ltS

J.Ui
re

20. In concluding, I should like to stress once again
the importance of the success of the United Nations
action in the Congo, in the higher interests of peace.
and for the future of the Organization. The African
countries, first and foremost, and the countries of other
continents will continue to need the United Nations from
time to time for the defence of their integrity in their
struggle against aggression, as a diplomatic instru-.
ment for the settlement of conflicts, and as a centre
for furthering the great principles of the Charter and
for organizing international c~operationwith a view
to raising standards of living. If today we allow the
authol'ity and reputation of the United Nations to be
weakened, the Secretary-General to be made the object
of an unjust and unopposed campaign, the motives and
intentions of Member States which make generous con..
tributions and sacrifices to be wilfully misinterpreted,
tomorrow, When, the work of the United Nations is
needed in other parts of Africa and of the world. we
may unhappily find that the Organization has lost its
strength and its effectiveness. We cannot allow this to
happen but the only way to avoid it at this stage is by
united action, which by ensuring here and now the
success of the United Nations in the Congo, will preserve its authority, its reputation and its efficiency
in the future.•

20. Permettez-omoi, pour conclure cette intervention,
de souligner une foie de plus 1'importance que pr6sente, pour les int6dts sup6rieurs de la paix et pour
l'avenir de notre organisation, le succ~s de Pop6ration
des Nations Unies an Congo. Les pays africains. en
premier lieu, et les pays des autres continents anssi
continueront d'avoir besoin, de temps h autre, de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour d6fendre leur int6grit6 et lutter contre l'agression, et de trouver en elle
un instrument diplomatique pour la solution de leurs
conflits, un centre promoteur des grands pXincipes de
la Charte. et un centre ob s'harmonisent les efforts
concertlls dllploylls par la communaute internationale
pour relever les niveaux de vie. Si nous tolerons
aujourd'hui que l'autorit6 et le prestige de l'Organisa..
tion soient affaiblis. que son Secretaire gllneral soit
1'objet d'attaques injustifi6es de la part de certains
Etats sans que les autres 1'appuient, si nous admettons
que les Etats Membres qui fournissent des contributions glln6reuses et consentent des sacrifices voient
leurs intentions et leurs mobiles deformes, demain,
lorsque 1'intervention de notre organisation sera ne-cessaire dans d'autres regions d'Afrique ou du monde,
nous decouvrirons peut-etre que, malheureusement,
elIe a perdu toute vigueur et toute efficacite. Nous
ne saurions le permettre; or, en l'etat actuel des
choses, la seule fa~on d'eviter cela est de mener une
actionsolidaire qui, en assurant aUjourd"uuile succ~s
de l'ONU au Congo, preservera son autorite, son
prestige et son efficacite dans 1'avenir.

21. The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the next
speaker, I wish to inform the Council that I have just
received a letter from the Permanent Representative
of the United Arab Republic [S/4518], who asks to be
seated at the Council table. The letter states that
Mr. Rafik Asha, Deputy Permanent Representative,
has been designated for the purpose.

21. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant de
donner la parole ~ l'orateur suivant, je voudrais informer le Conseil que je viens de recevoir du repr6sentant permanent de'la Republique arabe unie aupr~s
de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies une lettre [S/4518]
dans laquelle i1 demande que son pays soit autorise h
prendre place ~ la table du Conseil. n ajoute que
M. Rafik Ashl:!-, representant permanent adjoint, a ete
deSigne ~ cette fin.

22. In accordance with rule ~;'; ,if th.I'; provisional rules
of procedure of the Council, ·Wi~h the consent of the
members of the Council, I invite the representative
of the United Arab Republic to take a seat at the Coun.cil table•

22. Conformement h l'article 37 du r~glement int6rieur provisoire du Conseil de securite, et avec 1'as..
sentiment des membres du Conseil, j'invite le repr6sentant de la Republique arabe unie ~ prendre place
~ la table du Conseil•

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Asha (United
Arab Republic) took a place at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Asha (Republique
arabe unie) prend place la table du Conseil.

23. Mr. MILLET (France) (translated from French):

23. M. MILLET (Fral"k.::e): Je ne cacherai pas au Conseil la vive impression qu 'a produite sur ma delega"
tion 1'expose que nous avons entendu le 9 septembre
du Secretaire general [896~me seance]..

It-

nun
:>it

:es

on
jet
sift
€l-

la
go
BS

de
BS

.t6

.t6
BS

[Ui
BS

la
le
i-

a

I shall not attempt to conceal from the Council the
deep impression whichthe statementwe heard from the
Secretary-General on 9 September [896th meeting]
made on my delegation.

BS

as
lle

as
llS

ut
st

24. Celui-ci n'est pas homme ~ employer vainement
de grands mats. Menace de banqueroute, absence, ou
peu s'en faut, de tout effort pouryremedier, manquemerits frequents aux engagements pris, incompetence
et irresponsabilite, tel est le tableau qui nous a ete
dresse d'une situation au Congo que, du fond du coour,
ma delllgation soubaite passagbre en raison de la sym.pathie profonde que porte mon pays au peuple congolais
comme ~ tous les peuples africains.

24. He is not a man to use strong language lightly.
The threat of bankruptcy, a complete or almost complete absence of any effort to counteract it, frequent
failure to honour commitments, incompetence and
irresponsibility: that is the picture drawn of a situation
in the Congo which my delegation earnestly hopes will
be purely transitory, for my country has great sympathy for the Congolese as for all African peoples.

llB

5

25. La crise ainsi d~crite ne date pas d'hier. D~jh.
les pr6cMents rapports qui nous ont 6te presentes
faisaient ressortir la desintegration de 1'administration congolaise et 1'indiscipline des forces mllitaires,
causes des graves evenements qui se developpaient
dans le pays.
26. n sly joint aujourd'hui unecriseconstitutionnelle
sur laquelle cet expose a attire notre attention. n nous
a ete rapporte comment, le 5 septembre, le pr6sident
Kasavubu avait revoqu6 le mandat donne par lui au
Premier Ministre. M. Lumumba, et comment, en r6ponse et sans pouvoir s'appuyer sur aucune disposition constitutionneUe. ce dernier avait pretendu revoquer le chef de 1'Etat. Depuis lors, nous avons reQu
des messages emanant de deux autorit6s gouvernementales differentes.
27. Nous apprenions hier, par les agencesdepresse,
qu'un des chefs de 1'armee congolaise avait pris le
pouvoir. Ce matin, semble-t-il, ce n'etait plus le cas.
Ce soir, en revanche, II parait que la nouvelle est

25. The crISIS thus described did not come about
yesterday. The earlier reports submittedto us already
indicated that the Congolese administrationwasdisintegrating and the military forces getting out of hand.
factors which were giving rise to serious incidents
throughout the country.
26. In addition. we now have a constitutional crisis to
which the statement drew our attention. We have been
told how on 5 September President Kasavubu revoked
the mandate he had given the Prime Minister, Mr.
Lumumba, and how Mr. Lumumba, with no constitutional provision to support his action, retorted by
claiming to dismiss the Chief of State. Since then we
have received messages emanating from two different
government authorities.
27. Yesterday we learned through the press agencies
that one of the heads ofthe Congolese Army had seized
power. This morning, this was apparently no longer
the case. This evening. however. the report would
appear to have been confirmed.
28. In th r circumstances, it is the view of my delegation that the Council acted wisely in deciding not to
hear the Congolese representatives forthetimebeing.

confirm~e.

28. Dans ces conditions, ma delegation consid~re que

le Consell a fait preuve de sagesse lorsqu'll a renonce,
pour le moment, rt entendre les representants congolais.
29. Ma delegation est enfin profondement emue de la

29. My delegation has been deeply disturbed by the

report confirmed by the Secretary-General, on the
basis of absolutely reliable evidence, that troops ofthe
Congolese National Army had carried out outrageous
massacres of the defenceless civilianpopulation,particularly in the Bakwanga region. This report reminded me of the account we heard in this Council
about the violence to which units ofthat same National
Army had resorted earlier. It proved-if proof were
necessary-that the presence of Belgian troops could
not be regarded as the cause of such excesses.

confirmation que le Secr~taireg~neral nous a apportee,
rt 1'aide de temoignages indubitables, des nouvelh~s
suivant lesqueUes des forces de 1'armee nationak
congolaise se seraient livrees, en particulier dans la
region de Bakwanga, h de revoltants massacres de
populations civiles sans defense. Ce recitm'arappele
celui que nous avions entendu rt cette table des violences dej1l. commises par des unites de cette meme
arm6e nationale. n nous a apporte la preuve, s'll en
etait besoin, que la presence de troupes beIges ne
pouvait etre consid~r~e comme la cause de tels exc~s.

30. In view of that unfortunate situation-and I do not
wish to dwell further upon it, although there are still
many aspects which couldbe emphasized-what attitude
should the Council adopt? What decisions are likely to
correct the existing state of affairs and help the Congolese people to weather this crisis, and, primarily,
to prevent the situationfrom deteriorating still fUrther
and the danger of civil war and international tension
from growing?

30. TeUe ~tant la triste situation sur laquelle je ne
veux pas m '~tendre et dont bien des aspects pourraient
encore etre mis en relief, queUe attitude dolt adopter
le Consell? QueUes d~cisions, de sa part, serontsusceptibles de remedier 1l. cet etat de choses et d'aider
le peuple congolais 1l. sortir de cette crise, et d'empecher que cette situation ne se d6teriore encore et
que ne s'accroissent le danger de guerre civile et la
tension internationale?

31. Along with the reasons for anxiety, we are convinced that there are also reasons for hope -in the
Congo. In the news reaching us daily, there are some
items which give promise of an easing of the situation.
A cease-fire appears to have been agreeduponbetween
the opposing military forces. Various groups are trying
to combine in order to work towards the marshalling
of all the forces for agreement, conciliation and restoration in the country and to unite all men of good
will. Let us hope that this trend will develop further
and that all the political leaders in the Congo who are
genuinely conscious of their responsibilities will come
together in a useful endeavour.

31. A cote des motifs d'inqui6tude, il y a aussi au
Congo, nous en sommes persuades, des raisons d'esperer. Parmi les nouvelles qui nous parviennent chaque
jour, il en est qui laissent entrevoir des perspectives
d'apaisementj un cessez-le-feu serait intervenu entre
les unites militaires qui s'opposent; divers elements
s 'efforceraient de se grouper dans la volonte de travalller au rassemblement de toutes les forces d'entente, de conciliation et de restauration du pays, de
.rlmnir tous les hommes de bonne volonte. Souhaitons
que cette tendance s'accentue et que s'unissent pour
oouvrer utilement tous les hommes politiques du Congo
veritablement conscients de leurs responsabllites.
32. Le Secretaire general nous a rapporte les mesures temporaires qu'avaient juge necessaire de
prendre sur place ses represe!J.tants et que lui-meme
a avalisees. n a paru indispensable 1l. ces representants d'empecher que, par la radio nationale congolaise, ne soient diffusees des incitations condamnables
qui auraient encourage de nouveaux heurts et de nou-

32. The Secretary-General has told us what tempo-

rary measures his representatives found it necessary
to take on the spot and which he himself endorsed.
They thought it imperative to prevent the national radio
from being used to broadcast reprehensible incite. ments which would have promoted further clashes and
disturbances. They also considered it necessary to
6

prevent
purpose
loyal
which
dramati
33. T

Zorin's
delibera
attribut
tions w
one at
allegati
allies,
too muc
to deem
slogans
34. I

Union
cording
to those
only on
having
indepen
35. Ma
Congo"
of the
an inde
has un
United
exercis
whether
relation
36. In

appeals
an end
strife
disastr
humilia
port. T
third-p
interve
cate the
cil and
recent
necessi
Moreov
-honoure
gent to
would b
the Uni
sumed
use that
the sco

37. I s

tion's
38. Th
kinds:
funds to

prevent th~ Congolese airports from being used for
purposes of internal strife. I should like to stress the
loyal and generous motives underlying these actions,
which were taken with a vieW to avoiding further
dramatic events.

veaux \."'jubles. n a paru llgalement n€lcessaire que
les a€lrodromes congolais ne puissentpas etre utilis€ls
h des fins de guerre intestine. Je tiens h souligner
ici les intentions loyales et g€ln€lreuses dans lesquelles
les mesures ont €lt~ prises en vue d'€lviter de nouveaux
developpements dramatiques.

33. That is why my delegation cannot accept Mr.
Zorin's version of the recent events in the Congo. By
deliberately distorting the facts, he has seen fit to
attribute to Mr. Hammarskjold motives and calculations which are patently implausible. I amnotthe only
one at this table to express the disgust we feel at such
allegations. He also attacked Belgium and its NATO
allies, the traditional target of Soviet invective. I have
too much respect for my colleagues in this Council
to deem it necessary to make a serious reply to such
slogans and such nonsense.

33. Crest pourquoi ma d€ll€lgation jugeinacceptablela
version qu'a donn€le M. Zorine des recents€lvenements
du Congo. n a notamment, en d€lformant d€llib€lrement
les faits, cru devoir attribuer h M. Hammarskjold
des intentions et des calculs dont 1'invraisemblance
est manifeste. Je ne suis pas le seulll cette table 11
exprimer la r€lprobation que de telles all€lgations nous
inspirent. n s 'en est pris llgalement h la Belgique et
h ses allies de 1'OTAN, cible traditionnelle des invectives sovilltiques. J'ai trop d'estime pour mes coil~gues du Conseil pour juger necessaire de repondre
serieusement h de telles rengaines et billevesees.

34. I would remind the representative of the Soviet
Union that, in Africa as elsewhere, France lives according to the ways of the twentieth century and not
to those of the age of conspiracy. InAfrica, France has
only one monopoly and it is proud ofit: it can boast of
having helped the greatest number of States to attain
independence.

34. La France, Monsieur le representant de 1'Union
sovietique, vit en Afrique, comme dans toutes les
autres parties du monde, h 1'heure du ~me si~cle
et non pas h celle des complots.EnAfrique, mon pays
ne poss~de qu'un monopole, dont il s 'honore, celui du
plus grand nombre d'Etats qu'il a aides h acceder h
1'independance.
35. Je crois pouvoir rappeler 11 M. Zorine qui, pour
les besoins de son argumentation, a parle du "Congo
fran9ais", que la Republique du Congo, dontlacapitale
est Brazzaville, est aujourd'hui independante etquele
Conseil de sllcurit€l a recommand€l unanimement son
admission h 1'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le
gouvernement de M. Fulbert Youlou exerce en pleine
ind€lpendance ses droits souveraine, qu'il s 'agisse des
€lmissions de radio ou de ses relations avec ses voisins.

35. May I remindMr. Zorin, who spoke ofthe "French
Congo" for purposes of his argument, that the Republic
of the Congo which has its capital at Brazzaville is
an independent State today andthat the Security Council
has unanimously recommended its admission to the
United Nations. The Government of Mr. FulbertYoulou
exercises its sovereign rights in full independence,
whether it be in respect of radio broadcasts or its
relations with its neighbours.
36. In his fourth report, the Secretary-General
appeals to all parties concerned in the Congo to put
an end to their internal quarrels and their domestic
strife and to work together to remedy what is today a
disastrous situation leading the Congo to ruin and
humiliation. That appeal deserves our warmest support. The same applies to the renewed appeals to all
third-party States to refrain from any interference,
intervention or initiative which might tend to complicate the situation and hamper the efforts ofthis Council and the United Nations. Our Secretary-GeneralIs
recent exchanges of letters demonstrate the urgent
necessity of repeating and emphasizing those appeals.
Moreover, any state which the United Nations has
,honoured by asking it to contribute a military contingent to restore order and security in the country
would be failing in its most solemn obligations towards
the United Nations and in the responsibilities it assumed when it joined the Organization if it were to
use that contingent, or any other, in the Congo outside
the scope of operation of the United Nations Force.

36. Dans sonquatri~merapport,le Secretaireg€lneral
adresse h toutes les parties intllress€les h l'intllrieur
du Congo un appal en vue de rnettre fiu h leurs querenes et leurs luttes intestines pour travailler
ensemble h rem6dier h une situation aujourd'hui
catastrophique, qui conduit le Congo h la. mine et h
1'humiliation. Cet appel m€lrite de recevoir notre plus
chaleureux appui. n en est de mame des appals
renouveles h tous les Etats tiers, de s 'abstenir de
toute ing€lrence, de toute intervention et de toute initiative qui' risqueraient de compliquer la situation et
qui vienqraient h 1'encontre de 1'effort poursuivi par
le Conseil et notre organisation. Les recentes correspondances du Secr€ltaire general montrent 1'urgence
de repeter et de souligner ces appels. Enfin, tout Etat
h qui l'Organisation des Nations Unies afaitl'honneur
de sladresser pour lui demander de llaider par la
fourniture de contingents militaires h restaurer dans le
pays 1'ordre et la a€lcurite faillirait h ses obligations
les plus solennelles envers les Nations Unies et aux
engagements qulil a souscrits en adherant h notre
organisation slil utilisait, au Congo, ce contingent ou
tout autre contingent en dehors du cadre de la force
d'intervention.

37. I should now like briefly to express my delegation's views on the financial asp~cts of the problem.

37. Je voudrais maintenant exposer bri~vement les
vues de ma delegation sur les aspects financiers du
probl~me.

38. The needs brought to our attention are of two
kinds: funds to maintain the United Nations Force and
funds to assist the Congolese State.

38. Les besoins qui nous sont indiques sont de deux
sOrtes: des fonds pour llentretien de la force dlintervention et, d'autre part, des fonds de secours et d'aide
h 1'Etat congolais.
7

39. In the opinion of my delegation, the Council should
proceed with caution in this matter and with all desirable guarantees. The programme of immediate
financial ass~stancedrawnup bythe Secretary-General
amounts to nearly twice the annual budget of the Organization. Is there not a danger that assistance
granted in such circumstances might evoke similar
requests from other states? The United Nations might
then find itself committed to a policy of bounty which
it would obviously be unable to carry out.

39. Ma d€ll6gation estime que le Conseil ne saurait
agir en cette mati~re qu'avec prudence et en s'entourant de toutes les garanties d€lsirables. Le programme
d'aide financi~re immMiate €ltabli par le Secr€ltaire
g€meral se monte pr~sque au double du budget annuel
de notre organisation. Une aide accordee dans ces
conditions ne risque-t-elle pas de susciter de la part
d'autres Etats des demandes analogues? L'Organisation peut se trouver ainsi engagee sur la voie d'une
politique de largesses qu'elle ne pourraitevidemment
pas conduire ~ bonne fin.

40. In requesting additional funds, the SecretaryGeneral has pointed out that the money to finance the
basic services for which the Congolese Government
is responsible will be a sheer waste ifnothing is done
to restore law aild order throughout the nation. Firstly,
therefore, the internal problems should be settled
through the genuine and effective efforts ofthe responsible Governments.

40. En demandant de nouveaux cr€ldits, le Secr€ltaire
gen6ral a marqu6 que l'argent pour le financement des
services 616mentaires dont le Gouvernement congolais
est responsable sera manife3tement fourni en pure
perte si rien n 'est fait pour restaurer la loi et 1'ordre
dans la vie nationale. Les probl~mesint6rieurs doivent
donc etre pr€lalablement r€lsolus par les efforts sinc~res et efficaces des gouvernements responsables.

41. Lastly, my Government considers that the problem before us should be examined in detail by the appropriate organs ofthe General Assembly, whichisto
meet in a few days and which is, we feel, the body
qualified to take decisions of such nature and scope.
It also feels that we should ensure that the United
Nations does not, without recourse to the usual pro.
cedure, assume the burden of government expenses
which should normally be borne by the Congolese authorities. 'Indeed, my delegation doubts the advisability
-even in the present circumstances-of an international organization taking over the basic prerogatives
and responsibilities of national authorities.

41. Enfin, mon gouvernement estime que le probl~me

differe

have le
times,
forces
aurpris
populat
is not
and a
the Con
loss of
expecte

qui nous est soumis devrait faire l'objet d'une €ltude

d6taill€le par les organes appropri~s de 1'Assemblee
g6n6rale qui se .r€lunit dans quelques jours et qui est
qualifiee, .semble-t-il, pour prendre des d6cisions de
cette nature et de cette ampleur. n estime, en outre,
que nous devons veiller ~ ce que notre organisation
n'assume pas, sans recours aux proc6dures habitue11es, la charge des d6penses gouvernementales qui
incombent normalement aux autorit6s congolaises. Ma
d€llegation a en effet des doutes sur 1'opportunite meme dans les circonstances actue11es -- de voir une
instance internationale se substituer aux autorites
nationales dans leurs pr€lrogatives et responsabilites
fondamentales.

42. Those are the concerns and the considerations
by which my delegation will be guided at the close of
our discussion.

42. Te11es sont les preoccupations et les considerations qui guideront ma d6legation lors de la conclusion
de nos debats.

43. Sir Patrick DEAN (UnitedKingdom):lshouldlike,
first, to explain the main considerations which govern
the attitude of the United Kingdom Government towards
the present situation in the Congo and towards the
responsibilities of the United Nations in the light of
that situation.

43. Sir Patrick DEAN (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
1'anglais]: Permettez-moi tout d'abord d'expliquer les
principales considerations qui determinent 1'attitude
du Gouvernement du Royaume-Unl en ce qui concerne
la situation actue11e au Congo et lea responsabilites
qui incombent ~ 1'Organisation des Nations Unies du
fait de cette situation.

44. The basic fact of the present position in the Congo

44. Le fait essentiel en ce rnoment est 1'existence
dans 1'ensemble du Congo d'uil grand nombre de fac-

is that there are many factions throughout the country
which hold strong and different views on how the
country should best be governed and what form of
constitution is best sulted to the population. These
different views are strongly supported, with the result
that there has been for some time almost a fotal paralysis of government in the country and .no Congolese
authorities have been able to exercise any effective
control for any length of time except purely locally.
Nor have they been able to carry on any of .the normal
processes of administration, with the result that ~oday
the economic life of the Congo is at a standstill. There
is virtually no money in the exchequer, the responsible
Congolese units are hardly capable of protecting the
population and the administration of justice, in the
ordinary sense of the term, has almost ceased.

tions qui ont des opinions bien arretees, mais divergentes, sur la faQon la meilleure de gouverner le pays
et sur la forme de constitution qui convient le mieux
~ sa population. Ces opinions divergentes sont soutenues avec une te11e vigueur que, depuis un certain
temps d6j~, le gouvernement du pays est presque
totalement paralys6 et que, sauf sur le plan purement
local, aucune autoriM congolaise n'est en mesure
d'exercer un pouvoir efficace pour unedur6equelconque. Les autoriMs congolaises ne peuvent exercer non
·plus aucune des attributions normales de I' administration, si bien qu'aujourd'hui la vie 6'conomique du Congo
est arret6e; les caisses de 1'Etat sont pratiquement
vides; crest ~ peine si les unites congolaises responsables peuvent prot6ger la population, etl'administration de la justice, au sens ordinaire de cette expression, a pour ainsi dire cesse.

45. In such a situation it is not surprising that, as
the Secretary-General has informed the Council in his
fourth report and in the grave and convincing statement
which he made to it on 9 September, ancient tribal

45. Dans ces circonstances, il n'est pas surprenant
que, comme le Secr6taire general en a inform6 le
Conseil dans son quatribme rapport et dans la d6claration, si grave et si convaincante, qu'il a faite devant
8

one; we
delicat
the Uni
in whic
solve tl
is for 1
support
have m:
order,
prevent
faction
49. We

attempt
the co
the Uni
in what
not onI
for inte
ways r
Such at
Secur!

50. Th
therefo
outside
of the
materi
in the C
51. Bu

deterio
this m
through
sponsib
people t
which

differences lUid claims haft flared up, and that these
have led to cases of mass&cr-e and looting in which, at
times, the uncontrolled elements of the Congolese
forces have taken part. Indeed it is.. . p erhaps only
surprising that the tragic loss of life amongthe civilian
population has not been greater, but if this situation
is not rapidly brought under control, and orderly life
and a proper economic basis soon re-established in
the Congo, an incalculable condition of cliaos,involving
loss of life on an infinitely greater scale, must be
expected.

le' Consell le 9 septembre, les anciennes divergences
et revendications tribales se ,soient ranimees et
qutenes aient abouti ~ des massacres et des pillages
auxquels les 6lements des forces congolaises sans
chefs responsables ont parfois participe. En verite,
peut-etre le seul fait surprenant est-ll que les pertes
en vies humaines parmi la population civile n'aient
pas 6te plus importantes; maiS, si la situation ntest
pas reprise en main rapidement et si I ton ne retablit
pas I'ordre public et I tactivite economique ~ bref
delai, II faut s'attendre ~ un chaos indescriptible qui
s taccompagnera de pertes envies humaines infiniment
plus nombreuses.
46. Depuis le 9 septembre, datehlaquellelapresente
s6:rie de r6unions du Conseil a commenc;§, les nouvenes du Congo ont etll frllquentes et variees et parfois
contradictoir~s. On a rapporte les dllclarations de
differents chefs politiques revoquant mutuellement
leurs pouvoirs; on a parle de votes du Parlement
congolais annulant ces declarations, de mandats d'arrat, d'emprisonnements et de remises en liberte; ana
dit que les chefs militaires avaient declare que 1'armee
allait prendre la situation en main, que sais-je encore.
47. Toutes ces nouvelles font que man gouvernement
est absolument convaincu qu'll n'existe ~ l'heure aetuelle au Congo aucune autorite capable d'assurer le
fonctionnement normal du gouvernement et le bienatre de la population.
48. A notre avis, le probl~me est d'ordre pratique;
nous estimons que, dans les circonstances actuelles
qui sont extremement difficiles et delicates, 1'Organisation des Nations Unies peut creer les conditions
voulues pour que les Congolais puissent regler leurs
differends et mettre leur pays en valeur. C'est pour
cette raison que mon gouvernement approuve et appuie
tous les efforts que les forces des Nations Unies ont
accomplis dans l'ensemble du pays pour maintenir
l'ordre public, proteger la population civile et emp@cher les combats entre les forces des diff6rentes
factions.
49. En outre, nous sommes convaincus queles autres
puissances ne doivent rien tenter pour influencer le
cours des evenements au Congo enintervenanthors du
cadre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Nous
sommes persuades que des tentatives de ce genre,
quelque forme qu'elles puissent prendre, ne peuvent
etre que dangereuses, non seulement pour la paix et
pour la stabilite du Congo, mais encore pour la paix
et la Securite internationales, qui doivent demeurer la
preoccupation principale du Conseil. En outre, ces
tentatives seraient contraires ~ 1'esprit des resolu..
tions que le Conseil de sllcurite a adoptees au sujet
du Congo.

46. Since the Council began its present series of
meetings on 9 September, the news from the Congo
has been frequent and various, and I am bound to say,
at times conflicting. There have been reports of pronouncements by different political leaders suspending
each other's authority, of votes in the Congolese
Parliament annulling these pronouncements, of warrants issued for arrest, of imprisonment and release,
that military leaders have declared that the armywlll
assume control, and so on.
47. All these developments strongly support the belief
of my Government that at the moment there is no
authority in the Congo capable of canying on the normal business of government and of assuring the wellbeing of the population.
48. The problem in our view is primarily a practical
one; we consider that in the present very difficult and
delicate circumstances the United Nations and only
the United Nations can create the necessary conditions
in which the Congolese people can go forward to resolve their differences and build up their country. It
is for this reason that my Government approves and
supports all the efforts which the United Nations forces
have made throughout the country to maintain law and
order, to safeguard the civilian population, and to
prevent fighting between the forces of the different
factions.
49. We are, moreover, convinced that at this time no
attempt should be made by other Powers to influence
the course of events in the Congo by actions outside
the United Nations. We believe that such attempts,
in whatever guise they are made, must be dangerous
not only for the peace and stability of the Congo but
for international peace and security, which must always remain the overriding cOncern of this Council.
Such attempts are also contrary to the spirit of the
. Security Council resolutions on the Congo.

50. The Government of the United Kingdom must
therefore feel serious concern at any continuance by'
outside Powers of activities in the Congo independent
of the United Nations effort, such as the supply of
material or personnel to any of the conflicting parties
in the Congo.

50. Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni ne pourrait
quteprouver de graves inquietudes si des puissances
exterieures poursuivaient des activites au Congo independamment des efforts entrepris par 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies, en fournissant par exemple du
matllriel et du personnel ~ 1'une quelconque des parties qui s 'affrontent au Congo.
5!. Mais il ne suffit pas d'empecher la situation de
s'aggraver encore, si urgenteet si difficile que cette
~che puisse etre. La verite, crest que l'Organisation
des Nations Unies a assume, par l'intermediaire du
consen de securite, la responsabilite et la tache
d'aider les Congolais ~ echapper ~ la tragedie qui
s'est abattue sur eux et ~ poursuivre 1'edification d'un

51. But it is not enough to prevent the situation from
deteriorating any further, urgent and difficult though
this may be. The truth is that the United Nations
through the Security Council has undertaken the responsibility and the task of helping the Congolese
people to escape from the destructive course ofevents
which has overtaken them, and to proceed with the
9

Etat independant, libre et pros~re. Cette tAche, II
faut que 1'Organisation des NationsUnies s'enacquitte,
car en veritl~ nul autre n'est en mesure de le fah-e.
52. Dans son qua:tri~me rapport, le Secretaire g6neral a indique comment, h son avis, cette ttche peut
Stre menee h bien. n a demande la creation d'un compte
international pour le Congo, de~tine h financer le fonetionnement des services essentiels et auquel seraient
versees les contributions volontaires des Etats Membres.
53. Le Secretaire general souligne egalement daDs
son rapport que les efforts visant h retablir une vie
normale grtce h 1'aide financi~re qu'll a proposee
seraient r6duits h neant s'n n'etait pas mis fin aux
luttes intestines dans le pays. n propose que le Conseil demande instamment aux parties interessees, h
1'interieur du Congo, de rechercher par des moyens
pacifiques une solution h leurs probl~mes internes de
faQon h preserver 1'unite et 1'integrite du pays. Le
Secrlltaire general propose en outre que le Consen
de securite, r6affirmant sa demande anterieure, prie
les Etats Membres de s'abstenir de toute action de
nature h empecher le retablissement de 1'ordre public
ou h compliquer la solution pacifique des conflits
internes. n demande que le Conseil eclaircisse le
mandat de la Force des Nations Unies de faQon h
permettre 11 cette derni~re de prendre' les mesures
necessaires pour protllger la vie de la population civile.

development of an independent, free and prosperous
State. This task the United Nations must discharge
since in truth there is none other to do so.
52. The Secretary-General in his fourth report has
indicated how he believes this can be done. He has
appealed for the establishment within the Congo of an
international account for the maintenance of essential
services into which voluntary contributions by Mew1>er
Governments would be paid.
53. The Secretary-General's report also pointed out
that efforts to re-establish normal life on the basis of
the financial assistance which he has proposed would
be nullified unless the internal conflicts in the country
can be resolved. He proposed that the Council should
urge the parties concerned within the Congo to seek
by peaceful means a solution to their internal problems
in a ws.y which would preserve the unity and integrity
of the country. The Secretary-General proposed further that the Council should reaffirm its request to
Member States to refrain from any action likely to
impede the restoration of law and order or make a
peaceful solution of the internal conflicts more difficult. He has asked that it should clarify the mandate
of the United Nations Force in a way which would
enable it to act as necessaryto protect the lives of the
civilian population.

54. Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uniappuiepleinemen! les propositions du Secretaire generalqu'ilconsid~re comme un ensemble indissoluble. 11 estime
quIon ne pourra venir about de la situation dangereuse
existant au Congo qu'en appliquant toutes ces propositions.
55. Le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste dans le RoyaumeUni approuve notamment la proposition tendant a creer
un fonds d'urgence; il entend y contribuer et esp~re
que tous les Membres de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies yont cooperer pleinement a la mise en application de toutes les propositions que le Secretaire general a formulees dans son quatri~me rapport et que
je viens de mentionner.

54. The Government of the United Kingdom fully
supports these proposals by the Secretary-General as
an integrated whole. They are convinced that if, and
only if, they are all put into effect can the dangerous
situation in the Congo be brought under control.
55. Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom
certainly supports the proposal for an emergency fund
and will contribute to it, in the expectation that all
Members of the United Nations will co-operate fully
in putting into effect all the proposals outlined in the
Secretary-General's fourth report, to which I have just
referred.

importance of an early effort by the various conflicting
parties concerned within the Congo to find by peaceful
means a solution to their internal difficulties. We believe that if a serious attempt to do so were made in
good faith, a settlement could be found which would be
responsive to the particular needs of the Congolese
people as a whole, and would preserve the territorial
and economic unity of the Congo, to which Her Majesty's Government attaches the greatest importance.

56. A cet egard, nous voudrions souligner combien n
est important que les diverses parties qui sont en
lutte au Congo s'efforcent sans delai de trouver des
moyens pacifiques de regler leurs difficultes internee.
A notre avis, si une tentative serieuse et de bonne foi
etait faite dans ce sens, il serait possible de parvenir
A un r~glement qui repondrait auxbesoins particuliers
de l'ensemble du peuple congolais et preserverait
1'unite territoriale et economique du Congo, A laquelle
le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste attache la plus grande
importance.

57. It must surely be clear by now that nOhB of the
rival Congolese factions in the Congo can or should
impose itself upon the other, and. that negotIation is
essential if the country is not to be further torn by
internal political strife or driven further into e~orlomic
disorder.

57. 11 doit apparartre clairement desormais qu'aucune
des factions congolaises rivales ne peut ou ne doit
.s'imposer a l'autre et qu'une negociation est indispensable si 1'0n veut enter que le pays continue a ~tre
dechire par des luttes politiques internes ou s 'enfonce
plus avant dans le desordre economique.

58. If outside help is necessaryinpromoUngapeaceful solution of the Congo's internal problems, we believe that the experience of the United Nations in
conciliatory procedures could contribute directly to
arranging a conference of all concerned to this end.
We also trust that those nations in Africa which naturally have the greatest knowledge of the Congo and

58. S'il est necessaire de faire appel 1\ une aide
exterieure pour trouver une solution pacifique aux
probl~mes internes du Congo, nous estimons que, grace
11 l'experience qu'elle a acquise en mati~re de procedures de conciliation, 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
pourra contribuer directement a organiser une conference qui r~unirait 11 cette fin tous les int~ress~s.

56. In this respect we lay particular emphasis onthe

10

62. It
patent
from
them
memb
that t
some
a tota
techlli
perial
belieV'
hono
way t
draw

63. I

been d
has pI
the Co
effort.
Soviet
to the
aggrav

the greatest influence with the Congolese leaders will
do everything they can to bring about this result.
And in this respect I noted with interest the suggestion
put forward at the 901st meeting bythe representative
of Tunisia.

Nous comptons egalement que les pays d'Afrique qui
connaissent le mieux les probl~mes du Congo et ont le
plus d'influence sur les dirigeants congolais feront
tout leur possible pour parvenir i\ ce resultat. Et, i\
cet egard, j'ai note avec interet la proposition faite
i\ la 901~me seance par le representant de la Tunisie.
59. Le Conseil est maintenant saisi d'un projet de
resolution presente par le representant des EtatsUnis [S/4516]. Ce texte porte sur lespoints essentiels
que je viens d'exposer et dont j'ai dit qu'ils constituaient les elements indispensables d'un programme
constructif et progressif qui permettrait de faire face
i\ la situation actuelle au Congo au mieux des inter~ts
veritables du peuple congolais.
.
60. Je voterai donc en faveur du projet de resolution
des Etats-Unis et j' esp~re que ses qualites lui vaudront
l'appui de tous les membres du Conseil.

59. The Council now has before it a resolution proposed by the representative of the United states
[8/4516]. This resolution covers the essential points
which I have just described as constituting the necessary elements for a constructive andprogressive programme to deal with the present situation in the Congo
in the true interests of the Congolese people.
60. I therefore support the draft resolution put forward by my United states colleague, andlhope that on
its merits it will commend itself to all my colleagues
round this table.

61. Avant de conclure mon intervention, j'ai le regret
de devoir dire quelques mots sur ladeclarationque le
representant de 1'Union sovietique a faite hier soir et
qui rev~le une attitude toute differente. Cette declaration m'a malheureusement fait 1'effet d'avoir un caract~re doctrinaire absolument depasse, d'un genre qui ne
rappelle que trop celles que le Conseil avait coutume
d'entendre il y a quelques annees. Le representant de
l'Union sovietique n'a pas cherche i\ parler des affaires d'Afrique en des termes autres que ceux de la
guerre froide et tous les slogans familiers ont ete
ressortis: desseins agressifs de 1'0TAN, sinistres
machinations des monopoles capitalistes et plus plL:-i;iculi~rement de Wall Street, volonM bien arr~t~e des
puissances colonialo-imperialistes de s'opposer au
mouvement de liberation des peuples d'Afrique. n a
egalement brandi un autre epouvantail en accusant le
Commandement des forces des Nations Unies auCongo
et le Secretaire general en personne de soutenir "les
forces qui, faisant le jeu des puissances coloniales,
combattent la politique visant i\ renforcer 1'independance de la Republique du Congo, favorisent la division du mouvement de liberation nationale des peuples
africains et aident les puissances imperialistes dans
leur lutte contre ce mouvement ll [901~me seance,
par. 35].
62. On pourrait croire que ces accusations sont par
trop rebattues pour qu'il soit besoin d'y repondre,
mais, vu lapersonnalitedeleurauteur,j'estimene pas
pouvoir les laisser passer. Je ne puis croire par
exemple qu'H y ait un seul membre du Conseil de
securite pour s'emouvoir de 1'accusation selon laquelle
la presence de moins de 300 Canadiens et Norvegiens
charges de fonctions techniques specialisees sur un
effectif total de 18.000 hommes environ ferait de la
Force des Nations Unies un instrument des visees
imperialistes des puissances de 1'OTAN en Afrique.
Je crois plut6t que, lorsque les Etats africains se
souviendront de 1'attitude honorable qui a toujours ete
celle du Canada et de la Norv~ge i\ 1'egard des probl~mes africains, Hs prefereront tirer d'autres conclusions.
63. Je crois egalement que ces m~mes Etats africains auront ete troubles par la fa<;on dont 1'Union
sovietique a insiste sur son droit d'envoyer au Congo
des fournituretl de toute esp~ce sans passer par 1'entremise de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies. Je auis
certain qu'ils esp~rent comme nous que l'Union sovie-'
tique cessera d'agir de la sorte et qu'elle tiendra
compte des appels du Conseil de securite qui a de-

61. Before I finish speaking I must regretfully say
something briefly about the statement made last night
by the representative of thE.~ Soviet Union, which indicated quite a different approach. This statement
regrettably seemed to me to be a thoroughly oldfashioned doctrinaire statement of the kind with which
the Council in years gone by hadbeen only too familiar.
The representative of the Soviet Union showed no
disposition to insulate the affairs of Africa from the
language of the cold war, and all the familiar slogans
were paraded: the aggressive designs of NATO; the
sinister machinations of the capitalistic monopolists,
especially on Wall street; and the determination of the
imperialist colonialist Powers to resist the liberation
movement of the African peoples. He also added a new
bogy; he accused the United Nations Command in the
Congo and the Secretary-General personally of supporting "those forces which, piaying into the hands of
the colonial Powers, oppose a policy for strengthening
the independence of the Republic of the Congo, encourage divisions in the national freedom movement of
the African peoples and help the imperialist Powers
in their fight against this movement" [901st meeting,
para. 35].
62. It might be thought that these accusations are too
patently trite to require an answer, but as they come
from so distinguished a source I feel I cannot let
them pass. For example, I cannot believe that any
member ofthis Council will be impressedby the charge
that the inclusion in a United Nations Force totalling
. some 18,000 of personnel from Canada and Norway of
a total of less than 300 men performing specialized
technical functions, constitutes an instrument of imperialist designs by the NATO Powers in Africa. I
believe rather that when the African states recall .the
honourable and consistent attitude of Canada and Norway towards African problems they will prefer to
draw other conclusions.

63. I believe too that these African states will have
been disturbed by the emphasis which the Soviet Union
has placed on its right to send supplies of any kind to
the Congo outside the framework of the UnltedNations
effort. I am sure that they share' our hope that the
Soviet Union will cease to act in this way and respond
to the appeals of the Security Council to do nothing to
aggravate the present very difficult situation.
11

mande awe Etats de ne rienfairequi risque d'aggraver
une situation dejh extr~mement delicate.
64. n suffira de mama d'examiner les faits pour
faire justice des affirmations tendant h presenter le
Secretaire general comme un agent des imperialistes
colonialistes. Les Etats africains connaissent parfaitement, je le sais, l'action du Secretaireg€meralen
faveur de leurs aspirations. Ils savent qu'Us peuvent
compter sur sa sympathie et sur son aide h l'avenir,
comme Us l'ont fait dans le passe. Et Us savent egalement, j'en suis persuade, que les Nations Unies en
tant qu'organisation ont ete et resteront poureuxd'un
immense secours, ce qui est d'ailleurs normal. Et je
suis convaincu que ces Etat13 doivent ~e profondement troubles par les tentatives que fait l'Union
sovietique pour jeter le discredit sur les efforts de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies au Congo.
65. Le Royaume-Uni ne doute pas pour sa part que,
dans toutes les decisions relatives aux operations des
Nations Unies au Congo. le Secretaire general s'est
laisse guider par son mandat et, dans le cadre de ce
mandat, par la resolution bien arr~tee d'emp~cher un
effonclrement totalde-liordre public qui constituerait
une menace pour la paix et lasecuriteinternationales,
ainsi que par le desir de mettre toutes les ressOllrces
de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies h la disposition
d'un peuple qui lutte pour creer le cadre constitutionnel et economique de son independance.
66. Le Royaume-Uni a la certitude que les decisions
d'urgence prises par le Secretaire general et par ses
represontants sur place ont ete prises dans ces intentions. Nous sommes convaincus que ces decisions
etaient pleinement justifiees. Je tiens donc h m'associer h 1'hommage qui a ete rendu audevouement et
h l'{mergie du Secretaire general et notamment aux
paroles prononcees par le representant de la Tunisie
bier soir et par les orateurs qui m'ont precede ce
matin.
67. J'ai ete profondement frappe enfin. en entendant
aujourd'hui les representants de l'Argentine et de
1'Equateur, par la perspective bistorique dans laquelle
Hs ont place le r81e de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies au Congo. Nous devons tous ici en effet considerer les consequences h long terme des decisions que
nous sommes sur le point de prendre. Dans la mesure
oft nous soutiendrons aUjouid'hui Paction des Nations
Unies au Congo. nous donnerons h I 'Organisation,
m"aintenant et dans d'autres cas d'urgence qui pourront
se presenter hi'avenir, la possibilite de repondre aux
besoins d'Etats Membres, ou m~me d'Etatsnonmembres, et A ceux de la communaute mondiale. Par les
decisions que nous allons prendre, nOlls pouvons oontribuer h realiser les aspirations et A assurer la
securite non seulement du peuple congolais, mais de
tous lea peuples.
68. M. ZORINE (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russel: 'La delegation sovietique estime indispensable, h propos de la discussion
qui s'est deroulee bier et aUjourd'hui, de formuler
une serie d'observations de principe et de presenter
ses propositions.

64. A similar examination of the record will serve
to dispose of the effort to portray the SecretaryGeneral. in the guise of a tool of the colonialist imperialists. The African states are, I know, well aware
of the record of the Secretary-General with regard to
their aspirations. They know that they can count on
his sympathy and assistance in the future as they have
done in the past. And they know too, I believe, that
the United Nations as an Organization has been and
remains of immense benefit to them, as indeed it
should be. And I believe that they must be seriously
disturbed at the attempts of the Soviet Union to discredit the efforts of the United Nations in the Congo.

65. The United Kingdom, for its part, has no doubt
that in all his decisions with regard to the United
Nations operations in the Congo, the Secretary-General
has been guided by his mandate, and within this mandate by a determination to prevent the total collapse
of law and order, which would constitute a threat to
international peace and security, and by a desire to
place the resources of the United Nations at the disposal of a people strugglingto establish a constitutional
and economic framework for its independent life.
66. The United Kingdom is satisfied that the emergency decisions taken by the Secretary-General and
his representatives on the spot have been taken with
these ends in view. We believe these decisions were
fully justified. I therefore wish to associate myself
with the tribute which has been paidto the devotion and
energy of the Secretary-General and which was particularly paid to the Secretary-General by the representative of Tunisia last night andby other representatives who have spoken before me today.
67. One last word. I have been deeply impressed in
the speeches which we have heard today from the
representatives of Argentina and Ecuador by-the historical perspective in which they placed the role of
the United Nations in the Congo. We round this table
must indeed consider the lasting consequences of the
decisions which we are nOw going to take. To the
extent that we support the United Nations inthe Congo
today, we are ensuring that the Organization will be
available now and hereafter to meet the needs of
Member States, or indeed of non-member States, and
ofthe world community in future emergencies. By our
action now we can contribute to the aspirations and
the security not only of the Congolese people but of
all peoples.

68. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): In connexion with the discussion which took place yesterday and today, the
Soviet delegation considers it necessary to make a
number of remarks on points of principle and to submit
Us own proposals.
69. In the first place, the representative ofthe United
states was unable in his remarks today to refute the
facts we presented in our statement yesterday, the
reason being that these facts are, unfortunately, real.
The Secretary-General likewise did not refute the
substance of these facts in his statement of yesterday.

69. En premier lieu, le representant des Etats-Unis.
dans son intervention d'aujOllrd'hui, n'apu dementir lea
faits que nous anons mentionnes bier, car ces faits
sont malheureusement exacts. Le Secretaire general,
dans son intervention d'bier. n'a pas non plus dementi
ces faits quant au fond. n a simplement voulu en

12

71.
the
are
deb
tak
cisi
wer
tion
fore
72.

on
the
that
ing
par
to
73.

and
sign
this
fact
sess
Chai
not
thor
The
whet
the
reso
, take
the
Coun
viol
the
detai
74.

to u
jecti
the
fact
the
its 0
caus
unde
Afri
valu
stan
deci

He merely gave his interpretation ofthem and offered
some explanations of his actions. His explanations do
not, however, refute the facts which were presented
and cannot satisfy those who would like to see in the
person of the Secretary-C,eneral an impartial individual who carries out the decisions of the Security
Council in precise and complete conformity with the
letter and the spirit of those decisions.

donner sa propre interpretation et fournir quelques
explications sur les mesures qu'il aprises. Cependant,
les precisions qu'il a apportees ne constituentpasnon
plus une refutation des faits que nous avons mentionnes, et ne peuvent satisfaire tous ceux qui voudraient voir dans la personne du Secretaire general
un agent impartial qui execute les decisions du Conseil
de securite en se conformant strictement et enti~re­
ment ! la lettre et ! I'esprit de ces decisions.

70. Secondly, the statement made by the representative of the United States was so framed as to give the
impression that somebody-the reference was to the
Soviet Union-wishes to undermine the United Nations
and its action in the Congo, and that the United States
opposes this and wants the tasks of the United Nations
to be carried out in the spirit of the Charter, so that
the acute problems now facing the Congo may be resolved.
71. The Soviet delegation is constrained to state that
the attempts to represent our position in this light
are completely futile. From the very outset of the
debate on the Congo question, the Soviet Union has
taken an active part in formulating the Council's de...
cisions and has voted in favour of the resolutions that
were adopted. It continues to stand by these resolutions and inl:08nds to ensure that they are strictly enforced.

70. En second lieu, l'interventiondurepresentantdes
Etats-Unis visait ! faire croire que quelqu'un, et l'on
a cit6 I'Union sovietique, vent saper l'Organisation des
Nations Unies et compromettre les mesures qu'elle
prend au Congo, et que les Etats-Unis sly opposent et
veulent que les t!ches soient executees par 1'ONU dans
l'esprit de la Charte pour resoudre les graves probl~mes qui se posent aujourd'hui au Congo.

72. Further, in a public statement made very recently,
on 13 September, Mr. Khrushchev, the Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, stated
that the Soviet Government is in favour of strengthening the United Nations in every way because it is the
paramount international body in which States belonging
to both systems are represented.

72. En outre, le President du Conseil des ministres
de 1'Union . sovi~tique, M. Khrouchtchev, a, tr~s r~­
cemment, le 13 septembre, d~clar~publiquement que le
Gouvernement sovietique ~st favorable ! un renforcement de l'Organisation des Nations Unies sur une base
universelle parce qu'il s'agit del'organeinternational
le plus important, oil sont representes des Etats
appartenant ! l'un et l'autre syst~me.

73. Our consistent policy is to increase the authority
and importance of the United Nations, and the great
significance which the Soviet Government attaches to
this international Organization is demonstrated by the
fact that the Soviet delegation to the forthcoming
session of the General Assembly is to be headed by '/;he
Chairman of the Council of Ministers. Unfortunately,
not all those who are speaking now of the lofty authority of the United Nations take this same position.
The question under discussion is not, moreover,
whether the United Nations is or is not carrying out
the measures provided for in the Security Council
resolutions on the Congo, or whether action is being
,taken outside the United Nations. It is rather that
the resolutions on the Congo adopted by the Security
Council are being violated and that they are being
violated, unfortunately, by the Secretary-General and
the United Nations Command, as has been shown by
detailed facts which have not been refuted.

73. Nous suivons fid~lement une politique visant !
renforcer l'autorite et l'importance de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, et le fait m~me que la delegation
sovietique ! la presente session de I'Assemblee generale est dirigee par le President du Conseil des
ministres indique toute 1'importance que le Gouvernement sovietique accorde ~ cette organisation interna~
tionale. Telle n'est pas malheureusement la position
de tous ceux qui parlent aUjourd'hui du grand prestige
de l'Organisation. n ne s'agit nullement de savoir si
l'Organisation des Nations Unies doit ou non executer
au Congo les mes.ures prevues dans les resolutions
du Conseil de securite, ou s'il faut agir hors de l'Organisation. Voici ce dont il s'agit: les resolutions
adoptees par le Conseil de securite sur le Congo sont
enfreintes, malheureusement, par le Secretaire general et le Commandement des Nations UnieSj sur ce
point, on a cite des faits precis qui n'ont pas ete
dementis.

74. The question is also that attempts are being made
to use the United Nations for the attainment of objectives in the Congo which have nothing to do with
the purposes of the United Nations and which are in
fact leading to a re-enslavement of the Congo under
the United Nations nag. The Soviet Union has voiced
its opposition to this and will continue to do so, because in its view this is the very sort of action that
undermines the authority of the .United Nations in
Africa and throughout the world. Preciselybecause we
value the authority of the United Nations, we take the
stand that these violations of the Security Council's
decisions must cease, that further violations must not

74. n s'agit en outre de ceci: on a tente d'utiliser
l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour executer au
Congo des taches qui n'ont aucun rapport avec les buts
de l'Organisation et qui, en fait, conduisent~unnouvel
asservissement du Congo sous le couvert du drapeau
de l'ONU. L'Union sovietique s'est opposee ets'opposera! ces tentatives, car elle estime que de tels
agissements, pr~cis~ment, compromettent le prestige
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies dans le monde
entier et en Afrique. crest justement parce que nous
attachons du prix au prestige de I'Organisation des
Nations Unies que nous sommes partisans de mettre
fin ! ces violations des decisions du Conseil de se-

71. La delegation sovietique estime indispensable de
declarer que cette tentative de presenter notre position
sous un tel jour est denuee detoutfondement. L'Union
sovietique, d~s le debut de l'examen de la question du
Congo, a pris une part active! l'61aboration des decisions du Conseil de securite et a vote pour les
resolutions qu'il a adoptees. AUjourd'hui encore, elle
se fonde sur ces resolutions et son intention est
d'obtenir qu'elles soient scrupuleusement executees.

13

be tolerated and that the United Nations must not be
used for the pl'~i" se of strengthening colonial domination.
75. Some speakers have referred here to enhancing
the authority of the United l"fations. We believe that
that should be done, but the proper way to do it is to
rectify the erroneous action that is undermining the
authority of the United Nations and not to aggravate
the errors already committed.
76. Thirdly, the tJnited States, in its draft resolution
[8/4516], departs from the Security Council resolutions
which the United States itself approved and voted for,
and does so on behalf of a policy which runs counter
to the purposes of the United Nations. I shall demonstrate this, if I may, by analysing the draft resolution
submitted for our consideration.
77. In opentive paragraph 1, the Secretary-General
is urged "to continue to give vigorous effect to the
resolutions of the Council". This, unfortunately, is a
pious wish, for the resolution says nothing about the
erroneous action which is in fact leading to violations
of the resolutions and which must be rectified.
78. In operative paragraph 2, the States Members of
the United Na!ions are called upon to make "voluntary
financial contributions to a United Nations fundforthe
Congo, to be used under United Nations control as
determined by the Secretary-General, for the financing of the necessary governmental expenditures not
covered by governmental revenue••• ". What does this
mean? It means that we would give the SecretaryGeneral a mandate to finance the governmental expenditures of an independent State, the Congo, as he sees
fit. This is called strengthening a country's sovereignty
and enhancing the authority of the United Nations in
the eyes of the African States. We do not think that
such a mandate can be given, especially since the
Secretary-General has unfortunately carried out the
last mandate he received inthe distorted and erroneous
fashion to which we have referred.

79. This paragraph is not in keeping with the resolutions already adopted by the Security Council, for in
all the resolutions adopted by the Council it was stated
that the Secretary-General should act in consultation
with the Government of the Congo in respect of all
questions, including economic and administrative
questions. In this paragraph, consultation with the
Government is no longer -mentioned. All financial resources are now placed at the disposal of the Secretary-General-and this does not involve a small figure
but some hundred million dollars which are to be
spent as the Secretary-General sees fit.
80. This can only be called the establishment of a
trusteeship over an independent State, the Congo. Life
is moving towards the end of colonial possession, the
end of trusteeship, but under this new draft resolution
of the United States, we wouid restore trusteeship
over an independent State which has only recently
freed itself from colonial domination.
81. Operative paragraph 3 reads:
"Urges all parties to the internal conflicts within
the Republic of the Congo, in the interest of its unity
14

curite, de ne pas tolerer que ces violations se reproduisent et que 1'Organisation des Nations Unies serve
A. rEinforcer la domination coloniale.
e/5. Certains orateurs ont dit ici qu'll fallait relever
le prestige de l'ONU. Nous sommes d'accord, mals
cela ne pourra se faire quesil'onrectifie les erreurs
qui compromettent ce prestige et non si l'on persiste
dans les erreurs passees.
76. En troisi~me lieu, les Etats-Unis, dans leur
projet de resolution [S/4516], s'ecartent des resolutions adoptees par le Consell de securite, en faveur
desquelles Us ont eux-m~mes vote, et cela aux fins
d'une politique contraire aux objectifs de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. C'est ce que jeme permettrai
de demontrer en analysant le projet qui noUB est
soumis.
77. Au paragraphe 1 du dispositif de ce projet de
resolution, le Secretalre general est instamment prie
"de continuer A. donner vigoureusementeffetauxresolutions du Consell". Mais cen'estlA.malheureusement
qu'un souha:it gratuit, car Fon ne parle pas dans ce
texte des actions fautives qui equivalent pratiquement
A. une violation des resolutions et qu'll convient de
rectifier.
78. Au paragraphe 2, les Gouvernements des Etats
Membres sont invites "A. yerser des contributions
yolontaires A. un Fonds des Nations Unies pour le
Congo" et le texte poursuit: "qui sera utilise sous le
contr8le de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, dans les
conditions fixees par le 8ecretalre general, pour couvrir les depenses publiques necessaires qui [ ...] ne
peuvent etre couvertes par des recettes publiques".
Qu'est-ce que cela signifie? Nous donnons le mandat
au 8ecretalre general de financer A. sa discretion les
depenses publiques de l'Etat independant du Congo
selon ce qu'll jugera necessaire. Et c'est lA. ce qu'on
appelle renforcer la'souverainete d'un Etat," renforcer
le prestige de l'Organisation des Nations Unies aux
yeux des Etats africains". Nons estimons impossible
de donner un mandat de cette nature,d'autantplus que
le Secretaire general s'est malheureusement acquitte
du mandat que nous lui avons precedemment confie en
le deformant et en commettant les erreurs que nous
avons signalees.
79. Ce paragraphe n'estpasconformeauxresolutions
dejA. adoptees par le Consell de securite, car aux
termes de tOlltes ces resolutions le Secretaire general
devait· agir en consultation avec le Gouvernement
congolais dans tous les domalnes, et notamment dans
les domaines economique, administratif, etc. Dans ce
paragraphe, II n'est plus question de consultation avec
le gouvernement. Le Secretaire general se voit dejA
confier toutes les ressources financi~res - et II ne
s'agit pas de sommes insignifiantespuisqu'onparlede
109 millions de dollars - ! depenser comme ille
jugera bono
80. Cela revient pratiquement A. imposer ULne tutelle
A. 1'Etat independant du Congo. La vie evolue vers la
suppression des possessions coloniales, vers la suppression du r~gime de tutelle, et nous voudrions, par le
nouveau projet de resolution des Etats-Unis., imposer
una nouvelle Melle A. un Etat independant qui vient
de se liberer de la domination coloniale.
81. Le paragraphe 3 est ainsi redige:
"Prie instamment toutes les parties aux conflits
internes dans la Republique du Congo de rechercher,

sa
w

or
of
C

o
se
ca
85
K

of
vi

th
in
le
f

an
in

w
of
m

th
ev
86.
m
st

on,
act
an
Co

-

re

lr
is

:s

~e

Il"
I-

ll"

IS

L-

!l.i

st

le

ie

l-

Ilt

:e

Ilt

le

ts

IS

le
le

!S

l-

Ie
~.

!it

IX

le
le

:e
iD

lS
lS
IX

1.1
1t
is

:e
10

11
le
le

.e
.e
.a

clans l'int6ret de l'unit6 et de l'integrit6 de la R6publique, un r~glement rapide par des moyens pacifiques avec te11e assistance du Secr6taire gen6ral
General as may be required ll •
qui pourra etre n6cessaire ll •
82. What does this mean? In the first place, IIparties
82. Qu'est-ce que cela signifie? Tout d'abord, naus
to the internal conflicts ll now make their appearance.
voyons apparai"tre des "parties aux conflitsinternes ll ;
But where did the lawful Government of the Congo
mats qu 'est devenu le gouvernement legitime du Congo?
disappear to? Why is there not a single word about it,
Pourquoi n'en dit-on pas le moindre mot alors que
even though preceding resolutions spoke ofthe Governtoutes les resolutions pdcedentes parlaient du goument to which the Secretary-General was to give
vernement que le Secretaire gen6ral doit aider 1
assistance in the solution of its many difficult probresoudre toutes ses difficult~s? Pourquoi n'est-ilplus
lems. Why has reference to the Government now disquestion maintenant du gouvernement? Parce que les
appeared? Very simply because the United states
Etats-Unis veulent etablir un autre gouvernement et
wants to set- up a different Government and wants to
cela avec 1'aide du Secretaire general. Le pMagraphe 3
do so through the Secretary-General, who, under
charge le Secretaire general de fourn1r l'assistance
operative paragraph 3, is indeed entrusted with proqui pourra etre necessaire. Cela signifie que nous
viding such assistance as may be required. 'PUs means
donnons mandat au Secretaire general dtetablir au
that we would give the Secretary-General a mandate to
Congo tout gouvernement qu'il jugera bono Nous ne
set up in the Congo any Government he wished. We
pouvons pas donner un pareil mandat, car cela equIcannot give such a mandate, because that would mean , vaudrait non seulement 1 imposer au Congo une verinot only the establishment of an outright trtlBteeship . table tute11e, mals aussi 1 satisfaire les aspirations
over the Congo but also the attainment ofthe objectives
de certains gouvernements., et nullement de parvenir
sought by certain Governments, objectives which are
aux fins de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
certainly not those of the United Nations.
83. This is what operative paragraph 3 really means,
83. Voil! ce que signifie le paragraphe 3. Et s'il
and if it means something else, we should like to know
slgnifie autre chose, quton m'explique pourquoi il a
why the draft resolution is worded as it is.
et€. ainsi redige.
84. Operative paragraph 4 reads: IIReaffirms its re84. Le paragraphe 4 dit ceci: IfPrie! nouveau taus
que~t to all states to refrain from any action which
les Etats de s'abstenir de toute action qui pourrait
might tend to impede the restoratlon of law and ortendre ! emp~cher le r6tablissement de l'ordre puder••• ". At first glance this would appear to be a wellblic•••". n semble, a premi~re vue, qu'il s'agisse l!
meaning proposal and one which apparently reiterates
d'une bonne initiative, dtune proposition qui rep~te ce
what was stated in the Security Council resolution of
qutavait affirme le Conseil de securite dans sa resolu22 July [S/4405]. However, anyone who reads the two
tion du 22 juillet [S/4405]. Mais quiconque lit attentiveresolutions attentively wiU see that there is a small
ment les textes trouvera en les comparant une leg~re
difference between them. The resolution of 22 July
difference. La resolution .du 22 juillet priait "taus les
says: IIReguests all states to refrain from any action
Etats de s 'abstenir de toute action qui pourrait tendre
which might tend to impede the restoration of law and
! empecher le retablissement de l'ordre public et
order and the exercise. by the Government of Congo
1'exercice de son autorite par le Gouvernement congoof its authority••. 11. Why has the Government of the
lais••• ". Pourquoi n'est-il plus question du GouverneCongo disappeared from the new text? Whydowe have 'ment du Congo? Pourquoi parle-t-on seulement de
only 1I1aw and order 11 , which to the mind of the repr,el'ordre public qui, dans l'esprit du representant des
Etats-Unis, signifierait une pretendue defense des
sentative of the United states would mean the sodroits de 1'homme?
caUed protection of human rights?
and integrity, to seek a speedy settlement bypeace-

ful means with !Ouch assistance from the Secretary-

85. Le representant de la France et celui duRoyaumeUni nQus ont ! l'instant parle d'actes i11egaux, de
violations de l'ordre et des droits de l'homme., de
violences faites ! des particuliers, etc. Or nous savons
comment le Royaume-Uni et la France etablissent
l'ordre dans leurs colonies, et nous saTons ce qutils
entendent par illegalite et legalite. J e ne voudrais pas
entrer dans les details, car je crains que le repr6sentant de la France et celui du Royaume-Uni ne
m 'accusent de faire de la propagande, mais tout le
monde ici comprend parfaitement ce dont il s'agit.
Nous sommes opposes! l'etablissement d'un ordre
public du type colonial. Nous pensons que l'ordre
public doit ~tre etabli par le gouvernement legitime
et non point par une autorite venue de l' exterieur,
fllt-ce sous le couvert du drapeau de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies.
86. Ce n'est pas un hasard si,dansleprojet de resolution des Etats-Unis, mention du Gouvernement du
Congo a disparu. Qui plus est, la resolution du 22
juillet continuait ainsl: " ... et aussi de s'abstenir de
toute action qui pourrait saper 1tintegrite territoriale
et l'independance politique de la Republique du Congolt.

85. The representatives of France and the United
Kingdom have spoken just nowoflawlessness, breaches
of law and order, violations of the rights of individuals,
violence done to citizens, and so forth. We know how
the United Kingdom and France establish law and order
in their colonies, and we know wbat lawlessness and
legality mean to them. I shall not pursue this theme
further, as I fear that the representatives of France
and the United Kingdom will reproach me for indulging
in propaganda, but everyone present understands full
well what is meant. We are against the establishment
of law and order of the colonial type. We believe,
moreover, that law and order should be established by
the lawful Government and not by some outside Power,
even if this is done under the United Nations flag.

1-

.e
i!

It

s
"

86. It is no coincidence that reference to the Government of the Congo has disappeared from the United
states draft resolution. The resolution of 22 July goes
on, moreover, to say: 11 ••• and alsoto refrain from any
action which might undermine the territorial integrity
and the political independence of the Republic of the
Congo".
15

.:::si:: . _
~

87. Why did these words disappear from the United
states draft resolution, leaving only the phrase "to
refrain from any action which might tend to impede
the restoration of law and order"? Why? Because the
United states is anxious to dismember the Congo, to
isolate the province of Katanga so that it can be further exploited by monopolistic capital from the United
states. That is why there is nothing inthe draft resolution about the territorial integrity and political independence of the Republic of the Congo.
88. Operative paragraph 5 reads:
"Reaffirms that the United Nations Force should
continue to act to restore and maintain law and order
as necessary for the maintenance of iD~ernational
peace and security".
In other words, a mandate is given to the United
Nations Command to go about and establishthe kind of
law and order it thinks desirable.
89. Again, reference to the Government has disappeared. The United Nations Command, it would seem,
is to establish law and order in an independent country. What is this if not the restoration of colonial conditions in a State which has just freed itself from
colonial oppression?
90. I believe that this cursory analysis of the United
states draft resolution is sufficient to show that it goes
counter and is in flagrant contradiction to the resolutions on the Congo which have thus far been adopted
and for which the United states has voted. The United
States now wishes, with its new draft resolution, to
, depart from the earlier resolutions and give the Secretary-General a mandate to persevere in and to aggravate the errors and the erroneous course of action
which have caused serious dissatisfaction among the
Congolese people and a loss of prestige by the United
Nations in the eyes of all Mrican states.
91. We are in favour of strengthening the authority
of the United Nations, but in order to do this we must
rectify the flagrant errors which have been committed
and which we have discussed, and we must secure
strict compliance with the resolutions we have already
adopted.
92. It is for this reason that the Soviet Union delegation emphatically rejects this draft resolution, which is
aimert at underminingthe Council's earlier resolutions
and aggravating the gross errors which have been
committed in carrying out the mandate given to the
Secretary-General under the Security Council's previous decisions.
93. The Soviet delegation therefore submits the following draft resolution [S/4519] for the consideration
of the Council:
"The Security Council,
"Recalling its resolutions of 14 and 22 July and
9 August 1960, and in particular the clause of the
resolution of 9 August which provides that 'the
United Nations Force in the Congo will not be a party
to or in any way intervene in orbe used to influence
the outcome of any internal conflict, constitutional
or otherwise',
"Noting the serious state of the economy of the
Republic of the Congo resulting from prolonged

87. Pourquoi cette formule a-t-elle disparu de la resolution des Etats-Unis, qui se borne ~ prier les
Etats: wde s'abstenir detoute action qui pourraittendre
A emp~cher le retablissement de l'ordre public"?
Pourquoi? Parce que les Etats-Unis ont inter~t au
' demembrement du Congo, Ala secession de la province
du Katanga pour que les monopoles capitalistes puissent continuer A l'exploiter. VoiU\ pourquoi lesEtatsUnts ne mentionnent pas dans leur projet 1'integrite
territoriale et l'independance politique de la RepubHque du Congo.
88. Le paragraphe 5 du projet de resolution estainsi
redlge:
"Affirme Anouveau que la Force des Nations Unies
doit continuer A agir pour retablir et maintenir
,l'ordre public selon ce qu'exige le maintien de la
paix et de la securite internationales".
En d'autres termes, on donne au Commandement de
la Force des Nations Unies le mandat de retablir
comme ill'entend un ordre qui sera celui pour lequel
il jugera bon d'intervenir.
89. LA encore toute mention du gouvernement a disparu. C'est donc le Commandement de la Force des
Nations Unies qui ~tablira l'ordre public 'dans unpays
independant. Qu'est-ce l!,sinonleretablissementd'un
regime colonial dans un pays qui vient de se llberer
de l'oppression coloniale?
90. n me semble que cette analyse rapide du projet
de resolution suffit Amontrer qu'il est en opposition, en
contradiction flagrante avec les resolutions adoptees
jusqu'ici sur le Congo et pour lesquelles ont vote les
Etats-Unis. Les Etats-Unis veulent aUjourd'hui, par
ce nouveau texte, s'ecarter en fait des resolutions
anciennes; Us veulent donner au Secretaire general le
mandat de poursuivre et d'aggraver les erreurs, la
politique erronee, dont la consequence a ete un grave
mecontentement de la,population du Congo et la chute
du prestige de I 'Organisation des Nations Unies dans
tous les Etats africains.
91. Nous voulonsreleverleprestigedel'Organisation
des Nations Unies. n faut pour cela rectifier les
grossi~res erreurs que lIon a tolerees et dont nous
avons parle, et obtenir que les resolutions que nous
avons dejA adoptees soient strictement appliquees.
92. VoilA pourquoi la delegation de l'Unionsovietique
rejette resolument ce projet qui vise i1 saper les
resolutions precedemment adoptees par le Conseil de
securite et Aaggraver les grossi~res erreurs qu'ona
laisse commettre dans l'execution dumandatconfieau
Secretaire general par les decisions anterieures du
Conseil de securite.
93. La delegation sovietique soumet A l'examen du
Conseille projet de resolution ci-apr~s [S/4519]:
"Le Conseil de securite,
"Rappelant ses resolutions des 14 et 22 juillet et
du 9 aoat 1960, et notamment la disposition de la
resolution du 9 aoat qui prevoit que ilIa Force des
Nations Unies au Congo ne sera partie A aucun conflit interne, constitutionnel ou autre,qu'ellen'interviendra en aucune faQon dans un tel conflit ou ne
sera pas utilisee pour en influencer l'issue",
"Constatant la situation difficile de l'economie de
la Republique du Congo, qui resulte de la longue
16

t
'i

re-

1es
ire

}"?

au
lee
istsite

?u-

nsi

ies
nir
l1a
de

11ir

:ue1

colonial rule and Belgian aggression against that
country,

domination coloniale et de l'agression beIge contre
ce pays,

-1. Invite le Secr6taire g6n6ral et le Commandement

"1. IBvites the secretary-General and the Command of the United Nations Force In the CODgo to
cease forthwith any form of interference in the internal affairs of the Republ1c of the Congo so that
its Government may exercise without let or hindrance
Its sovereign rights and authority over the whole
territory of the Congo, and, in particular, immediately to evacuate armed forces under the control
of the United Nations Command from all airports at
present occupied by them and to hand over national
radio stations to the complete and unrestricted con"
trol of the Central Government of the Congo;

de la Force des Nations Unies au Congo h. mettre fin
imm.&llatem.ent l toute intervention dans les affaii-es
interieures de la R6publique du Congo, afin que le

GOUTernement congolais puisse exercer sans entrave
ses droits souverains et son autorite sur tout le
territoire du Congo et, en particulier, l evacuer
sans tarder les forces armees dont dispose le
Commandement des Nations Unies de tous les aerodromes qu'etles occupent actueilement et iI. mettre,
complMement et sans restriction, les stations de
radio nationale~ l la disposition du Gouvernement
central congolais;
1t2. Prie le Secretaire general de r6voquer le
commandement actuel de la Force des Nations Um~s,
dont les actions constituent une violation flagrante
des decisions du Conseil de securite relatives 'A. la
qtlestion du Congo;

"2. Instructs the secretary-General to remove the
present Command ofthe United Nations Force, whose
actions constitute flagrant violation of the security
C~cU's decisions on the question of the Congo;

"3. Calls upon all states Members of the United
Nations to provide the Republ1c of the Congo with
speedy financial and other economic assistance
through voluntary contributions, It being understood
that such assistance will be placed' d1rect~y at the
disposal of the Government of the Republ1c of the
Congo."

"3. Fait appel il. tous les Etats Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour qu'ils prMent
d'urgence, par des contributians volontaires, une
assistance f:in3.nci~re et economique h.laRepublique
du Congo, etant entendu que cette assistance sera
mis.e dlrectement lla disposition du Gouvernement
de la Republique du Congo.1t

94. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of France, who wishes to exercise his right of reply.

94. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Jedonnela
parole au representant de la France qui desire user
de; son droit de reponse.

ons
He

95. Mr. MILLET (France) (trans~ated,from French):
(should like to exerciseniy:rtghtofreply With respect"
to the inadmissible remarks the'representative of the
Soviet Union has seen fit to make about my country.

95. M.> MILLET (France): Jedesireuserdemondroit
de reponse en ce qui concerne les remarques inadmissibles que le representant de l'Union sovietique a
cru bon de faire au sujet de mon pays.

, la

96. I shall be very brief but, contrary to what Mr.

96. Je serai tr~s bref mais, il. la difference de ca
que M. Zorine disait bier de certains de mes coil~gues
et de moi-m~me, 11 semble qu'11 faiile parfois, dans
cette enceinte, plus de courage pour parler bri~ement
que pour ne pas parler du tout.

lis-

des
ays
l'un

rer

ljet
, en
ees
1es
par

aye
lute

ana
:ion
1es
ous
ous

que

1es
lde
lna
!iau
100

du

t et
a la
des

onert ne
l de

gue

Zorin said yesterday about some of my colleagues and
about myself, it seems that it sometimes requires
more courage in this Council to speak brieflythan not
to speak at all.
97. I too could make some unpleasant remarks, which
would at least have the merit of being true, as to the
establ1sbment of law and order by the Soviet Union.

97. J e pourrais moi aussi faire des remarqlles d&sagreables, mats qui auraient au moins le me-rite
d'~re vraies, sur le retablissement de l'ordre par
ltUnion aovietique.

98. With regard to the conduct of France and the

98. En ce qui concerne le comportementde la France
et la difference de comportement entre l'Unionsovietique et mon pays, je dirai simplement, pour reprendre
l'expression que vient d'employer le representant
sovietique: tout le monde sait ce dont il s'agit.

difference between its conduct and that of the Soviet
Union, I shall merely say, to borrow the words the
Soviet representative has just used: everyone present
understands full well what is meant.
99. The PRESIDENT: I caU on the representative of
the United Kingdom, who wishes to exercise his right
of reply.
100. Sir Patrick DEAN (United Kingdom): I too would
like to reply to some remarks which the representative
of the Soviet Union saw fit to make in his last intervention about the United Kingdom Government's attitude towards the maintenance of law and order in the
dependent territories for which it is still responsible.

99. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Je donne
la parole au representant du Royaume-Uni, qtiidesire
user de son droit de reponse.

100. Sir Patrick DEAN (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
I'anglais] : Je voudrais,.mo:!. a~ssi, r~pondre d certaines
remarques que le representant de l'Union sovietique
a juge ben de faire dans sa derni~re intervention au
sujet de l'attitude prise par le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni en ce quiconcerne1emaintiendel'ordre
public dans les territoires dependants dont 11 est encore
responsable.
101. n a dit, si j'ai blen compris, que Itnous savons
tous ce que les GOUV6.l'nements du Royaume-Uni et de
la France entendent par le maintien de Itordre public
dans leurs territoires coloniaux", ou quelque chose
dtapprochant.

101. He said, if I heard aright, that "we all know
what the Governments of the United Kingdom and
France mean by· the enforcement of law and order in
their colonial territories", or some such words.

17

102. De prime shord, bien entendu, cette formulen'a
en soi rien de pejoratif, mais, etant donneson origine
et son contexte, je crainB de ne pouvoir accorder ~
mon collllgue sovietlque le benefice du doute. Le
representant de l'Union sovietlque a dit qu'il ne s 'etendrait pas davantage sur ces questions, de peur que je
ne me croie oblige de lui repondre et que je ne l'accuse
de vouloir faire de la propagande.
103. Sur le premier point, il a parfaitement raison,
et j'estime effectivement devoir lui repondre. Mais,
sur le second point, je crols qu'il se trompe et je ne
puis croire qu'il pense lui-m~me que ses remarques
lu! vaudront un avantage quelconque sur le plan de la
propagande. Pour ma part, je n'en crois rien.Au contraire, je suis persuade que la majorite des representants iei presents, parmi lesquels se trouvent les
representants de plus d'un Etat souverain dont 1'evolution vera 1'independance n'a pas ~e sans dependre
du Gouyernement du Royaume-Uni, reeonna1'ti.-ont en
general que la poUtique du Gouvernement duRoyaumeUni ft. l'egard des territoires dont il est encore responsable est de les aider ft. progresser vers 1'independance aussi rapidement qu'il est possible et qu'il est
raisonnable.
104. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je n'ai
plus d'orateurs inscrits sur ma liste. Jeproposedonc
cie lever la ~eance et de convoquer le Conseil demain
~ 10 h 30 pr6cises. LeConseilentendrad'abord quatre
de ses membres, puis .les representants d'Etats non
membres qui ont trlls patiemment attendu leur tour
de prendre la parole.

102. On the face of it, of course, there is nothing
offensive in this expression, but coming from the
source that it came from and given the context, I fear
that I cannot give my Soviet colleague the benefit
of the doubt. The representative of the Soviet Union
said that he would not amplify his remarks as he ap"-ehended that I would feel bound to reply and would
~. ~use him of speaking for propaganda purposes.
103. On the first point he is entirely right, and I do
feel bound to reply. On the second point, however, I
feel he is wrong and I cannot believe that he himself
believes that his remarks will bring him any propaganda advantage. I certainly do not. On the contrary,
I believe that the majority of representatives around
this table, among whom are representatives of more
than one sovereign state for whose development to
independent status the United Kingdom Government
has had some responsibntty, will in general agree that
the policy of the United Kingdom Government toward
the territories for which it is still responsible is to
assist them toward independence ·as rapidly as is
possible and wise.

104. The PRESIDENT: I have no further members of
the Council inscribed on my 11st, and would therefore
propose that we adjourn the meeting and that we meet
tomorrow promptly at 10.30 a.m. The Council will
hear four meinbers of the Council and then we shall
proceed to hear the representatives ofthe non-member
countries who have been waiting very patiently to be
heard.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

La seance est levee a 18 hIS.

18
Litho in U.N.

Price: $U.s. 0.35;2/6 stg.: Sw. ire 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

28379-December 1960-1,775
