\'l.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

215

Assembly resolution 38/20 of 22 November 1983 and of
the present resolution;

38/119.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session of the views and
suggestions expressed at the above-mentioned meeting, if
it is convened.

Thc General Assemhl_,-,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Bearing in mind article 7 of the lnternational Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights. 170
Recalling a/so its resolution 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to draw up a draft convention against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in
the light of the principies embodied in the Declaration.
and its resolution 32/63 of 8 December 1977,
Reca/lingfurther that the Sixth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in its resolution 11 of 5 September 1980, expressed the
belief that the draft convention should be finalized at thc
earliest possible time, 171
Considering that it was not possible to complete thc
work on the draft convention during the thirty-ninth scssion of the Commission on Human Rights,
1. Welcomcs Economic and Social Council resolution
1983/38 of 27 May I 983, in which the Council authorizcd
a meeting of an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human Rights for a period of onc week prior
to the fortieth session of the Commission in order to complete the work on a draft convention;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
complete, at its fortieth session, as a matter of the highcst
priority, the drafting of a convention against torture and
othcr cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, with a view to submitting a draft, including provisions for the effective implementation of the future convention. to thc General Assembly at its thirty-ninth
session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled '"Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".

100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher 1983

38/118.

Principies of Medical Ethics

The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolution 37/194 of 18 December 1982,
by which it adopted the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in the protection of prisoners and detainees against
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment,
Alarmed that not infrequently members of the medica!
profession or other health personnel are engaged in activities which are difficult to reconcile with the Principies of
Medica) Ethics,
Recognizing the need for the full application ofthe Principies of Medica) Ethics and desiring that the Principies be
given wide publicity,
1. Urges ali Governments to take measures with a view
to promoting the application by ali health personnel and
Government officials, in particular those employed in
institutions of detention or imprisonment, of the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in the protection of prisoners and detainees against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the
Principies of Medica) Ethics widely and in as many languages as possible and to issue a pamphlet containing the
text of the Principies in the six official languages of the
United Nations;
3. Ca/Is upon ali Governments to give the Principies of
Medica) Ethics the widest possible distribution, in particular among medica) and paramedical associations and institutions of detention or imprisonment, in an official language of the State;
4. Invites ali relevant intergovernmental organizations,
in particular the World Health Organization, and nongovernmental organizations concerned to bring the Principies of Medica! Ethics to the attention of the widest possible group of individuals, especially those active in the
medica) and paramedical field;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the steps taken
by the United Nations and the relevant specialized agencies, as well as by Governments, for the dissemination and
implementation of the Principies of Medica! Ethics.
100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher I 983
170 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
171

See Sixth United Nation.i Congress on the Prevenuon o(Cnme and the
Treatment ofOlfenders, Caracas, 25 August-5 Septemher 1980: Repon prepared by the Secretaria/ (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.IV.4),
chap. 1, sect. B.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher 1983

38/120.

Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa

The General Assemhly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning preparations for the Second International C'onference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa 172 and the sections on Africa contained in the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 17 •1
Recalling its resolutions 37/197 of 18 December 1982.
entitled "International Conference on Assistance to Rcfugees in Africa", and 38/5 of 28 October 1983 on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
Bearing in mind resolution AHG/Res.114 (XIX) on thc
Second Conference, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Governmcnt of the Organization of African
17 ~ A: 38, S26.
17.l O!f¡cwl Records uf the (;enera/ Assemhly, Thirty-eighth S,·sswn, .\11¡•p/ement No 12 (A/38/12 and f'orr. l) and Supplement No. 12A (A/38.• I 2
Add.l).
