United Nations

S/PV.5446

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5446th meeting
Tuesday, 30 May 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ikouebe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Congo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Christian
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. De Rivero
Mr. Al-Bader
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mrs. Taj
Ms. Wolcott Sanders

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-36518 (E)

*0636518*

S/PV.5446

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, Cuba, Israel, Liechtenstein,
Switzerland and Ukraine in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ambassador César
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities; Ambassador Ellen Margrethe
Løj, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism; and Ambassador Peter
Burian, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2006/276, containing the text of
a letter dated 4 May 2006 from the Chairman of the

2

Counter-Terrorism
Committee
transmitting
the
Committee’s nineteenth 90-day work programme from
April to June 2006.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by the
Chairmen of the 1267 Committee, the 1373 Committee
and the 1540 Committee.
I now give the floor to Ambassador César
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.
Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): I am delivering
my 120-day briefing to the Council as Chairman of the
Committee pursuant to paragraph 16 of resolution 1617
(2005). Since my previous briefing to the Council, four
individuals have been added to the list, and the
Committee has also approved a number of other
changes to the list. The Committee is resolved to
improve the quality of the list — that has been one of
my chief concerns since I took over the
chairmanship — and to that end a number of measures
have been introduced.
With regard to dialogue with States and visits to
selected States, between 28 April and 8 May we visited
selected countries pursuant to paragraph 15 of
resolution 1617 (2005). We visited Qatar, Yemen and
Saudi Arabia — the latter two of which have suffered
from attacks by Al-Qaida. All three countries
expressed, through their authorities, their commitment
to support the work of the Committee and the
implementation of relevant sanctions measures.
Furthermore, I believe that all three countries have
made significant contributions to the fight against AlQaida, which further illustrates their concerted efforts
to combat international terrorism.
Qatar is actively engaged in the work of the
Committee and offers us a clear insight into areas
which are of specific concern to Islamic States. The
visit to Qatar provided an opportunity for us to learn
more about its efforts to counter international terrorism
and its desire to work in the Committee to further
improve the sanctions regime. Yemen, too, is an
important country in the fight against Al-Qaida, given
that several individuals on the list are nationals of that
country. As the Council knows, a number of listed
individuals and entities also come from Saudi Arabia.

S/PV.5446

Many governmental officials from all three
countries expressed concerns about certain aspects of
the Committee’s work. One area discussed was the
need for greater consultation with relevant States prior
to placing any individual on the list. They expressed
the view that such consultations would not only
improve compliance by Member States but also serve
as a way of obtaining sufficient identifiers. Another
area addressed concerned Al-Qaida’s use of the
Internet. Many officials commended the Committee’s
Monitoring Team for having organized meetings of
heads and deputy heads of security and intelligence
agencies to discuss that issue and took note of the
suggestions that resulted from those meetings.
Recently, the Monitoring Team of the Committee
submitted a paper on Al-Qaida’s use of the Internet,
which is currently under consideration in the
Committee.
In addition, the officials considered Al-Qaida’s
ideology to be the greatest long-term threat within
those countries. In that regard, we also learned about
efforts to counter that ideology and to draw a majority
of the people away from it. In Saudi Arabia in
particular, these efforts were seen as directly linked to
attempts to dispel the preconceived notions existing in
some Western media that identify Islam with terrorism.
Needless to say, we fully agree that there is a need to
fight such prejudice, and I invited the Saudi authorities
to brief the Committee directly about that project.
Since my most recent briefing to the Council, the
members of the Monitoring Team have visited Africa,
Asia and Europe to discuss issues related to the
effective implementation of the sanctions regime. An
expert member of the Team also accompanied me on
my recent trip to Yemen, Saudi Arabia and Qatar, and
the Team has participated in further meetings of chiefs
and assistant chiefs of security and intelligence
services from a group of Islamic countries. Recently,
the Monitoring Team held a meeting with chiefs of
security and intelligence services from the region to
address the specific threat posed by Al-Qaida-related
groups in Somalia and the problem of effective
implementation of the sanctions regime.
On 30 March, the Committee issued a press
release in which it recalled paragraph 14 of resolution
1617 (2005) and invited States to send representatives
to discuss relevant issues with the Committee in
greater depth. Upon approval by the Committee,
representatives of Germany, Sweden and Switzerland

attended the Committee meeting held on 15 May to
present the joint efforts of the three Governments to
increase the effectiveness of the sanctions. Their
efforts are based on a paper written by the Watson
Institute for International Studies. The three
Governments’ representatives referred to that document
and emphasized the legal and political difficulties —
including listing and delisting procedures — posed by
sanctions targeting individuals. That presentation and
the subsequent discussion were useful for the
Committee, particularly as it is preparing to consider
revising its listing and delisting guidelines and
procedures. The presentation also enabled the
Committee to become informed about certain problems
that States may experience when dealing with
sanctions-related issues, particularly in the absence of
transparent procedures.
The Committee continues to place great emphasis
on improving the transparency of its work, which
includes stepping up the dialogue between the
Committee and Member States. That effort is reflected
in, inter alia, the notes verbales sent to States on 25
April. The first note (SCA/2/06(9)), recalling
resolution 1452 (2002), specifically reminded States of
the exceptions provided for in the sanctions regime,
particularly with regard to the freezing of assets. It
emphasized that States can release funds — even for
basic needs — only if they previously inform the
Committee of their intention to do so. Another note
(SCA/2/06(8)) clarified the Committee’s procedures
concerning deceased individuals whose names appear
on the Consolidated List. With regard to requests for
the delisting of such persons, the Committee decided
that it would consider such requests by States on a
case-by-case basis; the requesting State should send to
the Committee the name of the deceased person on the
List, together with a statement of case justifying the
delisting request. That will usually require a death
certificate or a similar official document confirming
the death. Furthermore, the Committee considered it
important to stress that the requesting State should also
determine whether any legal beneficiary of the
deceased person’s estate, or any joint owner of his or
her assets, also appears on the Consolidated List and to
inform the Committee accordingly. The clarifications
provided in both notes are an example of the
Committee’s determination to address issues that
Member States have identified as important for
improving their implementation efforts.

3

S/PV.5446

For several weeks, the Committee has considered
the recommendations contained in the fourth report of
the Monitoring Team (S/2006/154), and it will soon
submit a report to the Security Council on its position
regarding them. Consideration of the Team’s
recommendations always gives the Committee an
opportunity to think about how to further improve the
sanctions regime.
The Monitoring Team continues to provide
professional assistance to the Committee in the form of
effective support for the monitoring of sanctions
implementation. The Team has presented various
proposals to the Committee on issues related to the
Committee’s current work on its guidelines and has
suggested further improvements to the Consolidated
List and to the Committee’s website, which are now
under consideration. Following the submission of its
fourth report to the Committee, in accordance with the
provisions of annex 1 (c) of resolution 1617 (2005), the
Monitoring Team has contributed to and participated in
all the Committee’s discussions on the 38
recommendations contained in the report. Here, I wish
to clarify that the Monitoring Team has cooperated
very closely with me throughout this period. Its work is
very important, and I believe that all members of the
Committee value that work.
At the same time, at the Committee’s request, the
Monitoring Team has been compiling the checklists
submitted by States in accordance with paragraph 10 of
resolution 1617 (2005) and will be presenting its
preliminary analysis to the Committee. I wish to clarify
that six checklists have been submitted to date. Finally,
in conformity with annex 1 (c) of resolution 1617
(2005), the Monitoring Team must submit its fifth
report to the Committee by 31 July 2006 at the latest. It
must also help the Committee to prepare an updated
written assessment of the steps taken by States to
implement the sanctions measures described in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1617 (2005), also by 31 July
2006.
The Team has continued to strengthen its links
with international and regional bodies by enhancing its
productive relationship with Interpol and by
establishing new areas of cooperation with the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the
International
Air
Transport
Association,
the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other relevant United Nations bodies, in
coordination with the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism

4

Executive Directorate. The Team has also continued to
coordinate its travel plans with the Directorate, and in
April this year a member of the Team participated in a
Counter-Terrorism Working Group conference with the
Directorate and the group of experts of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).
The Monitoring Team has also continued to work
closely with the Executive Directorate and the experts
supporting the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), to examine ways to assist the
31 States that tend to be late in reporting, or that do not
report at all, to the three Committees. At the same time,
the Team has made some proposals, which are
currently under consideration by the Committee, on
how to assist the 44 States that have not yet submitted
to the Committee their reports under resolution 1455
(2003). At the Committee’s request, the Team has also
provided significant assistance to the Government of
Afghanistan to ensure that its national reconciliation
programme takes full account of the sanctions regime
against former senior members of the Taliban. The
Team has continued to work with the Government of
Afghanistan with regard to requests for the exclusion
of members of the Taliban from the consolidated list.
With regard to the future work of the Committee
and the Monitoring Team and emerging challenges, the
Committee will focus its work in the immediate future
on the following activities.
First, in the context of revising its guidelines, the
Committee will take up the matter of its procedures for
the listing and delisting of names. That will be a very
difficult and arduous task for the Committee, but it is
nevertheless a very important one. The Committee is
aware of the great expectations that have emerged on
the part of States with regard to the revision of
procedures. Some of the Member States on the
Committee have already received some ideas, and
those will be discussed in June. At the same time, the
Committee would like to believe that the revised listing
and delisting procedures will certainly benefit
implementation measures taken by States.
Secondly, with regard to further improving the
quality of the list, the consolidated list plays a very
important deterrent role, despite its current
imperfections. Nevertheless, its completeness and
accuracy are essential for the success of established
sanctions measures. We therefore encourage all

S/PV.5446

Member States to submit the names of individuals and
entities that should be included on the list as a result of
their association with Al-Qaida and the Taliban. For its
part, the Committee should consider without delay the
best way to assist States in their implementation efforts
in cases when the identity of an individual is not
certain due to the lack of sufficient identifying
information on the list.
Thirdly, the Committee will focus on completing
its consideration of the recommendations contained in
the fourth report of the Monitoring Team and will
submit to the Security Council a report reflecting the
Committee’s position in that regard.
Fourthly, the Committee will review the report
expected from the Monitoring Team regarding the
checklist referred to in annex II of resolution
1617 (2005). The checklist is a newly introduced tool
to monitor adherence to sanctions on the part of States.
Its effectiveness has not yet been ascertained.
The Committee will also continue to discuss, in
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the 1540 Committee, how to enhance cooperation,
including as regards Committee reports.
The Committee has before it various issues of
great complexity and urgency. The Committee’s agenda
also continues to grow, which has required it to revisit
certain matters several times in order to ensure that
there is no omission. As Chairman of the Committee, I
would like to assure everyone here that I will spare no
effort to intensify the work of the Committee in order
to make as much progress as possible in our work.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
Committee’s determination to make further progress in
our work. I would therefore like to encourage the
members of the Committee to continue to take a
proactive and creative approach to our responsibilities.
I would also like to repeat my invitation to Member
States to benefit from the opportunity provided by
resolution 1617 (2005) and to send representatives to
the Committee to discuss in greater depth matters
relating to sanctions. As stated by the SecretaryGeneral in his recent report on a global counterterrorism strategy, we can only combat the threat of
terrorism successfully when we are unified and
persistent in our efforts.
Before I conclude, I would like publicly to thank
the authorities of Qatar, Yemen and Saudi Arabia for

their kindness to me and the members of the
Committee and the Monitoring Team who visited those
countries.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Mayoral for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Løj, Chairperson of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism.
Ms. Løj: As Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), I would like to review the
Committee’s activities since the Committee’s last
report to the Council, in February 2006. I will inform
the Council about the Committee’s nineteenth work
programme, for the current three-month period ending
30 June 2006.
Before I begin, I would like to thank the head of
the Committee’s Executive Directorate (CTED), Mr.
Javier Rupérez, and his team, as well as the Secretariat
staff, for their valuable support.
Based on the recommendations from the
Council’s comprehensive review of the CTC Executive
Directorate last December, the Committee decided to
focus its work for the first part of this year on three
areas, namely, on how to revise the reporting regime,
how to enhance dialogue with Member States in need
of technical assistance, and how to deepen the
Committee’s relations with international, regional and
subregional organizations. I would like to give the
Council an update on the progress we have made on
those issues, and to explain what the Committee sees
as the main upcoming challenges.
First, with regard to the reporting regime, many
States have, on various occasions, raised the issue of
“reporting fatigue”. The seemingly endless requests to
report to the Council on counter-terrorism — which, to
be fair, come mostly from the CTC — have led States
to ask what the purpose of reporting is. The point has
been made that the extensive requests to report have
taken away essential resources that could otherwise
have been spent on implementation. In that regard, the
Committee will also continue to discuss, in cooperation
with the 1540 and the 1267 Committees, how to
enhance cooperation, including with regard to
reporting. But let me point out that, while I do
understand those concerns, the many reports that the
CTC has received from States have created a solid

5

S/PV.5446

foundation for the Committee’s ability to advice and
assist States in their implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). Without reports, therefore, we cannot do our
work.
That having been said, the Committee also
recognizes the need to look into revising the reporting
regime. As a first step, the Committee has decided to
base its discussions on a thorough analysis of
individual
States’
accomplishments
in
the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). To that end,
the Committee has adopted an analytical tool — the socalled preliminary implementation assessment — that
provides a systematic and transparent way to monitor
the extent to which States have implemented the
obligations and provisions laid down in resolution
1373 (2001). It is the Committee’s hope that such a
systematic overview will deepen the Committee’s
discussions on how best to advise and assist States in
implementation, including if States do not yet meet the
requirements of resolution 1373 (2001).
That analytical tool is still being tested. However,
it is my hope that, once we have gained some
experience with it, the Committee can use that tool as a
basis for improving our dialogue with States on setting
priorities for their respective ways forward, including
areas where there are needs for assistance.
While the introduction of that tool should ease
the reporting burden on States, States will regularly
have to update the Committee on developments in their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). In those
cases in which the Committee finds that the most
efficient way to get such information is through
reporting, then such reports will be solicited, but I can
assure the Council that the Committee will continue to
seek ways to ease the reporting burden on States and to
allow more resources to go towards enhancing
implementation.
Before I move on, I would also like to mention
that the Committee has again contacted all States
which are behind in their reporting to the Committee. I
hope that those States will take some comfort in the
Committee’s updated working methods and that they
will re-establish dialogue with the Committee. I would
also urge States that might need assistance in preparing
the report to let us know. Without a report, it is not
possible for the Committee to identify priorities for
further implementation, including possible needs for

6

assistance, or to play a facilitating role in ensuring that
such needs are filled.
CTC’s continuing visits to Member States, upon
their consent, remain an important tool in our work. We
continue to enhance our cooperation with the G8-led
Counter-Terrorism Action Group. Since I last reported
to the Council, CTED has visited the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. I would like to express the
Committee’s gratitude to the Government in Skopje for
its hospitality and spirit of cooperation.
Also, the Committee has approved more country
visits, and CTED is currently working with the States
concerned regarding the preparations. I would like to
thank those Governments for welcoming us. It is the
Committee’s hope and intention that those visits will
prove helpful to States that are already engaged in the
fight against terrorism. A key to success continues to
be thorough follow-up to the visits. During the past
months, the Committee has taken stock of the first
visits and discussed what more can be done to ensure
that the visits lead to concrete, measurable results.
I have already touched upon some aspects of the
Committee’s ongoing work to facilitate technical
assistance. As I informed the Council at the last
briefing, the Committee has prepared policy guidance
and adopted CTED’s implementation plan in that
regard. CTED, in turn, is now working on creating
results through fulfilling the implementation plan. The
Committee looks forward to hearing from CTED that
the efforts have led to concrete, measurable outcomes.
In the meantime, the Committee appreciates CTED’s
outreach to potential donors to establish who would be
willing and interested in providing assistance, and in
which area.
Besides discussions with potential donors in New
York, the practice has also been established of CTED’s
meeting with potential donors specifically in
connection with visits to States. I would like to
encourage all potential donors to engage with CTED
on those issues. The Committee will continue to
discuss what more can be done to strengthen
cooperation with donors, including through organizing
an informal meeting with donors and assistance
providers.
As I mentioned at the beginning of my briefing,
the Committee is also looking into how to strengthen
cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional organizations. First of all, the Committee

S/PV.5446

has begun efforts to strengthen its relationship with
several African regional and subregional organizations,
as well as with the Caribbean Community. We have
also embarked on preparations for the next and fifth
special meeting of CTC with international, regional
and subregional organizations. The goal is to ensure
that the meeting will be results-oriented.
Also, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Pacific Island Forum for inviting me to
participate in the recent meeting of its working group
on counter-terrorism, which took place in Auckland,
New Zealand, at the end of April. It was very
interesting for me to hear the participants explain the
successes and challenges they had encountered in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). I was impressed
to learn how much those States — many of them
among the smallest Members of the United Nations —
have accomplished in recent years in their fight against
terrorism. While many of those States are behind on
reporting to the Committee, that has certainly not led to
a halt in implementation. With the help of donors, the
region is now making a concerted effort to ensure that
most of the Pacific Island Forum members bring their
reporting to the Committee up to date before too long.
That type of regional cooperation is very fruitful and I
hope that other regions can be inspired by such
cooperation, but I would also like to stress the
corresponding commitment made on behalf of the
Committee to the Pacific States that, if they update on
reporting, the CTC will use that information to assist
them in identifying priorities in their implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and to facilitate assistance in
areas where we have mutually agreed that there are
such needs. The Committee counts on the cooperation
of potential donors to achieve those results.
The Committee is continuing its discussions on
how to take into account, in the course of its activities,
the fact that States must ensure that any measure taken
to combat terrorism complies with all their obligations
under international law, and that States should adopt
such measures in accordance with international law, in
particular human rights law, refugee law and
humanitarian law. I would like to inform the Council
that the Committee has now agreed on guidance for
CTED in that regard.
Before I conclude, let me take stock of the
challenges ahead for the Committee.

First of all, the Committee will spend some time
testing its newly-developed analytical tool, both in and
of itself and as a basis for enhanced dialogue with
States on implementation. The goal is twofold — first,
to ensure systematic, transparent and effective
monitoring of States’ implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), leading to the targeted and prioritized
enhancement of States’ implementation of the
obligations and provisions in the resolution; and
secondly, to ensure that requests for further reporting
will be targeted, with a view to easing the reporting
burden on States.
Secondly, the Committee will continue to discuss
how the visits to States can be more results-oriented,
including through the design of a thorough follow-up
process.
Thirdly, the Committee will continue its
discussions on how to ensure that we achieve concrete,
measurable results through the facilitation of
assistance,
leading
to
results
in
enhanced
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Finally, the Committee will begin its analysis of
States’ reporting on resolution 1624 (2005) in light of
the requirement to report to the Council within a year
of the adoption of that resolution — in other words, by
14 September 2006. I encourage all States that have not
yet submitted a report on their 1624 implementation to
do so as soon as possible in order to ensure that the
analysis provided to the Security Council is based on
as extensive reporting as possible.
The implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
remains crucial in the international community’s fight
against terrorism. Developments since I reported last
have shown once again that the Committee’s main task
remains vital and urgent. Support from and cooperation
with Member States remains invaluable. I would
therefore like to thank Member States for their
important contribution.
That concludes my statement in my capacity as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. I
would now like to make the following statement in my
national capacity.
As members know, the Chairmen of the three
counter-terrorism committees rarely speak in their
national capacities at these briefings. I choose to do so
today to reiterate a point which is very important to
Denmark: the question of due process guarantees in the

7

S/PV.5446

1267 Committee. Before I proceed, however, I would
like to fully associate Denmark with the statement of
the European Union to be delivered shortly by the
representative of Austria.
In the fight against terrorism we often get the
sense that we are walking on a razor’s edge to strike
the right balance between preventive and swift action
against terrorists and adequate safeguards for the
individual, not least for those unjustly targeted. Getting
this balance right strengthens the legitimacy of the
sanctions regime and thereby, in the view of Denmark,
its efficiency.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime
remains as important as ever in the international fight
against terrorism. But on various occasions States have
expressed concern that it does not meet fundamental
due process standards, thus indicating that the Council
may not be getting the razor’s edge balance exactly
right. This issue demands the immediate attention of all
members of the Security Council.
In the view of Denmark, the Council could strike
a better balance by taking a close look at both its
listing and delisting procedures. Denmark has focused
particularly on delisting. We presented a proposal in
the 1267 Committee last year to establish an
independent review mechanism — an ombudsman —
to which individuals and entities on the Committee’s
list would have direct access. When petitioned, or on
its own initiative, this mechanism would make
independent recommendations to the Committee for its
consideration. As is the case today, the Security
Council will maintain its prerogative to decide on any
delisting. At the same time, our proposal will provide
listed individuals and entities with the right to access
the mechanism directly, without a State as an
intermediary. It would also provide for a review
independent of the Committee.
Denmark very much looks for forward to
discussing this and other interesting proposals in the
1267 Committee shortly, and we are ready to engage
constructively in order to try to live up to the
Chairman’s expressed wishes for early results.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Løj for her briefing as Chairman of the
1373 Committee.

8

I now give the floor to Ambassador Peter Burian,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Burian: I have the honour to brief the
Security Council on the most recent activities
undertaken by the 1540 Committee and to outline its
future efforts to promote compliance by all States with
resolution 1540 (2004) through the achievement of the
implementation of its requirements.
As members are aware, on 27 April, the Security
Council examined the report of the Committee which
addressed the status of implementation of resolution
1540 as of April 2006. The same day, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1673 (2006) and
emphasized the importance of all States fully
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
With resolution 1540 (2004), the Security
Council adopted the first international instrument
which deals with weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials in an integrated
and comprehensive manner. The main objective of the
resolution is to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials, and to deter non-State actors from gaining
access to such items and from illicit trafficking in
them. It establishes binding obligations for all States
regarding non-proliferation and is aimed at preventing
and deterring illicit access to such weapons, their
means of delivery and weapon-related materials. The
resolution requests all States to report on measures
they have taken or intend to take to implement their
obligations under the resolution.
Continuous monitoring of and support for the
efforts of all States to fully implement the provisions of
the resolution require a lasting effort by the Council. It
therefore decided to extend the mandate of the
Committee for a period of two years, until 27 April
2008. It also decided that the Committee shall intensify
its efforts to promote the full implementation by all
States of resolution 1540 (2004) through a work
programme which shall include the compilation of
information on the status of States’ implementation of
all aspects of resolution 1540 (2004): outreach,
dialogue, assistance and cooperation. The Council also
decided that the Committee’s work programme shall
address, in particular, all aspects of paragraphs 1, 2 and
3 of resolution 1540 (2004).

S/PV.5446

As of 30 May 2006, 129 States Members of the
United Nations and one organization have submitted
first national reports to the Committee; 62 Member
States have yet to submit their first report. In response
to the examination of the first national reports by the
Committee, 83 States provided additional information.
Facilitation of reporting and conduct of outreach
activities to promote States’ reporting and
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will remain
among the top priorities of our future work.
With respect to reporting, the Committee intends
to approach again all United Nations Member States
that have yet to submit a first report. Based on its
previous experience of examining national reports
submitted by States, the Committee decided to assist
the national authorities of those States in the
preparation of a first report on the implementation of
the resolution. I will also continue the practice of
reaching out to the members of all regional groups in
New York to discuss issues relating to reporting as well
as implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) generally.
The Committee, with the support of Member
States and the United Nations Department for
Disarmament Affairs, will continue its other outreach
activities to promote States’ implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), consistent with resolution 1673
(2006). Three regional seminars aimed at raising
awareness about proliferation problems worldwide,
facilitating further reporting and advancing the
implementation process will be organized in the second
part of this year in China, Ghana and Peru. Within
existing resources, the Committee also will continue its
practice of informing organizations outside the United
Nations about its work at relevant meetings and
conferences. I will make full use of these opportunities
to address, in particular, issues of reporting and
implementation.
As part of the Committee’s efforts to promote
information-sharing concerning States’ implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), I am also pleased to
announce that on 19 May 2006, the Committee decided
to publish a legislative database on its official website.
This database contains links to public sources of
relevant information about national legislative and
other regulatory measures of States which have
submitted reports on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The Committee developed the database to
provide additional information on laws, regulations and
other measures related to States’ implementation of

resolution 1540 (2004) and to facilitate the exchange of
information on the implementation efforts of States.
The Committee will regularly update the database. It
will encourage States to make appropriate use of the
background information provided through the database,
as well as of legislative advice provided by
international organizations, when enacting national
implementation laws and measures.
The Committee will interact and cooperate with
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations in order to facilitate the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540 Committee will
maintain close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the 1267 Committee. The
Committee’s experts will continue to work closely with
their colleagues, making every effort to maximize
synergies between and among the experts of the three
Committees. As part of those efforts, the Committee’s
experts have been working with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the 1267
Committee Monitoring Team to develop proposals for
improving reporting and addressing the problem of late
submission of reports in a coordinated manner. We also
are making use of country visits by the CTC and the
1267 Committee in order to raise the issue of reporting.
The Committee, through its experts, will continue
to act as a clearing house on assistance, including by
collecting up-to-date information on the issue and by
informally contacting States to inquire whether they
might be interested in receiving information on offers
and requests for assistance.
In its future work on the examination of national
reports, the Committee, through its experts, will
identify national practices in implementing resolution
1540 (2004) that might be used in providing further
general and specific guidance, upon request, to States
seeking legislative assistance in implementing the
resolution.
The Committee will also invite those States that
offer assistance and those that request assistance to
take a proactive approach on a bilateral basis,
including making use of offers by international
organizations, in order to contribute to capacitybuilding. In this regard, the Committee looks forward
to the results of the donor conference on assistance for
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which
will be organized by the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute in Geneva on 6 and 7 June 2006.

9

S/PV.5446

A draft programme of work, which will cover a
12-month period, is currently under consideration by
Committee members. The programme will be based on
the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) and resolution
1673 (2006). It also will reflect the recommendations
contained in the Committee’s report to the Council of
25 April 2006 (S/2006/257).
On behalf of the Committee, I look forward to the
cooperation of all States as the Committee goes
forward with its future work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Burian for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): We thank the Chairmen
of the three counter-terrorism Committees for their
informative briefings today. Such briefings give the
wider United Nations membership the opportunity to
be informed and updated on the efforts made by the
three Committees to build on the effectiveness of the
United Nations system of targeted sanctions, counterterrorism and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.
Greece associates itself with the statement to be
made later on behalf of the European Union by the
Permanent Representative of Austria.
The fight against terrorism remains vitally
important, as terrorism is one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, as well as to
the security of our citizens and our societies. This is
obvious in the light of the many devastating terrorist
attacks worldwide that have inflicted mass casualties
involving thousands of people. The scale of
destruction, however, would be much worse if
terrorists succeeded in getting access to weapons of
mass destruction.
This means that terrorism can be effectively
defeated only through a global response, with the
United Nations playing a leading role, and through the
adoption of a comprehensive and action-oriented
counter-terrorism strategy. In this respect, we support
the Secretary-General’s report of 27 April 2006
(A/60/825), which is centred on elements and
recommendations that can assist the United Nations in
addressing and confronting the phenomenon of
terrorism in a more effective and coordinated manner.

10

What is also frightening about terrorism is not
only that it poses a threat against our lives, but that it
also undermines the very values and principles on
which our societies are founded: freedom, democracy
and the rule of law. That is why we need to fight and
defeat terrorism — without, however, compromising
our values and principles. We must ensure that counterterrorism measures are in conformity with international
law, including human rights, international humanitarian
and refugee law.
The sanctions regime established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) remains a
critical tool in the fight against terrorism. We welcome
the continuous efforts of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee to bring further improvements to
this regime, and particularly to its Consolidated List
and to its guidelines on issues related to listing and
delisting procedures. The recommendations put
forward by the Monitoring Team in its fourth report
(S/2006/154, enclosure) provide valuable assistance
and guidance to the Committee, and we support their
early adoption.
We believe, however, that the Committee should
further address concerns regarding the need to
establish procedural fairness and an effective remedy
within the current system of listing and delisting
procedures. The establishment of such fair and clear
procedures will, in our view, enhance the effectiveness
and credibility of sanctions and will reduce their
negative effects on innocent individuals.
As regards the issue of procedural fairness, we
are of the view that targeted individuals and entities
should be notified of their listing and should be
allowed to have direct access to the Committee’s
delisting procedures. Likewise, we believe that a
review mechanism should be in place in order to
consider delisting requests in case of wrongful
application of a targeted sanction.
In that respect, we welcome the initiatives taken
by Denmark and France, each aimed at addressing,
respectively, the two aspects of that problem. Likewise,
we commend Germany, Sweden and Switzerland for
sponsoring the recent academic study of the Watson
Institute on strengthening targeted sanctions through
fair and clear procedures, which we see as a new
process regarding the improvement of targeted
sanctions and their implementation. The paper contains

S/PV.5446

useful suggestions that should be thoroughly studied by
the sanctions Committee.
We commend the work carried out by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Executive
Directorate (CTED), and we fully support the three
areas in which the Committee has decided to focus its
future activities. The revision of the reporting system,
the enhancement of the dialogue with Member States
and the deepening of cooperation with international
and regional organizations are key elements for better
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). Making visits to Member States is another
important tool of effective monitoring and, if properly
used, can be of great help in that respect. We attach
great importance to proper follow-up to these visits.
We also support the Committee’s efforts to facilitate
and coordinate the provision of technical assistance to
Member States.
Lastly, we welcome the recent adoption by the
Committee of policy guidance for the CTED on how
the Directorate should take into account human rights
concerns in the course of its activities. We expect that
the CTED will continue to effectively implement these
guidelines in its day-to-day interaction with Member
States. We are certain that these measures will enhance
the counter-terrorism policy of the sanctions
Committees.
Greece firmly supports the work carried out by
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), given the seriousness of the threat that the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related material poses to
humankind.
The recent adoption of resolution 1673 (2006),
which extends the mandate of the Committee for
another period of two years, is a positive development
that will enable the Council to focus on the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in all its
aspects. In that respect, we urge States which have not
submitted their reports to do so, in order to allow the
Committee to carry out its most demanding task.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
facilitating the provision of technical assistance to
States which lack the capacity to fulfil their obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004).
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to start by thanking the three Committee

Chairmen for their detailed briefings and for their and
their Committees’ work throughout the year. I should
like also to thank the experts and staff members who
support the Committees. I wish also to associate myself
with the comments to be made later by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.
Terrorism continues to constitute one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security.
Substantial progress has been made on the counterterrorism agenda over recent years, but the
international community must continue to stand
together and to do more. Only by helping all States to
strengthen their capacity to tackle terrorism can we
hope to succeed in the medium and the longer term.
Let me begin with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), whose work is an
essential element in the international non-proliferation
effort. The analysis provided in the recent report is
particularly useful, and we welcome the recent
extension of the Committee’s mandate, as set out in
resolution 1673 (2006). The work of the Committee so
far has been a major achievement, but, as we have
heard, there is still a great deal to do. We particularly
welcome the chance for the Committee to tackle the
issue of outreach. The Committee has an essential role
to play in promoting bilateral and multilateral
assistance programmes both between States and with
international and regional organizations. That will
allow individual States to develop effective action
plans and to learn from good practice. It will increase
access to technical assistance and will ultimately steer
all States towards achieving full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
I should like to move on to the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Following the
Council’s recommendations last December, the United
Kingdom welcomes the development and use of new
analytical tools which allow States and the Committee
to move away from the never-ending reporting cycle
and shift to a tailored dialogue. Those tools also allow
for consistency in analysis. We also value the country
visits made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and attach great importance to
timely and accurate follow-up to those visits. The
Committee will be judged by the concrete results that
derive from all those visits.

11

S/PV.5446

The United Kingdom particularly supports a
strong focus on technical assistance. The issue has
been under discussion for some time, and there is now
an opportunity to move more quickly. Thus, we look
forward to seeing substantial results in the form of the
assistance delivered and the resulting improvement in
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Assistance is critical to the success of counterterrorism efforts. We need to be more consistent in
agreeing on what is needed, more aware about what is
already being provided, and more coherent and
committed in how we get assistance delivered.
Now let me say a few words about the Al-Qaida
and Taliban sanctions Committee, established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999). The very productive
programme of visits, particularly by the Monitoring
Team, and the efforts with the Government of
Afghanistan are very encouraging. The United
Kingdom fully supports the reconciliation process in
Afghanistan, and we hope that the Committee will do
all it can to aid that process.
We encourage the Committee to maintain and
increase its progress on listing and delisting. This is an
important issue whose resolution is overdue, and which
last year’s world summit asked us to address. Now we
must make rapid progress on it. The recent paper by
the Watson Institute for International Studies should
help inform the Committee’s discussions. We also look
forward to hearing the Committee’s views on the
recommendations contained in the fourth report of the
Monitoring Team. We should like also to urge States to
submit their checklists to the Committee, as called for
in resolution 1617 (2005). The focus should be on the
quality of each list, ensuring that the Committee and
Member States have as much information as possible.
We look forward to the continued coordination of
work and close cooperation among the three
Committees. We remain committed to working on the
issue of reporting to make sure we have the right
balance in the reporting requirements of the
Committees and the consequent burden on States.
At the most recent open briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.5375), we expressed our desire to encourage
other States to submit information requested under
resolution 1624 (2005) concerning incitement, by
taking a proactive approach and voluntarily submitting
information. The United Kingdom, for its part,
submitted its reply to the CTC earlier this month. We

12

should like to call on all other States to do the same
without delay. That will allow the CTC to have the
basis for the best possible information to report to the
Council in September, as called for in that resolution.
The issue of incitement to terrorism remains a
central one for the British Government; we must take
steps to tackle it. The United Kingdom legislative
programme for preventing terrorism and pursuing
terrorists and those who support terrorist organization
has been under review, not least on that issue of
incitement. Most notable among the new legislation is
the Terrorism Act 2006, which contains a
comprehensive package of measures designed to ensure
that the police, intelligence agencies and courts all
have the tools they require to tackle terrorism and
bring perpetrators to justice.
There has been much discussion in recent weeks
of the Secretary-General’s proposal for a counterterrorism strategy for the United Nations. The United
Kingdom wholly and wholeheartedly supports the
Secretary-General’s idea. Its operational focus is
exactly right, and it sends a strong message that
terrorism can never be justified, no matter what the
context. We also welcome its pragmatic approach and
its focus on capacity-building and on maintaining
counter-terrorism work throughout the United Nations
system. We welcome particularly the fact that the
whole United Nations membership is engaged in this
discussion of how to tackle a threat which aims to
undermine the values and principles of the
Organization, and we hope that the membership will all
be able to come together and quickly agree on a strong
strategy building on the areas in which we are all able
to reach agreement.
International terrorism has been and will continue
to be a grave problem for the global community. The
best way to tackle it is together. That requires a real
commitment from us all: in the Security Council and
outside it.
Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
and we appreciate the work of the three Committees.
We are grateful to Ambassador Mayoral, Ambassador
Løj and Ambassador Burian for their well articulated
briefings.
My delegation is pleased to see a well
coordinated modus operandi and interconnectedness
and complementarities among the three Committees.

S/PV.5446

We note in particular that the Monitoring Team of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the panel of experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) are pursuing a common approach on reporting
to Member States. The Committees have found ways to
minimize travel costs by arranging joint trips to Africa,
Asia and Europe and have been jointly considering the
sanctions regimes and effective measures for their
implementation. At the same time they have been
helping
reporting
and
non-reporting
States,
coordinating technical assistance to States and
addressing issues that Member States have identified as
important for their implementation efforts.
The visit to my country by the CTED delegation,
led by Mr. Javier Rupérez, from 13 to 17 February, is a
case in point. The delegation was composed of a 1267
Committee member and representatives from other
relevant international organizations, which included
Interpol, the International Civil Aviation Organization
and the International Maritime Organization. The
CTED had useful discussions with Tanzanian
stakeholders on how best to implement resolution 1373
(2001), including through enhanced reporting
obligations for other Committees and exchange of
information on international terrorism.
Tanzania is encouraged by the report on how the
Committees intend to work with relevant international
and regional organizations with a view to helping
Member States in discharging their responsibilities
under other resolutions, namely, resolutions 1455
(2003), 1540 (2004) and 1624 (2005).
We highly commend the CTC’s comprehensive
technical assistance implementation plan, the 1267
Committee’s partnership in sanctions implementation
and the decision by the 1540 Committee to publish on
its website a legislative database. We believe that the
efforts made by those Committees will improve the
capacity of Member States in the implementation of
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1540 (2004) and 1373 (2001).
Regarding the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
Committee, my delegation wishes to commend the
Committee for courageously embarking on the process
of addressing the thorny issue of listing and delisting
through the revision of the Committee’s guidelines.
Of equal importance and concern is the lack of
adequate identifiers on the Consolidated List. There is

a need to expedite the ongoing exercise of refining the
list.
Tanzania is committed to implementing all
relevant resolutions, with the help of the partners and
friends of the United Nations. We fully recognize the
exemplary work and professionalism displayed by the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
which has developed a database for documents and
information.
We were gratified by the useful interventions
made by the Governments of Sweden, Germany and
Switzerland during the 1267 Committee meeting with a
view to improving the quality of the Committee’s
Consolidated List. The Committee benefited as a result
of the combined efforts to make the targeted sanctions
more effective.
We recognize the important coordination role
played by the 1540 Committee in preventing the
acquisition by non-State actors of weapons of mass
destruction or related materials and their means of
delivery. The Committee’s coordination with the CTC
and the 1267 Committee should be highly commended.
The Committee should be encouraged in its plan
to use its expertise and, in collaboration with the CTC
and the 1267 Committee, to act as a clearing house,
contacting Member States in need of information and
inviting States offering assistance and those needing it
to take a proactive approach, on a bilateral basis or
through international and regional organizations, in
order to contribute to capacity-building. In this context,
the Committee should strive to increase States’
awareness of the availability of such bilateral and
international
assistance
facilities,
in
the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to express my thanks to Ambassador
Mayoral, Ambassador Løj and Ambassador Burian for
their briefings on the activities of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). Those Committees play an
important role in our efforts to combat terrorism.
There is a need for cooperation between the AlQaida and Taliban sanctions Committee and Member
States — hence the visit organized by the Committee to
my country, during which the Chairman was able to
hear Doha’s views about the Committee’s work and the
need to continue to implement its activities, which are

13

S/PV.5446

of the utmost importance to Qatar. The Committee also
examined the various legislative and legal measures
that are in place in Qatar aimed at combating terrorism
in a firm and realistic manner through the rule of law,
the promotion of democracy and full respect for human
rights, as well as domestic legislation to combat
terrorism.
Sanctions remain an important tool for the
Security Council, but we understand that there is a
need to move from comprehensive sanctions to
targeted sanctions. However, such sanctions must be
imposed with a view to achieving a clear objective.
They must be implemented objectively, effectively and
in a balanced number. Some believe that the imposition
of sanctions is a political tool of the Security Council.
However, we must be clear in stating that the
imposition of sanctions is also a legal tool; the Security
Council must take into consideration both the legal
aspect and human rights, which must not be violated.
More than 50 States have pointed out the need for
the Committee to ensure legality and transparency
when listing or delisting names. At the moment, many
cases are being put forward by individuals on the
Committee’s list and by domestic courts alleging that
the United Nations is violating human rights in listing
names. In this regard, my delegation would like to
stress once again the need for checks and balances
when including the names of individuals and entities
on the list. Our methods must be effective and
accountable. Implementation must be monitored and
sanctions must be transparent. The listing and delisting
of individuals and entities must be fair and transparent.
Sanctions must also be implemented in an accountable
manner.
Radicalism must be combated in a number of
ways, most importantly by creating societies that are
free from and extremism and hatred of others. We
should recall that resolution 1624 (2005) stresses the
continuing need for international efforts to promote
dialogue and wider horizons for cooperation between
societies in order to prevent hatred of others. We also
recall the international appeal for a dialogue among
civilizations and for coexistence among peoples, as
well as the need to prevent extremism. We call on the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) once again to
take up that issue very firmly and to call on States not
to distort religion.

14

The most important aspect of the fight against
terrorism is the defence of human rights. States must
ensure that any measures they take to combat terrorism
conform with their obligations under international law
in that regard. In the fight against terrorism, specific
rights cannot be restricted under any circumstances or
at any time. We believe that the United Nations should
have a comprehensive strategy to ensure respect for
human rights in the fight against terrorism.
My delegation shares the positive view of the
progress being made in the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We believe that the Committee must continue
to consider the reports submitted by States. My
delegation welcomes the fact that many States have
submitted national reports. We call upon non-reporting
States to do so now, and we call upon the Committee to
provide the technical assistance requested by States to
make further progress against the threat of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs). The
Committee
must
proceed cautiously in ensuring the non-proliferation of
WMDs by State or non-State actors. At the same time,
non-proliferation measures cannot be selective.
Finally, I call upon all three Committees to
coordinate and cooperate closely with a view to
achieving the greatest possible effectiveness in the
fight against terrorism.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): Allow me to express my
deepest sympathy and condolences to the Government
and the people of Indonesia as well as to the families
of those who were killed or injured in the devastating
earthquake which hit the southern coast of Java on 27
May.
I thank the respective Chairs of the three counterterrorism-related Committees for their briefings this
morning, in which they detailed progress being made
and challenges ahead. We found the briefings to be
very informative and useful. In expressing our thanks
to the three ambassadors, Ellen Løj, César Mayoral and
Peter Burian, let me also state that we welcome the
resumed practice of ad hoc briefings by the
Committees to inform Member States of their activities
on a more frequent basis. We also highly appreciate the
excellent and dedicated work of the members of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), the experts on the Monitoring Team of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee, the experts
on the 1540 Committee and the Secretariat.

S/PV.5446

Today’s meeting offers an opportunity for
Council members not only to be briefed on the
progress made in the work of the three Committees, but
also to hear the views of Member States on that work.
This is important because, in the ongoing debate in the
General Assembly on a comprehensive counterterrorism strategy, comments and opinions have been
expressed by Member States about the manner in
which the three Security Council Committees do their
work. It is also relevant in the context of the currently
debated mandates review and of the follow-up to the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1).
One of the areas in which rationalization will be
required in the work of the Committees — and about
which many States have voiced concerns — relates to
the easing of the reporting burdens on some Member
States. While emphasizing that reporting by Member
States is of central importance for the effective work of
the Committees, the three Chairs expressed their
understanding of the need to take action on the
problem of the burdens arising from reporting
obligations.
Japan supports consideration by the Council of
the possibility of consolidating reports to the greatest
extent possible to ease that burden where necessary.
For those non-reporting States that have the will but
lack the capacity to prepare reports, it is necessary to
consider the possible provision of assistance. We
appreciate, in that regard, the efforts by Ambassador
Løj and Ambassador Mayoral to hold dialogue with
several regional groups, including the Pacific Islands
Forum and members of the Caribbean Community. We
also encourage the expert groups of the three
Committees in their efforts to consolidate the questions
addressed in a single questionnaire. We hope that such
a questionnaire will be agreed and put into practice as
swiftly as possible.
Another
rationalization
measure
worth
undertaking would be to consolidate Committee visits
to Member States, although the manner in which such
visits should be consolidated would obviously require
careful consideration, and in some cases adjustment,
given the fact that all of the Committees have related
but distinct purposes derived from their respective
mandates.
It seems to us that there is ample room for the
coordination and consolidation of visits. We believe
that, among the three Committees, the Counter-

Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee in particular should be
encouraged to coordinate the timing of their visits so
that they can be conducted jointly, while respecting the
requests of States to be visited. Such a step would also
enhance the effectiveness of the dialogue with State
authorities and improve the gathering and sharing of
information. At the same time, we understand that
there may be cases in which separate visits will be
necessary. When individual visits are required, it is
indispensable to share with the other Committees the
outcome of those visits so that the findings are fully
utilized. Such considerations aimed at rationalizing
visits would not only help relieve the burden of the
visited States, but also create the kind of enhanced
cooperative relationship between the Committees and
the visited States that we hope to see.
The CTED’s responsibility to identify the specific
assistance needs of States on the basis of information
obtained through State reports and State visits
continues to be one of its important duties. To that end,
we expect that the development of closer cooperation
between the Directorate and the Group of Eight’s
Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG) will be
achieved through such efforts as participation in local
CTAG meetings, where relevant, during CTC and
CTED visits abroad. Japan expects the CTED to play a
clearinghouse role in matching identified needs for
assistance with actual donor support.
In that regard, we note and appreciate the fact
that the CTED has recently begun to engage in active
dialogue with potential donors. We hope that such
proactive efforts on the part of the CTED and the work
of the CTC will begin to produce concrete results and
that the needed assistance will begin to reach those
States requiring it. The Japanese Government wishes to
share its experience and information in that regard as
both a donor and a CTC member. In that connection,
my Government has established a new funding
facility — grant aid for cooperation on counterterrorism and security enhancement — providing
approximately $70 million for the current fiscal year,
beginning in April.
Other matters that have been raised are the listing
and delisting of individuals and entities on the
Consolidated List of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee and the issue of due process, which is also
of great interest and concern to many Member States.
Unfortunately, a final conclusion has yet to be reached

15

S/PV.5446

in the Committee. It is essential that sanctions
measures be fully implemented and that terrorist
activities be effectively prevented. To that end, it is
necessary to expeditiously find a solution to the issue
of listing and delisting and to enhance confidence in
the Consolidated List. It is therefore encouraging that
serious discussion on this matter has resumed in the
Committee. We expect that that will soon result in a
fairer and more transparent procedure that takes into
consideration the various proposals put forward by the
Monitoring Team, Member States, think tanks and
others.
Finally, we welcome the two-year extension of
the 1540 Committee’s mandate in a decision taken in
April through resolution 1673 (2006). Under that
resolution, the submission of additional information by
Member States will continue to be required as one of
the pillars of the implementation of the resolution,
while enabling the Committee to assist Member States
more proactively in fulfilling that goal. It is important
to enhance the implementation of the resolution
through multiple means, including through the
provision of technical assistance, outreach activities
and the holding of seminars. The Committee has just
embarked upon a discussion regarding the work
programme for the coming 12 months. We regard that
work programme as highly important as a guideline for
the activities of the Committee. We intend to contribute
constructively to the discussion.
In conclusion, the three Committees must not
only continue to pursue their respective practical
activities; they must also achieve substantive results in
the improvement of procedural matters, as has
repeatedly been pointed out by Member States. Our
intention is to continue to play an integral role in
advancing the work and reform of the three
Committees while giving full support to their
respective Chairpersons and members.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to begin by
thanking the Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540
Committee — Ambassadors Ellen Margrethe Løj,
César Mayoral and Peter Burian, respectively — for
their comprehensive briefings.
We note with satisfaction that the CounterTerrorism Committee has decided to focus its work for
the first part of this year on the revision of the
reporting regime, how it should enhance dialogue with

16

Member States in need of technical assistance and
deepen its relations with international, regional and
subregional organizations.
In connection with the reporting regimes, we
support the introduction by the Committee of the
analytical tool, referred to as the preliminary
implementation assessment, to monitor the extent of
States’ implementation of their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). We wish to reiterate the call
made by my delegation in February 2006 for the 1373
Committee, in consultation with the 1267 and 1540
Committees, to work on the consolidation of the three
reporting regimes, as recommended in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document (General Assembly
resolution 60/1).
With regard to technical assistance to States in
need, we are appreciative of consultations being
undertaken by the Committee with Member States and
with potential donors, and hope that the ongoing
dialogue will yield fruitful results. The emphasis of
that consultation should be on a regional and
subregional approach, which appears to be the most
cost-effective method to channel assistance to as many
countries as possible in a region or subregion.
My delegation wishes to stress that cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations should be an integral part of the
Committee’s work. In that regard, we hope that the
fifth special meeting of the CTC with international,
regional and subregional organizations, which is
scheduled for later this year, will focus on how best to
utilize regional institutions as a medium to facilitate
and strengthen the capacities of States, particularly in
developing regions, to meet their obligations under the
regime established by resolution 1373 (2001).
With regard to the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, my delegation considers country visits by
the Chairman and the Monitoring Team as one of the
key pillars by which the implementation of the
sanctions regime can be evaluated. It is through that
interaction between the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee and Member States that implementation can
be monitored, and practical steps taken, to correct
weaknesses in the sanctions regime.
We wish to raise the issue of recent court
challenges to the listing decisions of the Committee in
some countries. That raises a fundamental issue: Is a
decision of the Security Council taken under Chapter

S/PV.5446

VII subject to judicial review in a Member State? It
appears we have an essentially political process
conflicting with the judicial norms of some member
countries. That problem will persist until the issue of
which system should have primacy is resolved, with
the potential to undermine the credibility of the
Committee.
We are particularly grateful to the Governments
of Sweden, Switzerland and Germany for sponsoring a
paper by the Watson Institute for International Studies
that has made a thorough study of that delicate legal
problem and come up with interesting proposals. My
delegation supports the option of a review mechanism
distinct from the 1267 Committee as an approach to
pre-empting that problem.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 1673
(2006) in April 2006, renewing the 1540 Committee’s
mandate for another two years, is an unambiguous
affirmation of the Council’s determination to live up to
its cardinal responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. The coming two years will be a
critical period for the 1540 Committee as it seeks to
achieve universal reportage and to examine, monitor
and assist in the implementation of operative
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of resolution 1540 (2004), as was
lucidly affirmed in operative paragraph 5 of resolution
1673 (2006).
Due to the current position on the submission of
first and additional reports by States, we find merit in
the intensification and widening of outreach activities
to sensitize, encourage and offer States the necessary
guidance to implement the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004). My delegation’s wholehearted support for
that
decision
informed
Ghana’s
favourable
consideration of the request to host the outreach
programme for Africa, which regrettably is the region
with an appreciable number of countries that are yet to
submit their first reports.
Another important element that needs to be
strengthened is the Committee’s role in the provision
of resources and assistance in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), especially to most developing
countries. The political will and commitment of those
countries are undermined by the absence of the
requisite national capacity, particularly with respect to
the technical sphere. Although bilateral arrangements
are generally welcomed, international cooperation is

imperative, and the Committee has a critical role to
play by acting as a clearing house on that issue.
Given the ever-evolving nature of terrorism, an
intensification of cooperation among the three
Committees and their experts would definitely enhance
the international community’s effort to address that
scourge. By extension, cooperation between the three
Committees
and
regional
and
subregional
organizations, as well as international financial
institutions and multilateral bodies, should be enhanced
if we are to achieve a comprehensive and sustainable
solution to that menace.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Mayoral, Løj and Burian for their
briefings on the work of the 1267 Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1540
Committee, respectively. China would like to make the
following comments, and express its hopes, with
regard to those Committees.
The visit by the Chairperson of the 1267
Committee
has
enhanced
understanding
and
cooperation between Member States and the
Committee. In conjunction with the consideration of
the fourth report of the Monitoring Team and through
letters by its Chairman, the Committee has enhanced
understanding and attention on the part of Member
States as concerns the implementation of sanctions. It
is our hope that, in the next phase of its work, the
Committee will focus its priorities on an extensive, indepth and practical exploration of the quality of the
sanctions and its listing and delisting procedures, so as
to reach a common understanding on ways to refine the
list at an early date.
Along with improving the quality of the list,
efforts should be made to ensure that the procedure is
fair and transparent and to avoid double standards.
Only in that way will we ensure that the Committee’s
work is respected and supported by the vast majority of
Member States. And only in that way will it be
generally conducive to the promotion of international
cooperation against terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee has increased
its technical assistance and coordination, strengthened
its dialogue with Member States and begun to discus
ways and means of deepening its relationships with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
In the future, the CTC should accelerate its

17

S/PV.5446

implementation of resolution 1624 (2005), for there is
not much time left before it must submit its report.
The relevant recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) have an important role to
play in counter-terrorism financing. China supports the
appropriate dissemination of those recommendations
by CTC. At the same time, the representation of
developing countries on the FATF should be increased.
Only thus can it play a greater role in counterterrorism.
China welcomes the seamless extension by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) of its mandate. We hope that the Committee
will establish a comprehensive and balanced
programme of work as soon as possible, in accordance
with resolution 1673 (2006) and the recommendations
contained in the Committee’s report. In July 2006, with
the joint support of the United Nations, the United
Kingdom, Denmark, Norway and Australia, China will
host a seminar in Beijing on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the Asia-Pacific region. We
believe that the meeting will achieve results.
We also hope that the three committees will
continue to strengthen coordination and cooperation on
the current basis. As to the consolidation of country
reports, China believes that the three committees have
different responsibilities and focus on different areas of
work, although those do overlap to a certain extent. At
the same time, the Committees all place heavy
reporting requirements on Member States, bringing
considerable pressure to bear. China encourages the
three committees and their respective experts to
continue to coordinate among themselves and to adopt
appropriate measures to streamline their work, reduce
the reporting burden on Member States, and assist
them in finding solutions to their difficulties and
thereby more efficiently and effectively to implement
the relevant resolutions.
Looking back over the past three months, we can
see that terrorist activities have remained rampant and
that the fight against terrorism remains a long and
arduous task. As the common enemy of the
international community of humankind, all terrorist
activities constitute a serious threat to international
peace and security, regardless of their motivation,
timing and location and the identity of the perpetrators.
In the fight against terrorism, we should not
exclusively focus on and combat those terrorist

18

organizations and individuals that threaten ourselves,
while being permissive and ambivalent towards those
that do not pose a direct threat to us and our allies;
much less should we fail to respond to the legitimate
requirements of other countries or even raise obstacles
on the basis of other motivations. If that should occur,
it would be difficult to expect proactive coordination
and cooperation on the part of other Member States.
The international community should unite in its
efforts and demonstrate a tireless opposition to
terrorism. It should regard the terrorist forces that
threaten any country as an enemy of all and combat
them with resolve, leaving terrorists with no place to
hide. Only thus will the international fight against
terrorism be complete and effective. China made that
point during the General Assembly’s discussion on
formulating a global counter-terrorism strategy.
China has always supported and actively
participated in the international counter-terrorism
struggle. In April 2006, China deposited with
Secretary-General Annan its instrument of ratification
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism, demonstrating yet again
our support for international cooperation in counterterrorism. In the future, China will continue
constructively to participate in counter-terrorism
cooperation and, as always, to support and actively
take part in the work of the three committees to
promote the implementation of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.
Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of
America): I would like to thank all three chairmen for
their briefings. Terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction are the pre-eminent
threats to international peace and security, and the
Council has a critical responsibility to counter those
threats. Ambassadors Løj, Mayoral and Burian show
dedicated leadership that helps to drive the
international community’s fight against terrorism and,
in Chairman Burian’s case, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, including the threat that terrorists and other
non-State actors could access those items.
Today’s presentations all refer to cooperation
among the committees, which is essential and must be
enhanced. The committees are the Council’s public
voice on terrorism, regularly interacting with States,
other parts of the United Nations system, as well as

S/PV.5446

international and regional organizations. For the
Council’s counter-terrorism efforts to succeed, they
must speak with one voice on terrorism and operate in
a coherent and coordinated manner. To do so, the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and
the Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) must conduct more
joint visits to States. When the two expert bodies
cannot do so, they should coordinate their visits to
produce the broadest impact. The two committees
should share information they gather on those visits
and, as appropriate, coordinate follow-up. We also urge
the committees and their experts to consult one another
more on engagement with other international and
regional organizations to be sure that those efforts
reinforce one another. Finally, reporting requests also
need careful thought and review to avoid reporting
fatigue.
We remain concerned that States still have much
to do to implement the obligations the Council has
established. The Secretary-General’s recently released
recommendation for a counter-terrorism strategy has
called on the Council bodies dealing with terrorism to
develop standards of accountability and compliance
against which individual States’ efforts can be
measured. The Council should take the steps necessary
to ensure that its subsidiary bodies heed that call.
I would like to say a few brief words about each
presentation.
The United States appreciates the leadership of
Chairman Løj, particularly her push for the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) to achieve concrete
results. We also are grateful for the hard work and
expertise of the Committee’s Executive Directorate,
under Ambassador Rupérez’s leadership.
We welcome the CTC’s recent accomplishments.
We applaud its efforts to streamline its reporting
procedures and to keep the CTC and States focused on
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We also
are pleased to hear that the CTC is preparing its fifth
special meeting with international and regional
organizations, as part of its work to strengthen
coordination with those organizations and highlight
issues that have yet to receive the attention they
deserve, namely restricting terrorist travel and denying
terrorist safe haven. To achieve the best results, all
United Nations Members must be invited to participate
as observers, as in previous meetings.

We also welcome CTED’s outreach to potential
donors on issues concerning technical assistance. The
United States provides extensive technical assistance,
including, for example, $1.5 million for the Pacific
Islands Forum to enhance existing anti-moneylaundering and counter-terrorism finance regimes in
that region. We also welcome New Zealand’s
successful programme to help Pacific Islands Forum
States prepare reports to the CTC, as well as to the
committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1540 (2004).
Facilitating technical assistance must not become
an end in itself for the CTC, however. The CTC must
remain focused on its primary mandate — monitoring
States’ implementation of their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). If States have received
technical assistance but still have not met their
obligations, the CTC must take action to ensure that
they do so. We welcome the CTC’s new preliminary
implementation assessment tool, which presents a
useful way to measure States’ implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We are glad that the CTC and
its CTED are working to identify best practices or sets
of best practices relevant to resolution 1373 (2001).
Once they have done so, the CTC should endorse or
adopt and disseminate those best practices, and use
them to measure States’ compliance with resolution
1373 (2001).
Looking ahead, we hope that the CTC’s next
work programme will cover a 180-day period. Doing
so will help streamline its work, freeing up the CTC
and CTED to focus on States’ implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), and not on administrative
matters.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) has focused on many important issues
since Ambassador Mayoral’s last briefing and the
United States commends his leadership. The
Committee, with the invaluable help of its Monitoring
Team, is working hard to strengthen the sanctions
regime, address States’ concerns, and ensure that the
international community remains energized and united
in fighting Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
Under his stewardship, the 1267 Committee
turned its attention to the Afghan Government’s
requests to delist former Taliban members who have
completed the reconciliation programme. The United
States strongly supports Afghanistan’s efforts to

19

S/PV.5446

reconcile former Taliban to the Afghan Government.
We appreciate Ambassador Mayoral’s decision to send
the Monitoring Team to Kabul to strengthen the
dialogue between the Committee and the Afghan
Government and to gather the information necessary
for the Committee to hold a constructive discussion on
the delisting requests.
In a further move to bolster dialogue, he recently
travelled to Qatar, Yemen and Saudi Arabia, as he
mentioned. All three States are important allies in the
fight against Al-Qaida. The United States was pleased
to join his delegation. Meetings with Member States
are often the most effective way to improve
cooperation and resolve differences, and thus help to
strengthen sanctions implementation.
Finally, Ambassador Mayoral is presiding over
the Committee’s important discussion about revising
the listing and delisting guidelines. Reflecting our
commitment to fairness and transparency in the
Committee’s work, the United States has submitted a
comprehensive package of recommendations. We
realize that the task is difficult, but we hope the
Committee will focus on this important issue and will
remain flexible in order to reach agreement.
With regard to the 1540 Committee and
Ambassador Burian, we welcome the Council’s recent
adoption of resolution 1673 (2006). Resolution 1540
(2004) is a vital step in the international effort to
address the threat to international peace and security
posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery,
including to terrorists and States that seek to use
proliferation of those items to threaten the civilized
world. As the 2006 United States National Security
Strategy states, “There are few greater threats than a
terrorist attack with WMD”. Resolution 1540 (2004), if
fully implemented, will ensure that no State or nonState actor is a source of WMD proliferation for
terrorists.
The Committee has a crucial role in assessing
States’ implementation of the resolution and ensuring
that States remain focused on fully implementing its
requirements. As the Committee’s April 2006 report to
the Council (S/2006/257) illustrates, much remains to
be done. The Committee must work with States to
identify gaps they must close to comply fully with
resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee should aim to
establish concrete standards for measuring States’

20

compliance with their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004), taking as an initial starting point the
elements of its matrix.
We also agree that the Committee should
continue to serve as a clearing house for information
concerning technical assistance. The United States is
working on its own plan to determine what assistance
we can provide other States to fully implement
resolution 1540 (2004). We encourage other
Governments to reach out to those that need to build
their capacity to comply with the resolution.
One vital mechanism to counter proliferation that
the Committee has not addressed adequately is the
need to choke off the supply of funds to proliferators.
Whatever else motivates proliferation, there can be no
doubt that it is money-driven. In that context, the
Committee must pay more attention to the provisions
of resolution 1540 (2004) that require States to take
measures against proliferation financing.
Last June, the United States took steps to
implement those obligations, when President Bush
issued Executive Order 13382. That order, consistent
with our obligations under resolution 1540 (2004),
establishes a targeted financial sanctions program that
blocks the assets of designated WMD proliferators and
their support networks. The order also prohibits United
States nationals and others within the jurisdiction of
the United States from engaging in transactions with
those to whom the United States has applied such
sanctions. We stand ready to share our experiences and
efforts with the Committee and with all interested
States, and we look forward to engaging in the
Committee’s discussions on this issue.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We express our gratitude to the Chairs of the
Committee on sanctions against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
the 1540 Committee, Ambassadors Mayoral, Løj and
Burian, respectively, for their substantive statements
and for their efforts to enhance the international system
to counter the global threat of terrorism.
The Russian Federation believes that it is
necessary to continue the endeavour to expand the
coordination of the activities and cooperation of the
three Committees in the light of the goals set forth in
the 2005 summit outcome document (General
Assembly resolution 60/1). Above all, it is important to
ensure an overall thrust aimed at developing the

S/PV.5446

effective dialogue being pursued by the Committees
with States, in line with implementation of their
mandates. On the one hand, more effective monitoring
of the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions is important. On the other hand, everything
needs to be done to ensure that States can, in a timely
manner, find and make use of the necessary resources
to build their counter-terrorism capacities.
Today’s briefings have yet again confirmed how
important it is to build upon achieved results from the
standpoint of interaction among the Committees,
exchange of information, joint participation of experts
in country visits and the design of reporting
mechanisms that are more acceptable to States.
With respect to the activities of the CounterTerrorism Committee, the Russian Federation supports
the work programme presented by Ambassador Løj and
the priorities it lays out. We note the considerable
contribution of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) to the work of the
Committee to implement resolution 1373 (2001). We
welcome the Committee’s efforts to further enhance the
reporting regime. We also welcome the adoption of the
CTC’s new arrangement for the preliminary assessment
of States’ implementation of the provisions of the
resolution. This significantly assists the Committee in
focusing on targeted work with States, in assessing
more objectively and in depth their progress in meeting
the requirement to build their counter-terrorism
capacity and in determining potential areas where
technical assistance might be needed.
We welcome the continued development of the
CTC’s practice of country visits, including the use of
varying formats for field missions, the expansion of
their thematic scope and the practical thrust of the
experts’ recommendations. In this regard, it is our hope
that the Committee will devote the necessary attention
to developing ways to work with States on the outcome
of visits, including mechanisms for direct liaison
between States and potential donors. For our part, as
the country presiding over the Group of Eight (G-8),
we actively support the effort to strengthen the
interaction of the CTC with the G-8’s CounterTerrorism Action Group.
We welcome steps to continue to develop the
Committee’s cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations, including the outcome
of the April seminar in Auckland. Here, while we must

devote attention to developing cooperation with
individual regional organizations, it is important not to
overlook the overall global context for the CTC’s
interaction with such organizations or the possibility of
using their experience and capacities in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). From that
standpoint, we welcome the practical preparations
undertaken by the CTC for the fifth special meeting
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations.
We continue to view the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team as
one of the effective and capable Security Council
counter-terrorism mechanisms. It is necessary to
continue work to strengthen the anti-Taliban sanctions
regime by enhancing the guidelines for the work of the
1267 Committee. We take note of the recent initiatives
of a number of States on this matter. We look forward
to an interactive and fruitful discussion of this issue in
the 1267 Committee and are prepared to take part in it.
Here, we would particularly like to underscore our
certainty that, to enhance the effectiveness of this
sanctions regime, it is most important to enhance
national procedures for taking decisions on placing
new names on the sanctions list. The commitment of
Member
States
to
full
and
conscientious
implementation of their obligations is key to the
success of our common efforts to counter the true,
changing threat to international peace and security
posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities.
We attach great importance to the effective work
of the 1540 Committee aimed at preventing weapons of
mass destruction from entering black market networks
and, above all, from being acquired by terrorists.
The Russian Federation was one of the initiators
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and of
April’s extension of the Committee’s mandate for
another two years. In timely fashion, we have
presented our national report and additional
information to the Committee. Ensuring the full
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) by all States continues to be our priority, and we
are actively pursuing that goal, both in the 1540
Committee and in the context of our presidency of the
G-8.
We support the proposals made in Ambassador
Burian’s statement to reinvigorate the activities of the

21

S/PV.5446

Committee, including by providing the necessary
assistance to needy States, holding regional seminars,
cooperation with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and more active use of the
capacities of field missions of the CTC and the 1267
Committee to explain the importance of the timely
submission of reports. It is our view that the collection
and analysis of national reports do not exhaust the
entire range of goals laid out in resolution 1673 (2006).
A major painstaking effort has still to take place to
develop and strengthen monitoring systems for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, an
effort in which the Russian Federation will continue to
be involved most actively.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank the Chairpersons of the three
Committees for their reports. The usefulness of these
public debates, in which we hear briefings, as well as
comments from Council members and non-members,
goes without saying.
I fully endorse the statement to be made by the
presidency of the European Union, but I also would
like to refer to a few particular aspects of our
Committees’ work.
France welcomes the two-year extension of the
mandate of the 1540 Committee. In the coming weeks,
the Committee is to draft a programme of work,
covering all aspects of resolution 1540 (2004), without
favouring or neglecting any. France will make
proposals to the Committee in this exercise, which we
feel is important for two reasons. First, resolution 1540
(2004) is the only multilateral tool for comprehensively
dealing with the proliferation of the triple threat of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related material. No aspect should be left out.
Secondly, the Security Council has decided to extend
the Committee’s mandate, and in the coming two years
the Committee must report to the Council on the
implementation of the resolution by States. It now must
equip itself with the tools required to meet that
ambitious objective.
At the same time, greater attention must be given
by the Committee to the question of assistance.
Achieving full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in the next two years will require that greater
assistance be given to States for whom this undertaking
is most difficult.

22

The Chairman of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee reported to us on the very useful recent
visits to Qatar, Yemen and Saudi Arabia. This
reconfirms the interest of this Committee and of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in visits to the field, as
long as they are well-prepared, well-coordinated and
thorough.
France welcomes the fact that the Committee has
decided to resume review of its delisting procedures, as
well as procedures with regard to humanitarian
exemptions. Today, individual sanctions have become
an essential international instrument in combating
terrorism, as well as support for various peace
processes. The Security Council has broken new
ground by creating this new tool; but, like any new
instrument, it must be improved upon.
We believe it has become urgent to set up a
mechanism that, firstly, will make procedures for
individuals and States simpler and more readable.
Secondly, it must ensure that all delisting and
exemption requests are received by the Committee and
dealt with accordingly. To this end, France proposes
that a focal point be set up within the Secretariat for
the direct receipt from listed individuals of their
requests for delisting or exemption. This focal point
will then ensure that the request is passed on to the
Committee and will inform the individuals concerned
as to the response to their request. Setting up a single
focal point for the various sanctions committees will
make the procedures more accessible, clearer and more
standardized and will ensure that all requests are
considered. We truly hope that there will be broad
support for our proposal and that it can be implemented
in the near future.
In the list of activities presented to us by the
Chairperson of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I
would like to refer in particular to the adoption of
guidelines for the respect of human rights. The
obligation placed upon States to respect international
law, in particular human rights and humanitarian
international law, must, in point of fact, be duly taken
into account by the Committee and its Executive
Directorate.
I am also particularly interested in the progress
achieved in the area of cooperation with regional
organizations, including their assistance in drafting
reports.

S/PV.5446

Finally, I note the will expressed to consider new
ways of responding to problems faced by States that do
not fully implement resolution 1373 (2001). That
desire echoes one of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in his report that we be unified
against terrorism. He has suggested that we define
parameters to draw a distinction between States that do
not have all the means necessary for implementing
their obligations from those that have the means but
lack the necessary will. The Council must be firm with
the latter.
In expressing these thoughts, we are responding
to one of the tasks assigned to us by the summit in
September — namely, that of strengthening the followup and monitoring capacity of the three Committees.
In conclusion, I would like to refer to the French
Government’s “white book” on domestic security
against terrorism, which I would be happy to present to
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. It underscores the
essential role played by the United Nations in
combating terrorism, because the United Nations alone
can provide the universal framework for mobilizing, on
the political front, all States and for setting legally
binding norms.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Løj, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador César Mayoral,
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, and Ambassador
Peter Burian, Chairman of the 1540 Committee, for
their briefings. We would like to commend them for the
work they are carrying out at the head of these
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
Peru has zero tolerance for terrorism. We strongly
and unequivocally condemn terrorism, in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
terrorism is committed. No ideological, political or
religious reason justifies those who commit, contribute
to, finance or make apologies for terrorism. My
country therefore supports the strengthening of the
Security Council’s counter-terrorism efforts.
With regard to the work of the 1267 Committee, I
would like to reiterate the importance that my
delegation attaches to improving the quality of the
Consolidated List. The recent approval of a procedure
to respond to requests for the delisting of deceased
individuals is a step forward. However, there are other
important issues that need to be addressed.

For example, it is essential that we have as much
information as possible regarding the identification of
individuals and justifying listing requests for those
individuals. All requests should comply with the
standards set by Interpol for inclusion in its database.
Difficulties in identifying individuals and entities on
the Consolidated List pose a challenge to the
implementation of sanctions, in particular with regard
to respect for human rights and to the efficiency and
credibility of the Committee itself.
In that context, my delegation believes that the
review of the procedures for inclusion on the
Consolidated List and for delisting is relevant here.
The Committee will be considering that issue shortly;
it is of great importance for my delegation, and we
commend Ambassador César Mayoral for his work in
that regard. We acknowledge the expectations both
inside and outside the United Nations with regard to
the review process, and we believe that the Committee
should take this opportunity to address the existing
limitations of the current system, bearing in mind once
again that any effort to combat terrorism must be based
on full respect for human rights, including due process.
Of course, we will cooperate fully with Ambassador
Mayoral in the complex process that he will be
heading.
When States face difficulties in implementing
sanctions and request assistance, the Committee should
be in a position to respond to those requests in a timely
and appropriate manner. In particular, if the Committee
is consulted by a State, it should be in a position to
determine the identity of an individual, either using the
information it has on file or, if that should prove
insufficient, by asking for additional information from
the State requesting inclusion.
With regard to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), my delegation continues to look
forward to the transition from the reporting regime to
the preliminary implementation assessment regime. As
mentioned by Ambassador Løj today, that new tool is
still being tested by the Committee.
The proper application of that new tool should
enable the Committee to gain a deeper and more
complete knowledge of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), thereby establishing a solid
foundation for the better understanding of national
situations, improved dialogue between the Committee

23

S/PV.5446

and Member States and, on a case-by-case basis, the
best approach to follow.
With regard to strengthening the Committee’s
working relations with international, regional and
subregional organizations, we believe that due
attention should be accorded to the mandate of each of
those organizations and to the work that they are
already carrying out in the area of counter-terrorism,
bearing in mind that efforts must not be duplicated. As
for the facilitation of technical assistance and other
activities of the Committee, such as visits, the
cooperation should be broad, and no actor should be
especially favoured, because a single technical
assistance model may not necessarily be the best fit in
all cases.
Respect for human rights is central in the fight
against terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate must continue to convey
that crucial message. The Committee’s recent approval
of policy guidelines for the Directorate on human
rights was an important step in the right direction.
My delegation also believes that it is important to
keep all Members of the Organization constantly
informed about the work of the Committee. In that
regard, we welcome the recent informal meeting
between the Chairperson and Member States, as well as
her intention to organize such meetings on a regular
basis. We invite Member States to participate in those
meetings and to take advantage of the opportunity they
provide to discuss matters with the Chairperson and the
Executive Directorate.
We would also like to mention the participation
of Ambassador Løj in the Pacific Islands Forum
meeting. Her participation proved very useful, not only
in disseminating information about the work of the
Committee, but also in learning about the progress
achieved in that region and the possibilities for
regional cooperation in counter-terrorism efforts there.
Peru underscores the importance of the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Terrorist non-State actors must be prevented
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction — that is
a real concern. Peru favours the promotion of measures
to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, as well as support for disarmament
measures.

24

My delegation is therefore participating with
interest in the negotiations under way to adopt the
Committee’s programme of work for the next 12
months. We believe that it should continue the pattern
followed to date, that is, it should compile and
disseminate information, promote dialogue, provide
assistance and facilitate cooperation. As stated in
resolution 1673 (2005), it should also continue to
consider aspects covered in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of
resolution 1540 (2004).
In my delegation’s view, the dissemination
activities carried out by the Committee and the way in
which States implement the relevant resolutions of the
Council are of great importance. That is why, as
Ambassador Burian recalled, Peru will host a regional
seminar this November on the follow-up to and the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
With regard to the exchange of information, we
wish to note the establishment of a database on
national measures. The database will help States
continue to improve their legislation aimed at
strengthening monitoring measures.
In his briefing, Ambassador Burian also referred
to State reports. Appropriate consideration of such
reports will undoubtedly enable the Committee to
identify areas in which States need technical
assistance. The Committee should assist States in
preparing their reports and, if necessary, in considering
legislative reforms needed for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the context of respect for the
rights and obligations of States parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention.
I wish to reaffirm the importance of improved
cooperation and coordination among the three
Committees and their expert groups.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as representative
of the Republic of the Congo.
I too thank the Chairs of the three counterterrorism committees — Ambassador César Mayoral,
Chair of the 1267 Committee, Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Løj, Chair of the 1373 Committee, and
Ambassador Peter Burian, Chair of the 1540
Committee — who have all given us clear and
informative briefings. My thanks go also to the three

S/PV.5446

expert groups that assist the ambassadors in their
difficult tasks.
The three briefings show that each of the three
Committees has reached a significant level of work in
its area of activity. In particular, they show that the
Security Council is maintaining a constant and
legitimate vigilance with respect to an equally constant
threat.
This meeting is being held a few days after the
worldwide commemoration of Anti-Terrorism Day,
which is observed every 21 May in memory of all the
innocent victims of this scourge throughout the world.
The commemoration of that day shows — as if it were
necessary — that the threat of terrorism must always
be taken very seriously and that any solution to that
threat must be transnational.
That is why my delegation notes with interest the
ongoing efforts of our Committees to encourage
Member States to effectively implement the various
counter-terrorism resolutions. It is true that that effort
is long-term and has not yet had all the results we had
expected, but any progress in this regard — modest
though it might be — must be taken fully into account.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our appeal for
even more sustained assistance to States that are late in
submitting their reports and in acceding to or ratifying
the international counter-terrorism instruments.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
strengthening of the dialogue with Member States, as
recommended by the Chair of the 1267 Committee,
through field visits and meetings with regional or
subregional organizations to create active partnerships
in the area of sanctions implementation, with, of
course, all the necessary precautions involving the
issue of list revision and taking into account provisions
concerning the legal and humanitarian aspects.
We are also pleased to learn that the CounterTerrorism Committee will hold, at a place to be
determined, its fifth special meeting on a very
important subject: preventing terrorism and ensuring
effective border security. We are certain that that
awareness-raising effort will greatly help to improve
the performance of all parties interested in the task of
counter-terrorism.
However, with regard to the 1267 Committee, my
delegation continues to stress the need to update lists,
taking into account all matters of interest to Member

States and others, and, as we have said, to ensure that
human rights and legal protections prevail. The 1267
Committee must be able to provide Member States
with the information to which they are entitled
concerning persons whose names are listed and
anything relevant to their listing or delisting. In that
context, we fully support the Chair of the 1540
Committee in his objective of strengthening
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations with a view to the implementation of that
important resolution.
The work programmes of the three Committees
highlight the need to better coordinate the activities of
their expert groups in order to create genuine synergies
in their efforts vis-à-vis Member States; hence the need
to identify best practices through the expert groups and
to make those practices available to States that need
them most.
In that regard, the websites of the three
Committees, whose services have been improved, are
an effective means for communication and the
exchange of information.
Resolution 1673 (2006), of 27 April 2006, renews
the mandate of the 1540 Committee and opens up new
perspectives for it that require further support from all
Council members. That is why my delegation hopes
that the donor conference soon to be held in Geneva —
on 5 and 6 June 2006 — on the implementation of that
resolution will have all the support expected.
Finally, we reaffirm our support for the Chairs of
the three Committees and wish them every success in
their missions to ensure the success of our common
fight against the scourge of terrorism.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.
First of all, I would like to thank the Chairpersons
of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive and
informative briefings. The European Union welcomes
today’s joint briefing as an important contribution to

25

S/PV.5446

strengthen the acceptance, legitimacy and transparency
of the Security Council’s efforts in the field of counterterrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.
Terrorism is a threat to all States and to all
peoples. Terrorism knows no borders. It is a global
threat that requires a global and comprehensive
response. In the global fight against terrorism, the
United Nations has a unique role to play. The 13
universal United Nations conventions and protocols
against terrorism, together with Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and
1624 (2005) and other relevant resolutions, provide the
legal framework for multilateral action against
terrorism. The European Union continues to be
committed to reaching agreement on a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism during the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly, in order to
achieve the objectives agreed at the 2005 world
summit.
It is also imperative that the United Nations and
its Member States continue to show their unity and
resolve in their fight against terrorism by adopting and
implementing without delay a global counter-terrorism
strategy based on the elements and recommendations
contained in the recent report of the Secretary-General.
The strategy should be operational and action-oriented.
It should focus on capacity-building, coordination and
cooperation and should involve all relevant actors,
namely, Member States, the United Nations, all 23
bodies and organizations in the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, civil
society and the public at large. As highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s report, we believe that the Security
Council and its committees have a key role to play in
the global fight against terrorism.
Turning to the work of the three Committees, the
European Union reaffirms the importance of respect for
international law — in particular human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law,
including due process and the rule of law — in the
fight against terrorism, which is a prerequisite for
making that fight both legitimate and effective.
We reiterate the 2005 world summit’s call on the
Security Council to ensure fair and clear procedures for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists and
for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exemptions.

26

The European Union calls upon the 1267
Committee to continue its efforts to further improve
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime, especially
the consolidated list and the Committee’s guidelines.
We expect that the Committee will expeditiously take
up its work on the guidelines dealing with listing and
delisting procedures, as mandated by Security Council
resolution 1617 (2005), while taking into account the
important recommendations in the fourth report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. In
that regard, we note the contributions of some Member
States to that important issue, including an academic
study on strengthening targeted sanctions through clear
and fair procedures that was sponsored by Germany,
Sweden and Switzerland, as well as initiatives by
Council Members such as Denmark and France. We
also note the recent publication of a legal opinion
commissioned by the Office of Legal Affairs on the
website of the United Nations.
In our view, effective listing and delisting
procedures are essential to preserve the legitimacy and
reinforce the efficacy of the United Nations sanctions
regime. A number of cases are currently pending before
various courts, including the European Court of
Justice, that challenge the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime as violating the rights of listed
individuals to a fair trial and to an effective remedy.
We believe that the Security Council should devote
special attention to that matter, as a negative court
ruling would not only put the Member States
concerned in a difficult position but might also call the
whole system of targeted United Nations sanctions into
question.
We would also like to draw attention to the
efforts of the democratically elected Government of
Afghanistan to foster the process of national
reconciliation, which have led it to put forward
requests to the 1267 Committee to delist certain
individuals who hold governmental functions, among
others in key positions at the provincial level. We call
upon the Committee to quickly decide upon those
requests in order to support the process of national
reconciliation as well as the rebuilding and
stabilization efforts of the international community.
The European Union fully supports the latest
work programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
for the period of April to June 2006. We welcome the
goal of the CTC to achieve concrete results with regard
to the revision of the reporting regime, the

S/PV.5446

enhancement of dialogue with Member States and the
deepening of relations with international, regional and
subregional organizations. We note with appreciation
that the Committee intends to shift its focus from
reporting to implementation and to start reflecting on
additional means to address the cases of States that do
not meet the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001),
based on the analysis of country reports provided by
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED).
The European Union supports the steps of the CTC to
encourage States to report on their implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) and reiterates its call upon the
CTC to further intensify its efforts to mainstream
human rights throughout all of its work.
The European Union welcomes the efforts of the
CTC and the CTED to improve the coordination,
coherence and efficiency of the delivery of technical
assistance in the field of counter-terrorism. We
commend the efforts of the CTED to enter into
dialogue with States, and encourage the continuation of
joint visits, including efficient follow-up, together with
other entities of the United Nations system and
regional organizations. In that context, the European
Union reiterates its readiness to continue its
cooperation and participation in CTED visits. We are
also pleased to note the exemplary cooperation
between the CTED, as key facilitator of technical
assistance, and the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as a key
provider of technical assistance to requesting countries
for the ratification and implementation of the 13
universal United Nations conventions and protocols
against terrorism. Finally, we call upon the CTED to
work closely with all technical assistance providers and
to share information that might be helpful to them in
their assistance programmes.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the danger of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, including their means of delivery,
and of their acquisition by non-State actors, in
particular terrorists. The European Union highly
welcomes the recent adoption of resolution 1673
(2006), which extended the mandate of the 1540
Committee for a further period of two years, until April
2008. We commend the Committee and its group of
experts for their comprehensive final report and
recommendations on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), which shall constitute a basis for the
adoption of a comprehensive programme of work

addressing the resolution in all its aspects. We
recognize that the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is a long-term task that will require
continuous efforts at the national, regional and
international levels. In that regard, we note with
concern that, as of today, 57 States have not yet
submitted their first reports. We urge all States which
have not yet done so to submit their reports to the
Committee and reiterate our readiness to consider any
request for assistance or advice to such States as might
be required.
The European Union welcomes the Committee’s
intention to keep the facilitation of further reporting
and the promotion of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) through outreach activities among the top
priorities of its future work. In that regard, we would
like to inform the Council that the European Union will
adopt a joint action to provide support to three regional
seminars in China, Ghana and Peru, which will be
organized by the 1540 Committee in the second half of
this year. We also commend the Committee for the
recent publication on its official website of a
legislative database containing relevant information
about national laws, regulations and other measures
related to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), which will be an important tool for Member
States when enacting national implementation laws and
measures.
Let me conclude by stressing the need for the
United Nations and its Member States to stand united
in a concerted effort to combat the global terrorist
menace we face today. The European Union stands
ready to play its part.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): On
behalf of Germany, Sweden and Switzerland, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting and
for the opportunity to address the Security Council.
I also thank the three chairmen of the committees
for their informative and timely briefings.
Today, I would like to focus on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), which
is currently reviewing the listing and delisting process
with regard to sanctions. I would like to share some
new thoughts and proposals on how to enhance the
effectiveness of targeted sanctions. Although my

27

S/PV.5446

statement will focus on the 1267 Committee, those
reflections are also relevant to other Security Council
sanctions committees.

Finally, it concludes that the aforementioned
issues may infringe upon basic principles of human
rights protection.

On an earlier occasion, I informed the Council of
an initiative launched by Germany, Sweden and
Switzerland in the field of targeted sanctions and
human rights. That initiative is a continuation of the
Interlaken, Bonn-Berlin and Stockholm processes and
aims at strengthening the implementation of targeted
sanctions by addressing concerns of due process.

We believe that the best way forward is reform on
a step-by-step basis. The Security Council and its
committees could start with the most urgent issues and
where progress can be achieved rapidly or at least
within a reasonable time. In our view, that includes the
following elements.

As members know, our three Governments have
commissioned the Watson Institute for International
Studies at Brown University to draft a report on the
subject. We would like to share the report’s content
with the Security Council and Member States with a
view to contributing concrete ideas for strengthening
the instrument of targeted sanctions. To that end, we
have asked for the report to be circulated as an official
United Nations document within the next few weeks.
The written text of my statement that has been
distributed contains a summary of the report and a brief
overview of its recommendations.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the following main findings and recommendations.
First, the report describes the legal challenges
against sanctions measures that have been brought
before various courts in Europe and elsewhere. In the
past, those courts have shown that they were well
aware of the primacy of the United Nations Charter
and the special responsibility of the Security Council.
Nevertheless, some courts have also expressed their
willingness to ensure that Security Council decisions
comply with the compulsory norms of international law
relating to the protection of human rights — the jus
cogens — from which neither the Member States nor
the United Nations may derogate.
Secondly,
the
report
summarizes
the
improvements made over time by the sanctions
committees, particularly by the 1267 Committee, but
concludes that shortcomings remain with regard to
listing, delisting, notification of individuals and
entities, and especially the right to an effective remedy.
Thirdly, it describes the lack of periodic review
of those listed, the limited time to resolve delisting
requests and the open-ended nature of the present
sanctions regimes.

28

First, the listing criteria must be further refined.
In recent years, the scope of targeted sanctions has
been extended considerably to include broad categories
of individuals and entities. Much has already been
done to make the listings as clear and as unambiguous
as possible. We welcome in particular the fact that
Security Council resolution 1617 (2005) has given a
more precise definition of the term “associated with
Al-Qaida or the Taliban”. However, we believe that the
criteria for identifying the individuals or entities
targeted by sanctions could be further developed and
refined.
Second, standards for statements of case must be
developed. The report’s suggestion seems to be very
much in line with the Monitoring Team’s proposal to
introduce a standard cover sheet.
Third, ways to notify targeted persons and
entities should be found. The report argues that the
United Nations has a responsibility to notify the targets
of sanctions, and it presents several ideas on how to do
so.
Fourth, a periodic review of listings, at least
every two years, should be introduced. Excessively
long intervals between reviews tend to change the
preventive character of sanctions into permanent
punishment, which could be very difficult for national
or international courts to accept in the long run.
Fifth, an administrative focal point should be
designated within the Secretariat to deal with all
delisting and exemption requests, as well as to notify
targets of listing. That proposal was put forward some
time ago by a member of the Security Council. It has
our full support.
Sixth, much could also be gained from
identifying a set of common standards and best
practices applicable to the different sanctions
committees.

S/PV.5446

Seventh, a review mechanism should be
developed to enable individuals and entities to ask for
a review of their listing. That step is likely to pose the
biggest challenge. However, we believe that this is the
most important issue to address, because the lack of
such a review mechanism raises questions of due
process and it is the deficiency that is most often
brought up in courts. The Watson Institute’s report lists
several options to be considered, ranging from a simple
reviewing mandate assigned to the Monitoring Team to
a full-fledged appeal system by independent courts or
tribunals.
Germany, Sweden and Switzerland wish to
pursue the dialogue on this important matter with the
Security Council and its subsidiary organs. We are
committed to strengthening the Security Council’s
instruments to fight terrorism in conformity with the
very principles on which this Organization is founded.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): First, Sir, I would like to commend you for
your work as President of the Security Council during
the month of May. I would also thank the Chairmen of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for the
information provided.
For more than 45 years, the Cuban people has
been the target of countless terrorist actions, most of
them masterminded and organized from United States
territory, with the support, protection and funding of
the successive Governments of that country. As a result
of those acts, the Cuban people has paid a high cost in
human lives. A total of 3,478 people have died, while
2,099 have been severely injured. The economic losses
for Cuba have also been very high. With full impunity,
funds to carry out terrorist actions are provided and
collected in Miami and other cities of that country. The
bank accounts that finance terrorism are openly and
regularly operated, terrorists are recruited, weapons
purchased and the territory is used by those who
finance, mastermind and commit terrorist acts against
Cuba. Instead of preventing and punishing terrorism
against Cuba, the United States authorities hold
hostage in that country’s jails Gerardo Hernández,
Ramón Labañino, Fernando González, Antonio
Guerrero and René González. This follows the
unanimous decision of the Court of Appeals of the

Eleventh Circuit of Atlanta to reverse their sentences
and order a new trial, overturning the trial held by a
crooked Miami-based court, without the guaranties of
due process. Those five Cuban youths were only
trying, with great altruism and courage, to obtain
information about terrorist groups based in Miami in
order to prevent their violent actions and to save lives
of Cuban and United States citizens.
New evidence has been revealed about United
States double standards in its so-called fight and
international campaign against terrorism, as well as
acts of this nature against the Cuban people.
The United States continues to fail to meet
international obligations of judging and extraditing the
infamous international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles,
whose extradition has been requested by the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
This terrorist’s impunity is perpetuated by
judging him as a mere illegal immigrant, despite the
fact that the United States Government itself has
acknowledged that he is a dangerous terrorist. That fact
was acknowledged in a letter sent to him in March by
the United States Bureau of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement. The letter stated, inter alia, that due to
his long record of criminal activities and acts of
violence, which caused the death of innocent civilians,
releasing him would mean a risk for the community
and the national security of the United States.
After 13 months of silence with regard to the
Cuban Government’s inquiries, Federal Bureau of
Investigation documents were disclosed on 22 April
which proved the complicity of the United States
authorities with the illegal entry of Posada Carriles in
the territory of the United States on board the boat
Santrina, property of the notorious terrorist Santiago
Álvarez Fernández Magriña. For several months, the
United States Government denied knowledge of Posada
Carriles’ entry into its territory, in spite of the fact that
it is now clear that the United States was aware of this
from the beginning, since an undercover FBI agent
travelled on board the Santrina.
If the Government was aware of this, why was
Posada Carriles not arrested until several months later?
Why were charges not presented immediately against
the other terrorists that helped Mr. Posada Carriles
enter illegally into that country, such as Santiago
Álvarez and Osvaldo Mitat, who are currently in jail

29

S/PV.5446

for arms smuggling and very serious violations of
United States security laws?

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.

Another example which proves the legitimacy of
Cuba’s denunciations was the reported arrest in Los
Angeles, California, on 19 April, of Cuban-born citizen
Robert Ferro. He had in his house an outrageous total
of 1,571 fire arms, including anti-missile weapons and
hand grenades, which were hidden in secret caches and
rooms. After his arrest, Ferro declared he was a
member of the anti-Cuban terrorist organization Alpha
66 and that he had a group of 100 members in
California and Miami ready and trained to carry out
actions against the Cuban Government. Ferro also said
to the press that some of the weapons had secretly been
provided by the United States Government with the
aim of overthrowing Fidel Castro.

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank the Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the 1267 Committee and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their briefings this morning. I would also
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism and to join all States in the
unequivocal condemnation of all terrorist acts,
irrespective of their motivation, wherever and by
whomever committed.

It is public knowledge that Robert Ferro, owner
of the arsenal, worked for the Central Intelligence
Agency and was an officer in the United States army’s
Special Forces.
Cuba has informed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), established under resolution 1373
(2001), in detail concerning the terrorist actions of
these and other individuals and organizations, as well
as about the protection afforded to accomplices by the
Government of the United States. To date, we have no
indication that the CTC has taken any action to
evaluate the information submitted or to undertake an
investigation on the breach of the obligations of the
United States pursuant to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001).
The Cuban Government reiterates its request to
the Committee to carry out an evaluation of the
information presented, inter alia, in documents
S/2002/15, S/2004/753 and S/2005/341, thus
contributing to putting an end to the impunity that
those who have carried out terrorist actions against
Cuba enjoy in United States territory.
It is impossible to eradicate terrorism if only
some terrorist actions are condemned while others are
hushed up, tolerated or justified, or if the issue is
simply manipulated in order to promote certain
political interests. In order to make progress, all
hegemonic intentions and acts of aggression must be
condemned and eliminated. In all honesty, all forms
and manifestations of terrorism must be condemned
and punished anywhere in the world. State terrorism
must be no exception under any circumstances.

30

We are very pleased to see that the CTC and its
Executive Directorate (CTED) are making further
progress in refining their approaches to monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We agree
that the CTC should take a more tailor-made approach
in monitoring implementation, and encourage the
Committee to deepen its dialogue with Member States
beyond mere reporting. Liechtenstein has just
submitted our fifth report to the CTC and stands ready
to continue its cooperation with it. We are also grateful
for the continuation of the practice of informal
briefings for Member States on the work of the
Committee.
Once again, we would like to focus our comments
today on the mandate given by the 2005 world summit
to ensure that fair and clear procedures exist for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists and
for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exemptions. The 1267 Committee has
been dealing with this issue for quite some time now.
In the meantime, several studies have been produced
on this question which underline the need for urgent
action by the Security Council.
Like previous speakers, we commend, in
particular, the study produced by the Watson Institute
for International Studies. The Monitoring Team of the
1267
Committee
has
also
made
valuable
recommendations. We call on the Council to give
serious consideration to the many proposals made to
improve the listing and de-listing procedures. There is
no doubt that United Nations organs, when imposing
measures that have a direct and dramatic impact on the
rights of individuals, must respect international
standards of human rights in a similar manner as States
would have to.

S/PV.5446

The work undertaken by the United Nations over
the last six decades to ensure that Governments respect
human rights would suffer a great setback were we to
allow the Organization to treat individuals in a manner
which it would qualify as impermissible by States. We
welcome Security Council action against terrorism,
which is based on a modern interpretation of what the
Charter means by the maintenance of international
peace and security. It must, however, go hand in hand
with an equally modern interpretation of international
human rights law.
Future listing and de-listing procedures must,
therefore, as an absolute minimum, grant targeted
individuals and entities the right to be informed about
the measures imposed and the reasons for their
imposition, as well as the right to present information
that might refute the case for listing. Furthermore, we
urge the Council to consider procedures that could be
considered an effective remedy or those that would at
least entail a similar effect. Any such improvements
would be highly beneficial for both the accuracy and
legitimacy of the sanctions regime and, therefore, for
its effectiveness. Finally, it must be stressed that any
such improvements must also extend, as far as
appropriate, to the so-called humanitarian exemptions.
Liechtenstein welcomes the extension of the 1540
Committee, as mandated by resolution 1673 (2006).
We have submitted our first report in a timely manner
and also provided the Committee with updated
information. In fact, the 1540 Committee and its
experts have been highly effective in their dialogue
with Member States and have established good
practices that can be beneficial for other Committees as
well. In this context, we would like to express our
support for measures aimed at consolidating the work
of various subcommittees dealing with counterterrorism. Such measures should make the United
Nations response to terrorism more coherent and more
effective and should focus on building State capacity.
This chain against terrorism, which we have been
building over the last years, will only be as strong as
its weakest link.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Israel, to whom I give
the floor.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership of the
Council during the month of May and for convening

this important meeting. We also wish to thank the
Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Al-Qaida Committee and the 1540 Committee for their
concise reports and invaluable contribution in steering
their Committees in this vital task.
Three months ago, in a similar briefing before the
Council, I warned that terrorism is sowing the seeds of
the first world war of the twenty-first century. Today
we must sadly and emphatically state that terrorism is
indeed the third world war. This is “World War Three”.
No country is immune from international
terrorism. It lurks in dark corners and strikes the blow
of destruction, death, indiscrimination and chaos.
Terrorists have executed horrific attacks in Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, Russia,
Saudi Arabia and Turkey. Terror has struck in Jordan,
Kenya, Tanzania, Tunisia, Uzbekistan and Yemen.
Terror has devastated Algeria, Argentina, Colombia,
Great Britain, the Philippines, Spain and the United
States. It continues to strike brutally, ruthlessly and
daily in Israel. There are many, many more States
targeted. And yet, foreigners targeted in terrorist
attacks represent an even wider circle of victims. The
victims were Australians. They were Dutch. They were
from each and every corner of the globe. They were
just unlucky enough to be at the wrong place at the
wrong time. We are linked, and we are all in this
together.
As this is a world war, the allies should fight this
axis of terror, just as 60 years ago the Allies fought the
Axis. To paraphrase Winston Churchill, never before in
the field of human conflict have so few inflicted so
much pain, horror, and destruction on so many. And
yet, never before have so many had the ability to defeat
the few if they only would mobilize their resources to
do so. If we do not stand together, we will fall together.
The world is no longer divided merely between rich
and poor or North and South. It is divided between
those who join in this fight and those who do not. It is
divided between those who spread evil and those who
do good; between those who incite violence and those
who preach tolerance. Those who stand idly and do not
fight this plague are in effect joining in collaboration
with it. Unfortunately, even in this Council we
sometimes find members that, despite being victims of
terror themselves, do not always show the courage and
determination even to condemn it strongly and
unequivocally.

31

S/PV.5446

I called the Council to arms and sounded a wakeup call three months ago; yet progress is far too slow
and too little. We must join together and win this war.
We must mobilize in a unified, concerted effort.
There can never be any justification for terror, no
matter the motive — period. We, therefore, fully
support the statement agreed upon in the 2005 world
summit outcome document, which reads,
“We strongly condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes,
as it constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security.” (General
Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 81)
No matter where it occurs, no matter the
circumstances, nothing can ever justify the wilful
targeting of civilians. Terror is terror is terror.
Israel welcomes the invaluable efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, the Al-Qaida Committee and the 1540
Committee in combating international terrorism. We
see the work of the Committees as part of the
international fight against terrorism and hope their
efforts will lead to a significant reduction of
international terror. Similarly, and very importantly, a
global strategy to counter terrorism, should it be
action-oriented and concrete, could complement these
efforts.
We in Israel, unfortunately, have an intimate
awareness of the need to fight international terrorism.
The axis of terror represents an unholy alliance of Iran,
the greatest State sponsor of terrorism and the largest
threat to international peace and security; Syria, which
hosts the headquarters of terrorist organizations
dedicated to wreaking havoc in the streets of Israel and
murdering as many individuals as possible; and the
terror organizations themselves.
A dark cloud is looming over the Middle East
and, indeed, the world. Iran, Syria and the terror
organizations they finance, harbour, nurture and
support, do not discriminate between their victims,
targeting innocents wherever they are, and in their trail
of terror kill Jews, Christians, Muslims and Druze,
Americans and Frenchmen and whoever happens to be
unlucky enough to be in their path. As the Foreign
Minister of the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority,
Mahmoud Zahar, recently stated, suicide terrorism

32

represents the realization of the ultimate dream of the
Palestinians. It is, indeed, a sad reality that the
Palestinians who went to the polls seeking a better life
and an end to corruption, find themselves in the grip of
a terrorist organization that is turning their dreams into
nightmares.
Unfortunately, there still exist elements that
believe that terrorism is a tool to fulfil political aims.
To that suggestion, the international community should
respond with a resounding “No”. That fanatic outlook
is anathema to the principles of peace and human
dignity and all that the United Nations stands for.
The axis of terror is alive and active. Leaders of
Hamas meet regularly with, and have been offered
financial assistance by, the President of Iran — the
very same President who calls for the annihilation of
another State Member of this Organization and denies
the Holocaust while attempting to develop the nuclear
capabilities to perpetrate the next one.
Just 48 hours ago, we witnessed how volatile the
situation is on Israel’s northern border, where Iran uses
Hizbollah to fight its war by proxy. With Iran and
Syria’s active support, Hizbollah perpetrated a
Katyusha rocket terrorist attack deep into northern
Israel, which resulted in an extensive exchange of fire
along the Lebanese border. We not only hold the
Government of Lebanon fully responsible for all the
terrorist activity initiated from its territory, but also
hold fully responsible the Governments of Iran and
Syria for harbouring and supporting Hizbollah and
other terrorist organizations. We expect the
international community to enforce Security Council
resolutions 425 (1978), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006)
in full.
As a result of the active collaboration between
Iran, Syria and their terrorist cronies, thousands of
innocent people have lost their lives, and the lives of
many more have been forever changed as a result of
wounds sustained from terror attacks. Indeed, more
than 24,500 terrorist attacks have been perpetrated
against the Israeli people during the current period. The
threat of terrorism is real and pressing, and we in Israel
face it every day, in every community. It is faced by
every single person. That horrific number is a
horrendous statistic of the wave of terror that is
sweeping the world while this third world war is
raging.

S/PV.5446

We will meet here again in three months’ time. If
all we do then is add the names of the hundreds more
victims and scores of countries hit, we will have failed
miserably. It is our moral duty and an urgent
responsibility to mobilize today. We owe it to our
children and grandchildren to fight this world war, so
that when we next meet we can declare substantial
progress, if not ultimate victory.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Ukraine, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the GUAM-participating States —
the Republic of Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine.
Since the attack of 11 September 2001, which
visited upon us an unthinkable dimension of terrorism,
many countries, cities and towns, including Bali,
Riyadh, Jakarta, Russia, Madrid, London, Sharm elSheikh, Dahab and — repeatedly — Iraq, as well as
many other sites all over the world, have fallen prey to
a brand of terrorism that operates in global networks.
Those tragedies prove that no State is immune from the
threat of terrorism. It is only through the concerted
efforts of the international community as a whole that
we will be able to effectively withstand that challenge.
Only a strong coalition of nations based on shared
principles and values and, of course, on the Charter of
the United Nations, can — as we must — resolutely
rebuff the terrorists’ aspirations and plans.
The Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) have made a fruitful contribution to fighting the
scourge of terrorism. We believe that they are
accomplishing their various mandates. The Committees
should continue their efforts to increase cooperation
and coordination among themselves and their experts
in monitoring the implementation of the respective
Security Council resolutions, as well as with regard to
information-sharing and visits to various countries
The GUAM countries welcome the efforts of the
1267 Committee to further improve the AlQaida/Taliban sanctions regime, and commend the role
of the 1540 Committee and its group of experts to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We consider the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s activities in providing the information on

available assistance programmes to be one of its main
contributions to the fight against terrorism. We expect
the Committees to continue their work, as mandated by
the Security Council.
In our view, the CTC is unique. The character and
scope of its mandate and working methods represent an
important innovation and open possibilities for interState cooperation. I would like to take this opportunity
to express GUAM’s full support for the CounterTerrorism Committee’s programme of further
activities. It is important that the Committee continue
to provide all possible assistance to the multinational
anti-terrorist coalition by strengthening, inter alia, the
capacities of the regional organizations and groups, as
many speakers have underlined today.
In this regard, let me stress that GUAM has
actively participated in the consolidation of the efforts
of the international community in the fight against
terrorism. In particular, GUAM has made its own
contribution to the special meetings of the CounterTerrorism Committee with international, regional and
subregional organizations held over the past several
years.
At the recent GUAM summit, which took place
on 22 and 23 May in Kyiv, Ukraine, the heads of State
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine declared the establishment of a
new international organization for democracy and
economic development, which will retain the name
“GUAM”. By signing the Kyiv GUAM summit
communiqué, its members stressed the following
priorities for the international organization in the
future: the strengthening of the values of democracy,
the rule of law, human rights and freedoms, stability
and security, combating international terrorism and
other lofty goals.
The participants in the summit had a high
assessment of the existing level of interaction in
combating terrorism, organized crime, drug trafficking
and other dangerous types of crime. They expressed
their determination to provide a political, legal and
organizational basis for overcoming the challenges of
international terrorism, separatism, intolerance and
extremism.
GUAM attaches great importance to the
strengthening of its legal framework. In that regard, the
Presidents of the GUAM States parties welcomed the
joint statement of the law enforcement authorities of

33

S/PV.5446

GUAM member States signed at Kyiv during the
summit on 22 May 2006 and also the signing by the
heads of those countries’ border services of a protocol
concerning cooperation among the operational bodies
of the border services.
GUAM is continuing to carry out two projects in
the area of counter-terrorism and border security: the
project on the establishment of the GUAM virtual
centre for combating terrorism, organized crime, drug
trafficking and other dangerous crimes; and the project
on the creation of the GUAM inter-State information
management system.
Terrorism is a reprehensible malady of the
present day. If we let it flourish through our hesitation,
it has the potential to undermine the very pillars of our
civilization. The United Nations and its Security
Council constitute the basis for our collective efforts to
fight this threat as a transnational phenomenon. GUAM
stands ready to further enhance its capacities in order
to make its contribution to our common goal. We thus
look forward to the speedy adoption and
implementation of a global strategy against terrorism to
promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent
responses at the national, regional and international
levels, as mandated by the world summit.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mrs. Núñez de Odremán (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like at the
outset to thank the representative of the Republic of the
Congo for convening this meeting of great importance
for the international community. We also wish to thank
the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
for the information they have presented today.
Terrorism in all its forms — particularly State
terrorism — is a grave threat to international peace and
security, including to the very coexistence of the
community of nations. We wish to reaffirm the position
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela: we condemn
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, by
whomsoever and against whomsoever committed.
In its firm resolve to fight terrorism, our
Government
has
ratified
many
international
conventions in this area. At the domestic level, we have
developed a broad set of counter-terrorism laws and

34

have created a national counter-terrorism authority.
Thus, we have complied in a committed, responsible
and consistent manner with our obligations in this
field. We have also regularly submitted the relevant
reports to the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee and to the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism. With the same conviction and
perseverance with which we are fighting this scourge,
we wish to express our condemnation and repudiation
of the use of terrorism as a political instrument for the
outright killing or intimidation of innocent, weak and
helpless people anywhere in the world.
In the fight against terrorism, the international
community has no other choice but to work together
and to adopt policies aimed at combating this scourge
in order to mete out effective justice. Policies
employing double standards compromise the
credibility, trustworthiness and good name of any
organization or State that deliberately uses such
policies to elude terrorism, particularly State terrorism.
At present, penalties against acts of terrorism
committed by the armed forces of a State are
insufficient under the norms provided by international
humanitarian law. The so-called collateral damage of
today’s military actions is not really collateral damage,
but rather principal damage, every time innocent men,
women and children are killed. Moreover, in the
current asymmetrical war, the concept of collateral
damage of military action makes no sense, since the
most powerful State is confronting an entire people.
Acts of mass destruction produced by weapons of mass
destruction are directed against people without any
distinction. That enables us to describe such acts as
State terrorism pure and simple. Examples abound,
such as the terrorist actions carried out by the
Government of the United States of America against
Nicaragua or the current case of the people of Iraq.
However, what is regulated and considered
inadmissible is support in any form for entities or
individuals who participate in terrorist acts or provide
safe haven for those who commit such acts. Such
support would be in flagrant non-compliance with
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). In paragraphs
2 (c) and 3 (g) of that resolution, States are prohibited
from offering safe haven to those who commit acts of
terrorism and from recognizing claims of political
motivation as grounds for refusing requests for the
extradition of alleged terrorists. Here too, examples
abound. Public opinion is aware of the protection that

S/PV.5446

the Government of the United States of America is
providing to one of the most infamous terrorists in the
Western hemisphere, Luis Posada Carriles, a wellknown assassin on the CIA’s payroll.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sadeghi
(Islamic Republic of Iran) and Mr. Alhariri
(Syrian Arab Republic) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

Another case worth mentioning in this Chamber
is that, on 15 March 2004, a formal extradition request
was made for the citizens José Antonio Pulido and
German Varela López, accused in Venezuelan courts of
having planted explosive devices in diplomatic
headquarters of Spain and Colombia. On 28 April
2006, the current United States authorities granted
those terrorists freedom within United States territory.
The current Government of the United States has not
responded to the request made by the Venezuelan
judicial system to extradite — in compliance with
existing treaties and international law — those citizens
accused of carrying out terrorist acts in Venezuela and
to bring them to justice for their actions. On the
contrary, it is protecting them with baseless excuses
that are indefensible in the eyes of the international
community.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

The double standards with which this subject is
being addressed are obvious. Will the following
questions remain unanswered? Who is the terrorist?
Who is the destabilizer? Who does not implement its
national counter-terrorism laws or even international
agreements when it is convenient?
Finally, our Government, which is committed to
the true fight against terrorism and does not justify any
form of terrorism, formally requests that the item of
State terrorism and the consideration of actions by the
international community against such cases as the
United States of America, which we consider to be
dangerous to our peoples, be included in this meeting
and subsequent deliberations of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
Syrian Arab Republic, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Alhariri (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to
commend your leadership of the Security Council for
this month. My delegation would also like to join
others in thanking Ambassadors Løj, Mayoral and
Burian for their briefings to the Security Council this
morning.
Syria would like to reaffirm its condemnation of
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism. Syria has
been a victim of horrific acts of terrorism, and was
among the first countries to sound the warning of that
looming danger. Syria has called for national and
international strategies to combat terrorism. Syria has
also shared its experience in combating terrorism with
many countries of the world, which has contributed to
saving the lives of many innocent persons of various
nationalities and to breaking up many international
terrorist cells.
Syria is implementing its commitments vis-à-vis
the Consolidated List. The relevant authorities have
incorporated names on the List into the electronic entry
control system at all Syrian border control posts, in
addition to distributing those names in hard copy.
We note with appreciation that the 1267
Committee is making great efforts to carry out its
mandate. Nevertheless, despite those efforts, the
Security Council has yet to seriously take up the
reference by the General Assembly in last September’s
World Summit Outcome to the need for fairness in
dealing with the issues of listing, delisting and
amending the Consolidated List and making exceptions
to it. That is in addition to the problems encountered in
the implementation of the provisions of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council — especially the
great gaps that exist with regard to identifying
elements for a number of names on the list, and in
particular the fact that many names are similar and
some are repeated and that spelling is not standardized.
The time has come for a comprehensive review to
update the List and to eliminate all doubt as to the
information it contains.

35

S/PV.5446

Syria notes the efforts being made by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to deal with the backlog of State reports. We
call for further efforts to fully eliminate the backlog of
such reports. Syria will soon present its fifth report to
the CTC, which will include the latest legislative steps
taken by Syria with regard to its national law to combat
terrorism and its financing. Let me also point to the
burden faced by States, including mine, in responding
to the many reporting requirements.
I would like to say that the body created under
the law to combat money laundering and the financing
of terrorism is taking a very active and effective role,
especially in opening up the banking sector and in the
future establishment of a stock market in Syria. That
body has also held a number of workshops, in
cooperation with various international bodies,
including the World Bank. A regional conference for
the Middle East and North Africa was held in
Damascus entitled “Development of an effective
system to combat money laundering and the financing
of terrorism”. The Arab Banking Union, in cooperation
with Syria’s central bank, held a seminar on combating
the financing of terrorism and money laundering.
Moreover, the Middle East and North Africa Financial
Action Task Force has also expressed its satisfaction
with Syrian transparency in the area of combating
terrorism, as well as with our country’s full
commitment to implement the recommendations of the
Task Force.
The anti-terrorism financing and money
laundering body is also signing memorandums of
understanding in order to share information with a
number of other States. That body has also requested
membership in the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units, and will attend the Group’s next
meeting, to be held in Cyprus in mid-June, as an
observer.
With regard to the work of the 1540 Committee,
we continue to believe that that Committee’s work can
in no way be seen as an alternative to the various
international disarmament mechanisms. We must avoid
attempting to inject the Security Council into the
activities of the General Assembly. I should also add
that we have submitted our report under that resolution.
Syria has also responded to further questions by the
Committee. Those clarifications also referred to the
fact that the law on combating terrorism and money

36

laundering includes language criminalizing any trade
in radioactive materials.
Syria is committed to cooperating with various
Security Council bodies on terrorism. We are making
sincere efforts to update our domestic legislation and to
establish effective ways to combat terrorism. We also
welcome the coordinating efforts of the three
Committees to implement their mandates. We call upon
them to avoid duplication and to streamline the many
reporting requirements, as called for at September’s
Summit. We also call on the Committees to avoid
duplication of the efforts being made by the General
Assembly, which is the sole legislative authority of the
United Nations.
In dealing with international terrorism, which
does in fact threaten international peace and security,
we call upon the Security Council to avoid intervening
in matters that fall strictly within the purview of the
General Assembly — especially as regards legislative
matters, for that would affect the legal nature of
Security Council measures and open the way to the
possibility of appealing against them.
The Arab region is suffering from terrorism in
general, and from State terrorism in particular, as
represented by the terrorism of Israel, which continues
to occupy Arab lands, to kill Palestinian citizens and to
destroy their property and to build a wall of separation
of Palestinian land. While noting the role of the
Security Council in international efforts to combat
global terrorism, we call on the States members of the
Security Council to avoid double standards in fighting
terrorism. Combating terrorism must be based on strict
legal criteria, and not on flimsy political
considerations.
In that regard, I must stress that Israel is dutybound to cease its cheap blackmail against the United
Nations. Israel is well aware that the international
community knows about the terrorist acts it has
perpetrated since coming to the region. Its gangs have
assassinated many international personalities, including
those sent by the United Nations to investigate the
situation in the region. Everyone is aware of the fact
that the source of terrorism in the region is Israel’s
continuing occupation of Arab lands, the ejection of
Palestinians from their land, the confiscation of that
land and Israel’s ongoing aggression against Arabs and
its denial of their basic rights.

S/PV.5446

The important point is that, in his statement, the
representative of Israel referred to and insisted on the
need to implement resolutions 1680 (2006) and 1559
(2004). I should like the statement we made to the
sponsors of those resolutions when they were
introduced to be clearly reflected in the records of the
Security Council. We said that the objective of the
resolutions was to serve the regional interests and
agenda of Israel and its supporters and not the cause of
peace and security in the Middle East.
The representative of Israel did not mention
Israel’s huge nuclear arsenal. He seeks to confuse the
legitimate rights of those living under occupation and
whose lands have been usurped with the rights of those
who perpetrate terrorism. Perhaps he should read the
United Nations Charter, which was drafted to save
generations from the scourge of war and from foreign
occupation. Those who are ignorant of these facts may
be illiterate, and if they are illiterate they ought not to
be here at the United Nations.
I will be brief. Israel’s terrorism is known to all.
Most regrettably, Israel can fool some people some of
the time; however, it cannot fool everyone all of the
time. Occupation is rejected. Right is might, and it is
the legitimate right of all people to combat occupation.
Neither Israel nor anyone else can prevent peoples
under occupation from resisting it.
Syria believes that the United Nations is a unique
framework for strengthening collective action towards
cooperation between all States to combat terrorism and
to identify its root causes. My delegation attaches the
utmost importance to the efforts of the General
Assembly to update international counter-terrorism
conventions and to ensure the discharge by all States of
their international obligations. In that regard, I would
stress that we shall effectively cooperate in
forthcoming discussions to establish a comprehensive
strategy to combat international terrorism.
We believe that any comprehensive strategy must
recognize certain basic elements, most important of
which are a clear and accurate definition of terrorism
and the need to address its fundamental roots,
particularly foreign occupation. The struggle against
terrorism must not be exploited for political ends. We
must therefore differentiate between criminal terrorism
and the rights of peoples under occupation and foreign
hegemony to struggle towards their independence and
self-determination. We believe that the strategy must

target terrorism perpetrated by individuals, groups and
States, and we therefore feel that State terrorism must
be addressed by the comprehensive strategy.
We look forward to the best possible
implementation by the three committees of their
mandates in order to enhance international cooperation,
promote international peace and security, and eliminate
all sources of tension in our world.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): May I
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your skilful
presidency of the Security Council and on your
professional stewardship of its work for this month. I
also commend your predecessor, Ambassador Wang
Guangya of China, for his commendable presidency of
the Council last month.
I would also like to thank the Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their
praiseworthy work and for their comprehensive
briefings to us today. My thanks also go to the vicechairmen, members and experts of the Committees,
particularly the members and head of the Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee, for their dedicated
efforts to implement the tasks assigned to those
important Committees.
The fight against terrorism remains a priority for
the international community. The role of the United
Nations in addressing that menace is of great
magnitude, and the important contribution that the said
Committees can and should make to tackle that
problem deserves recognition and appreciation. Iran
remains fully committed to cooperating with the
Committees in fulfilling the important tasks with which
they have been entrusted. In the past four years, three
visits have been paid to the Islamic Republic of Iran by
the Chairman of the 1267 Committee and by the 1267
Committee’s Monitoring Team. Moreover, Iran has
furnished the said Committees with the required
reports and is in the process of finalizing its fifth
national report to be sent to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.
As a victim of terrorism, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has always strongly condemned terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and has demonstrated its
strong resolve to fight terrorism by all means,

37

S/PV.5446

including by arresting one of the greatest number of
Al-Qaida members apprehended by any single State
and handing them over to the authorities of their
respective countries in the past four or five years. In
that context, Iran has intensified its control over and
security at its borders with a view to preventing the
entry of terrorists into or transit from its territory.
Moreover, and aware of the indisputable mutually
reinforcing connections between terrorism —
particularly that of Al-Qaida and the Taliban — and
drug-trafficking, Iran has fought a costly war against
that menace, on which Al-Qaida feeds. Here, I would
like to emphasize that, as also indicated in the reports
of the 1267 Committee, the efforts of the international
community in fighting terrorism, particularly the
threats posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban, will not
yield the expected results unless adequate attention is
also given to the menace of drug-trafficking, which
serves as the main financial feeding ground for that
terrorist group. Indeed, Iran has shouldered the burden
almost single-handedly thus far. Therefore, the
contribution and attention of the whole international
community to that important aspect of fighting AlQaida and the Taliban are unquestionably needed.
Terrorism is a serious threat and a global menace.
The increasing insecurity and the escalation of acts of
violence and terrorism perpetrated by malicious
terrorists in different parts of the world — including
the heinous and unspeakable terrorist acts in Iraq and
also the daily, cold-blooded State terrorism practiced
by the Israeli regime in Palestinian territories — are of
serious concern to the international community.
Terrorism is a perverted product of the mentality
espoused by some State and non-State actors, which
glorifies military might as the source of legitimacy and
denigrates the principles of international law, ethics
and morality as cumbersome constrictions on the
exercise of power. Terrorism can and must be
destroyed first and foremost by reversing the logic of
violence and coercion and changing those mentalities.
The
United
Nations
counter-terrorism
mechanisms are the embodiment of our forces, joined
under the umbrella of the United Nations, to eradicate
the menace of terrorism, and have thus far registered
commendable achievements. Yet, the international
community’s efforts to eradicate terrorism have faced
some hurdles along the way that need to be addressed
appropriately. For instance, an opposing unilateralist
trend has, from the very beginning of this effort,

38

threatened to halt the momentum and shatter the
universal consensus, thus undermining the overall and
effective fight against terrorism.
Moreover, while the decisive stage in the war
against terrorism is that of capturing the minds and
hearts of peoples, the abuse of the fight against
terrorism by some demagogues to spread hatred and
bigotry among various cultures and religions, and their
efforts to demonize and defame certain religions or
cultures by the unfair and unfounded attribution of
terrorism to them, may in fact prove to be no less
serious in their gravity than terrorism itself. In its
endeavours to fight terrorism, the United Nations
should also consider proper mechanisms to rescue the
much-abused term of terrorism from those countries
that unfairly and baselessly use it as a pejorative term
for any other country that dissents from their policies.
We need to recognize that the application of double
standards in dealing with terrorism and terrorist groups
is yet another important matter of grave concern which
seriously undermines the international community’s
collective campaign against terrorism.
In the course of the past three decades, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has been subjected to acts of
terrorism by various terrorist groups. Particular
reference should be made to a terrorist group which has
long been stationed in Iraq and which has planned,
financed, supervised and perpetrated terrorist
operations in Iran. These have resulted in the killing of
many civilians and officials as well as in damage to
private and government property. That terrorist group
was long supported and sheltered by the regime of
Saddam Hussein and ironically continues to enjoy
similar protection from the occupying forces in Iraq
today. During this period, that terrorist organization
has staged more than 612 terrorist operations in Iran or
against Iranian interests outside the country, including
hijackings, abductions, bombings and indiscriminate
terrorist attacks against civilians.
There are also other terrorist groups that have
operated against the Iranian people with the
collaboration of other terrorist organizations and with
the tacit support of some foreign countries. Most
recently, a terrorist group attacked and killed tens of
people in the eastern and south-eastern parts of the
country in an attempt to create an environment of
intimidation and insecurity. We are of the strong view
that there should not be a distinction between different
forms of terrorism. In other words, there are no good

S/PV.5446

and bad terrorists or terrorism: terrorism is bad and
should be condemned and combated with no
discrimination.
It is not my intention to take the time of the
Council to respond to some of the baseless and
unworthy allegations raised here against my country by
the representative of the disgraced Israeli regime.
However, I wish to mention the following points. Ever
since its inception, the Israeli regime has been deeply
suffering from a lack of legitimacy. So it is not
surprising that the representative of such a regime,
ruled constantly by those who are culprits of various
crimes against humanity and war crimes, would make
such baseless and fabricated propaganda as a remedy
for the regime’s illegitimacy.
Moreover, it is an open secret that the Israeli
regime has continuously and purposely violated many
international laws and norms, not to mention dozens of
United Nations resolutions, including Security Council
resolutions. The response of that irresponsible regime
has been nothing but complete defiance. In that
context, particular reference can be made to the
mischievous policy of the Israeli regime on the nuclear
issue, which is a showcase for its concealment and its
unabated pursuit of a nuclear arsenal in recent decades.
It is indisputable that this ill-intentioned policy has
been threatening peace and security in the volatile
region of the Middle East and beyond for years. In fact,
the Israeli nuclear danger and missile capability,
coupled with its wicked behaviour, present a real threat
not only to regional peace and security but also to the
whole world. Therefore, this threat needs to be urgently
and decisively addressed by the international
community. Indeed, that regime should face a united
front and must be kept under continuous pressure to
relinquish its terrorist acts and its nuclear programme,
and to place all of its nuclear facilities under
international monitoring.
It is worth mentioning that the only existing
obstacle to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East is the Israeli regime’s nonadherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its continued clandestine
operation of unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, with the
help and technological assistance of a certain State.
The regime has paid no attention to the constant
international call in many forums, and particularly at
the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT,
which called upon that regime by name to accede to the

Treaty immediately and without any conditions.
Moreover, the regime has never been a party to the
international instruments on weapons of mass
destruction,
namely
the
Chemical
Weapons
Convention, the Biological Weapons Convention and
the NPT.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel wishes to make a further
statement, and I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I believe that, before I
made my statement, the representatives of neither Iran
nor Syria were supposed to speak. I would just like
very, very briefly to express my appreciation — which
I hope is shared by members of the Security Council —
for the opportunity afforded to all of us to hear lectures
about terrorism by two of the world’s greatest experts
on that subject.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic wishes to
make a further statement, and I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Alhariri (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to make one brief comment on the
representative of Israel’s statement that we were not
“supposed” to speak. We made our statement under
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
which is perfectly clear, and with the approval of the
Council. I think addressing the Council in the way he
did is evidence of absolute arrogance. If there are
experts on international terrorism, everybody knows
that Israel is “the” expert on international terrorism. It
established a State on the basis of international
terrorism. If there is suffering in the world, it is
because of Israel.
In his statement, the representative of Israel
spoke three times of a third world war. The
Constitution of UNESCO tells us that “wars begin in
the minds of men”, and it appears that this is what is in
the mind of Israel. If we think about this, we will find
the reasons for both the First and the Second World
Wars.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran wishes to
make a further statement, and I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

39

S/PV.5446

Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My first
statement was not, in fact, a response to the first
statement of the representative of Israel, as that
representative said, but this one is indeed a response to
what the representative of Israel just said.
I shall be very brief and will limit my response to
one sentence. What the representative of Israel just
said was a big lie, and it shows that all the other things
they say are the same, the proof being that the

40

secretariat of the Security Council received our letter,
requesting that our delegation be included in the list of
speakers, on Friday.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.10 p.m.
