asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6849

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6849th meeting
Wednesday, 17 October 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Caballeros . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Guatemala)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mrs. Kaur
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security
Peace and justice, with a special focus on the role of the International
Criminal Court
Letter dated 1 October 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Guatemala
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/731)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-55207 (E)

*1255207*

S/PV.6849

The Secretary-General: I thank His Excellency
Minister Harold Caballeros for convening this timely
discussion.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace
and security
Peace and justice, with a special focus on the
role of the International Criminal Court
Letter dated 1 October 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of Guatemala
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/731)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Chile,
Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Ecuador, Estonia,
Finland, Honduras, Japan, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Peru, the Philippines, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Judge Sang-Hyun Song, President
of the International Criminal Court, and Mr. Phakiso
Mochochoko of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/731, which contains a letter dated
1 October 2012 from the Permanent Representative
of Guatemala to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him the
floor.

2

When it comes to peace and justice, we are living
in a new world. Those who contemplate committing
horrific acts that shock the conscience of humankind
can no longer be confident that their heinous crimes
will go unpunished. Rulers and warlords who perpetrate
atrocities can no longer trade their power for amnesty
and then slip away, unpunished, to some safe haven.
We live in an age of accountability. It is an age
in which there is an ever-growing emphasis on the
responsibility of States to end impunity and to prosecute
those responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and other egregious crimes. It is an age in
which United Nations envoys and representatives will
not, as they negotiate and mediate peace agreements,
promote or condone amnesty for genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes or gross violations of
human rights. It is also an age that Security Council has
played a central role in bringing about by establishing
the tribunals for the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and
Lebanon, and the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
At the centre of the new system of international
criminal justice stands the International Criminal
Court (ICC). In that regard, I welcome warmly the
participation of The Honourable Judge Sang-Hyun
Song, President of the International Criminal Court.
Both the Court and the Council are frequently
active in the same situations. The grave crimes that
the ICC deals with threaten, in the words of the Rome
Statute, the peace, security and well-being of the world,
the very peace and security that the Council is charged
to maintain.
It is not surprising, then, to find the Court
investigating, prosecuting and trying situations that are
on the Council’s agenda, such as those concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and
the Lord’s Resistance Army. Of course, the Security
Council has itself referred certain situations on its
agenda to the Court’s Prosecutor, as we saw in the cases
of Darfur and Libya.
However, the Court is not simply an autonomous
international organization. It is also a judicial body,
independent and impartial. Once set in motion, justice
takes its own inexorable course, unswayed by politics.
That is its strength, its distinctive virtue.

12-55207

S/PV.6849

It also, frankly, presents challenges to those who
have to navigate the new environment that is created
when justice enters the scene. When the Court takes
up a situation, whether because of a Security Council
referral or otherwise, the whole landscape changes. It
is likely to keep changing, as cases are investigated,
arrest warrants are issued, suspects are detained and
transferred to The Hague, trials are opened and verdicts
and sentences are handed down.
The Court and Council both operate in that fluid
setting, and both should explore the many ways in
which they can complement and leverage each other’s
work, from prevention to enforcement. In that regard,
the Council, where it has referred a situation to the
Prosecutor, can greatly assist the Court by acting to
secure the necessary level of cooperation from Member
States.
Ten years have passed since the Rome Statute
entered into force and the world’s first permanent
international criminal court became a new part of the
global system. A considerable amount of experience
has been accumulated since that time. We have seen the
value of a Court that pursues justice in all regions. We
have seen how the actions and inaction of the Court and
the Security Council can have an impact on each other.
Most importantly, we have seen how the activities of
each one can assist the other.
Only if perpetrators of grave crimes are prosecuted
and held to account can there be any hope that future
such crimes will be prevented and peace preserved.
Justice is crucial for breaking cycles of violence and
fragility. Even the possibility of ICC engagement in a
given situation can create an incentive to set up local
mechanisms to deliver justice.
That gives the Council a critical role to play when
mandating peacekeeping or special political missions:
to strengthen the national capacity of a country to
prosecute serious crimes. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission has worked with the
national authorities to set up and support prosecution
support cells to investigate and prosecute serious
crimes in the eastern part of the country.
The Court, for its part, can help to strengthen
national responses to serious crimes through the
domestic incorporation of provisions of the Rome
Statute. In addition, its outreach work is intended to
stop cycles of violence from recurring.

12-55207

The Council and the Court can also support
each other in building local justice responses and in
strengthening the rule of law.
The Council and the Court frequently operate in
the same political space. They share a common interest.
The Court can help advance the purposes of the United
Nations — above all, to maintain international peace
and security. The Council, by understanding and
respecting the work of the Court, can advance its own
cause and better discharge its responsibilities
In this new age of accountability, in this period
of growing demands for justice, let us do our utmost
to draw solid lessons from a decade of advances and
challenges. Let us do everything we can to see that the
Council and the Court work together to deliver both
justice and peace. I look forward to a constructive
discussion.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Judge Sang-Hyun Song.
Judge Sang-Hyun Song: It is an honour to have
this opportunity to address the Security Council
on the occasion of the tenth anniversary year of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). This is the first
time that a President of the ICC has been invited to do
so, and I would like to thank the Guatemalan presidency
of the Council for taking this initiative.
Let me apologize in advance if I slightly overstep
the conventional time limit allocated to speakers. I am
afraid I would not be able to limit my statement to 10
minutes even if I were to speak in Gangnam style.
The ICC, together with the Rome Statute that
underpins it, is the realization of a compelling vision
that those responsible for the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community must face
justice. The Rome Statute makes it clear that the
primary responsibility for prosecuting such crimes lies
with States. The ICC is a court of last resort, called on
to act only where States are unable or unwilling to do
so.
The ICC was preceded by several temporary courts
and tribunals, which made a huge contribution to the
development of international criminal law. But the
vision behind the Rome Statute was to have a permanent
court that would be readily available whenever needed.
It would deal with clearly defined crimes, and could
develop over time a unified body of jurisprudence that
3

S/PV.6849

would enhance legal certainty for those affected by its
work.
The Rome Statute establishes a carefully considered
institutional balance within the ICC. There is an
independent Prosecutor, an independent defence and an
independent judiciary. The Prosecutor decides which
cases to pursue, but it is the judges who have the final
say on whether to issue an arrest warrant or summons
to appear, or whether there is sufficient evidence for
charges to proceed to a trial.
Ten years from its foundation, the ICC is fully
functioning at all levels. Judgment was given in our first
trial earlier this year. A second case is close behind,
and several others are at earlier stages in the judicial
process. Our current cases arise from seven distinct
country situations, three of which were referred by the
States themselves and two by the Security Council.
The first 10 years have seen a welcome growth in
international support for the ICC. From the 60 States
parties required to bring the Rome Statute into force a
decade ago, the ICC has grown into a community of 121
States. More are joining every year, the most recent of
which was Guatemala. Each step the ICC takes towards
universality reduces the potential for impunity and
strengthens the prospect of justice for the victims of
terrible crimes.
Today’s discussion is about peace and justice. The
relationship between the two has been the subject of
debate since ancient times in all the world’s cultures,
and continues to be so. We have, however, taken a step
forward in recognizing that we need to pursue both.
One must not override the other.
While the ICC’s contribution is through justice, not
peacemaking, its mandate is highly relevant to peace as
well. The Rome Statute is based on the recognition that
the grave crimes with which it deals threaten the peace,
security and well-being of the world. The Statute’s
objective is to ensure their effective prosecution at the
national or ICC level, putting an end to impunity and
thereby contributing to the prevention of further crimes,
as well as laying the foundation for a sustainable peace.
But I must be clear that, as a judicial institution, the
ICC can work only on the basis of the law. It can pursue
only those cases where it has jurisdiction and where the
Prosecutor can obtain the necessary evidence to justify
criminal proceedings. In dealing with the cases before
them, the parties and the judges make great efforts
to understand conditions on the ground, but can take
4

these into account only insofar as they are relevant to
the factual or legal issues under consideration in the
proceedings. The role of a criminal court is to establish
guilt or innocence in accordance with the law; it is not
for a court to take a view on political or other factors
extraneous to the proceedings.
In saying this, I fully recognize the challenges that
may face the international community over how best to
achieve peace and security in situations in which the
ICC plays a judicial role. In addressing these challenges,
however, it is important to remember that the ICC
does not deal with ordinary crimes. The Rome Statute
crimes are considered to be the gravest in the eyes of
the international community; the victims are often
numbered not in the hundreds but in the thousands, and
the perpetrators therefore carry an especially heavy
burden of personal responsibility for their actions.
That is one of the reasons why the drafters of the
Rome Statute included a provision enabling the Security
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, to refer situations inside or outside the normal
limits of the ICC’s jurisdiction to the Prosecutor. As we
all know, it has done so twice, in relation to Darfur and
Libya. Those referrals have been an important sign of
the growing confidence of the international community
in the ICC. In both instances, however, it is clear that
follow-up to the referrals at the international level has
sometimes been problematic, and the ICC has needed
on occasion to inform the Security Council of specific
instances of non-cooperation.
I will not comment further on the specifics of
those referrals, as the Prosecutor reports to the Council
regularly on them. I would simply like to underline
that, once such a referral is made, the Prosecutor and
the judiciary are bound to act in accordance with the
requirements of the Rome Statute, and to follow the
referral wherever it leads them, in accordance with
those requirements.
If the Prosecutor decides to launch an investigation
and bring charges against individuals, the ICC has to
pursue these proceedings as it would any other active
case.
The Security Council, on the other hand, does
have a potential emergency brake at its disposal if
it considers suspension of ICC action necessary in
order to maintain or restore international peace and
security. Under article 16 of the Rome Statute, the
ICC must comply with a request to defer investigation

12-55207

S/PV.6849

or prosecution made by the Council in a Chapter VII
resolution.
If the ICC is to effectively deal with situations
referred by the Council under Chapter VII, it needs to
be able to count on the full and continuing cooperation
of all United Nations Members, whether they are
parties to the Rome Statute or not. This includes
cooperation not only in investigations and the gathering
of evidence, but also in areas such as the execution of
arrest warrants and tracing the assets of suspects. In
making any future referrals, it would be very helpful
if the Security Council could underline this obligation
of full cooperation, without which it is very difficult
for the ICC to discharge the mandate the Council has
given it.
An area of concern for many ICC States parties
has been the financial implications of these referrals.
This complex issue is principally for United Nations
Members to consider. Clearly, it will be difficult to
sustain a system under which a referral is made by the
Security Council on behalf of the United Nations, but
the costs of any investigation and trial proceedings are
met exclusively by the parties to the Rome Statute.
In this context, I welcome the encouragement
in General Assembly resolution 66/262 of voluntary
contributions by United Nations Members to help meet
the costs of ICC investigation and prosecution. The ICC
stands ready within the framework of its Relationship
Agreement with the United Nations to help with the
implementation of any longer-term solution that would
be workable on both sides.
The Security Council and the ICC are two highly
distinct bodies with very different roles, but we are
connected by the shared objectives of peace, justice
and respect for international law, enshrined in both
the United Nations Charter and the Rome Statute. The
worst nightmares of humankind lie at the intersection
of our respective mandates. When massive crimes
against innocent victims threaten international peace
and security, both the Council and the ICC have an
important role to play. And in the ICC, the Council may
recognize a unique avenue for ensuring justice as a
crucial element in wider international efforts.
In adopting the Rome Statute, States created
important possibilities for the Security Council to use
its Chapter VII powers in the ICC framework. The
Council has the unique prerogative to create a specific
judicial mandate for the ICC to extend the Court’s

12-55207

jurisdiction where it otherwise would not reach, and to
require non-States parties to cooperate with the Court.
Furthermore, a referral by the Security Council allows
the ICC Prosecutor to open an investigation without
waiting for judicial authorization. When the Council
exercises these prerogatives, it is important for it to
take due account of how the ICC will have to carry out
any mandate it is given, and of the cooperation that it
will require to do so effectively.
The ICC warmly welcomes the trust that the
Security Council has placed in it through its referrals.
the ICC hopes that the Council will actively support its
ability to act on these referrals by ensuring compliance
with the Council’s resolutions and by underlining the
need for full cooperation by United Nations Members.
The ICC is grateful for the support we have received
from the Security Council, such as the statement on the
ICC staff detained in Libya in June.
The ICC welcomes the concept note (S/2012/731,
annex) circulated by the Guatemalan presidency in
preparation for today’s debate, and looks forward
to hearing the reactions of members of the Security
Council to the ideas in it. The ICC is keen to maintain
a close dialogue with the Security Council in the areas
where our mandates intersect, not least with a view to
ensuring the effective implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Council.
The International Criminal Court is a young
institution by international standards, with plenty of
work in progress and much still to learn. As we move
forward, I can assure the Security Council that we will
hold fast to the principles of prosecutorial and judicial
independence and the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Judge
Sang-Hyun Song for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mochochoko.
Mr. Mochochoko: Allow me to start by thanking
you, Sir, the Guatemalan presidency and the Security
Council for convening this very important meeting, the
first of its kind. This meeting comes at a very opportune
time as the International Criminal Court (ICC)
celebrates 10 years of existence. I would also like
to convey, on behalf of the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, her greetings and her apologies for not being
here today. The Office of the Prosecutor considers
today’s exchange with the Council to be crucial, given
that both the Council and the Office of the Prosecutor
are committed to preventing mass atrocities, which can
5

S/PV.6849

constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Indeed, this debate offers an opportunity to reflect on
issues of mutual concern and interest between our two
bodies.
The Office of the Prosecutor welcome the concept
note (S/2012/731, annex) circulated by the Guatemalan
presidency in preparation for this meeting. The note
clearly articulates some of the key principles regarding
the relationship between the Security Council and the
Court, and raises important points for discussion.
The respective mandates of the two bodies — the
pursuit of individual criminal accountability and the
pursuit of international peace and security — are at the
heart of the relationship.
The significance of today’s debate can thus not be
overstated. As President Song has already mentioned,
the Office of the Prosecutor is currently working on
two situations referred by the Security Council to the
Office of the Prosecutor — the situations in Darfur and
in Libya.
We investigate war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide in a number of countries that
also have the close attention of the Security Council.
At the same time, the Security Council is working on
many issues that relate to the mandate of the Office of
the Prosecutor, including, for instance, efforts to end
the use of child soldiers, as was recently taken up by
the Security Council in its open debate on children
and armed conflict (S/PV.6838) and resolution 2068
(2012) adopted at that meeting, under the auspices of
the German presidency. Those efforts coincide with
the completion of the first ICC trial and its verdict on
the use of child soldiers. Furthermore, the Security
Council discusses issues of peace and security and
authorizes peacekeeping missions in situations where
the Office of the Prosecutor is operating. The Council
is also addressing the link between sexual violence and
conflict, and is monitoring new situations involving the
alleged commission of massive crimes.
It is evident from the foregoing that the relationship
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the Council
could be nurtured and strengthened by extending our
interaction beyond specific situations referred by the
Council to the Prosecutor and by creating space for
open discussions on thematic issues. Such dialogue is
crucial, as both the Security Council and the Office
of the Prosecutor are committed to preventing mass

6

atrocities which constitute a threat to international
peace and security.
The evolving relationship between the Council
and the Court is not without complexities, given our
different mandates and organizational structures.
Allow me to highlight three areas, looking at them from
the Office of the Prosecutor’s perspective.
First, a key difference between our two organs is
that the Security Council is a political body within the
United Nations system, while the Office of the Prosecutor
is an independent organ within an independent judicial
institution, which has to adhere to clear legal criteria
and jurisdictional boundaries at all times in order to
maintain its legitimacy and credibility. We are all too
familiar with frequently raised concerns about the
politics of case selection as a result of Security Council
referrals. Incidentally, the same concerns can be raised
with regard to State referrals.
What many forget or overlook is that for both types
of referrals, the Rome Statute provides clear guidelines
that protect the independence of the judicial process.
The Rome Statute provides for a legal process for the
preliminary examination, investigation and prosecution
of situations referred by States or the Security Council,
as well as for judicial review, during which situations
may be rejected if they fail to satisfy statutory legal
criteria for opening an investigation. Simply put, the
Council may unilaterally trigger, but cannot impose
acceptance of jurisdiction by the Office of the
Prosecutor. Perceived or real political selectivity on
the participation of the Council is further constrained
because referrals encompass a situation rather than one
or several particular suspects or groups.
It is important to underscore the need to respect the
Office of the Prosecutor’s independence at all times.
Once the Security Council decides to refer a situation to
the Prosecutor, the judicial process has been triggered
and the matter is fully in the hands of the Prosecutor
and the Judges. The only way to stop the procedure is
by legal means, namely, by invoking article 16 of the
Rome Statute. Efforts to interfere with the independent
exercise of the Office’s mandate would only serve
to undermine the legitimacy and credibility of the
judicial process, thus giving credence to allegations of
politicization of the process.
The second area I would like to highlight involves
what we have in common. First, there is the matter of
our respective mandates. While the Security Council

12-55207

S/PV.6849

has been given the primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, the mandate of the
Office of the Prosecutor is to ensure accountability for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole. Some might construe that as a
source of tension between the two organs. In our view,
the respective mandates link us together.
The fight against impunity, to which both organs
are committed, is an essential contribution to the quest
for world’s peace and security. That is also recognized
in the Rome Statute’s preamble, which notes that “such
grave crimes threaten the peace, security and wellbeing of the world”. Indeed, the Security Council was
instrumental in ushering in what the Secretary-General
has called “the age of accountability”.
Next year, we will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the creation of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia by the
Council. It was in 1993 that the Council revived the
notion of international criminal justice, after a long
silence following the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials.
The Council was thus a source of inspiration for the
establishment of the ICC.
Secondly, both the Council and the Office of the
Prosecutor have a role to play in strengthening the
complementary relationship between peace and justice.
From the Office of the Prosecutor’s perspective, there
is no dilemma or contradiction between peace and
justice. In most situations before the Court, conflict
management and, often, specific peace negotiations
were under way while investigations and prosecutions
were proceeding.
The role of the ICC has never precluded or put
an end to such processes; in some cases, it has even
encouraged them. The policy of the Office is to pursue
its independent mandate to investigate and prosecute
those few most responsible and to do so in a manner that
respects the mandates of others and seeks to maximize
the positive impact of the joint efforts of all. To pursue
its judicial mandate and preserve its impartiality, the
Office cannot participate in peace initiatives, but it will
inform the political actors of its actions in advance so
that they can factor investigations into their activities.
Finally, both the Security Council and the Office
of the Prosecutor have a clear preventive mandate.
Prevention is key to all our efforts. For the Office, the
preventive role is foreseen in the Rome Statute preamble
and reinforced in the Office’s prosecutorial strategies.

12-55207

In fact, the preamble makes clear that prevention is
a shared responsibility in that it provides that States
parties are
“determined to put an end to impunity for the
perpetrators of these crimes and thus to contribute
to the prevention of such crimes”.
The Office of the Prosecutor will make public
statements referring to its mandate when violence
escalates in situations under its jurisdiction. It will
visit situation countries to remind leaders of the
Court’s jurisdiction. It will also use its preliminary
examinations activities to encourage genuine national
proceedings, and thereby attempt to prevent the
recurrence of violence. Given that the commission of
massive crimes can threaten international peace and
security, the Security Council can complement the
Office’s preventive efforts.
Let me now briefly look forward to how the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Office of the Prosecutor can be strengthened.
The Council has already referred two situations
involving the commission of massive crimes to the
Prosecutor, and the Prosecutor regularly reports back
to the Council on those matters. The Council and the
Office should together seek more constructive strategies
for attaining their mutual goals. We are encouraged by
recent efforts of regional organizations, and would like
to mention in particular the multilateral efforts to bring
to justice the leaders of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
including Joseph Kony. Those efforts must be replicated
in other situations. The failure of States to implement
ICC arrest warrants is also reflected in the failure to
implement Security Council resolutions relating to
cessation of violence, disarming parties to a conflict,
ensuring an end to impunity through local initiatives,
and other relevant obligations.
The relationship between those two obligations
must be explored further. True peace and justice rely on
the acceptance of Security Council resolutions as the
binding legal obligations that they are. Increasing the
political and diplomatic support of the Council for the
Court is essential, and the Council can do so through
its declaratory statements recalling the need to observe
applicable norms of international law and stressing the
importance of accountability for those most responsible
for serious violations of the rules. Additionally, such
tools as avoiding all non-essential contacts with

7

S/PV.6849

ICC suspects in order to achieve the arrest of these
individuals need to be further explored and deepened.
A new chapter should be added to our relationship.
The Office of the Prosecutor can make a substantial
contribution by proactively collecting information and
monitoring situations under preliminary examination,
and by investigating and prosecuting those most
responsible for serious crimes. But once its judicial
process has resulted in requests for and the issuance
of arrest warrants by the Court’s judges, it is up to the
international community, through the Council, to act.
We must find the necessary consensus to show
that we are serious about the threat that these serious
crimes pose to international peace and security and that
we have and will use the tools necessary to put those
crimes to an end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mochochoko for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful for the convening of this important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
President Song and Mr. Mochochoko of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for their briefings.
Strengthening the global system of accountability
for the worst atrocities remains an important priority
for the United States. President Obama has emphasized
that preventing mass atrocities and genocide is a core
national security interest and core moral responsibility
for our nation. We are committed to bringing pressure
to bear against perpetrators of atrocities, to ensuring
accountability for crimes committed, and to prioritizing
the rule of law and transitional justice in our efforts to
respond to conflict.
Accountability and peace begin with Governments
taking care of their people. But the international
community must continue to support rule of law
capacity-building initiatives to advance transitional
justice, including the creation of hybrid structures
where appropriate. From the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to Côte d’Ivoire to Cambodia, the United
States is supporting efforts to build fair, impartial and
capable national justice systems.
At the same time, more can be done to strengthen
accountability mechanisms at the international level.
The United States has strongly backed the ad hoc
8

international criminal tribunals and other judicial
institutions in Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia, Sierra
Leone and Cambodia. Such tribunals and courts have
been critical to ending impunity and helping those
countries move forward. As those judicial institutions
complete their mandates in the coming years, the
International Criminal Court may become an even
more important safeguard against impunity.
Although the United States is not a party to the Rome
Statute, we recognize that the ICC can be an important
tool for accountability. We have actively engaged with
the ICC Prosecutor and Registrar to consider how we
can support specific prosecutions already under way,
and we responded positively to informal requests for
assistance. We will continue working with the ICC
to identify practical ways to cooperate, particularly
in areas such as information-sharing and witness
protection on a case-by-case basis, as consistent with
United States policy and law.
Last year, the Council made its first unanimous
referral to the ICC of the situation in Libya. Resolution
1970 (2011) has kept the principle of accountability
central to Libya’s transition from authoritarianism to
democracy. Moving forward, it is critical that Libya
cooperate with the ICC and ensure that the detention
of and any domestic proceedings against alleged
perpetrators of atrocities are in full compliance with
its international obligations. We are exploring ways to
assist Libya in pursuing justice sector reform, and we
reaffirm that there must be accountability in Libya for
violations and abuses on all sides.
The Security Council also acted in response to
the atrocities in Darfur, but justice has still not been
served, and the lack of accountability continues to fuel
resentment, reprisals and conflict in Darfur and beyond.
Despite constant calls on all parties to the conflict to
cooperate fully with the ICC, the Sudan has failed to
meet its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) and
individuals subject to outstanding arrest warrants
remain at large. We continue to urge all States to refrain
from providing political or financial support to those
individuals. We applaud the example Malawi set by
refusing to host President Al-Bashir.
The Council should review additional steps that
can be undertaken to complete the ICC’s work in
Darfur. We should take inspiration from the concerted
European Union efforts that resulted in the arrest and
detention of the final fugitives from the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
12-55207

S/PV.6849

We should consider ways to improve cooperation
and communication between the Security Council and
the Court. For example, the Council should monitor
developments in situations it refers to the Courts, since
the ICC may face dangers in conducting its work.
However, we must also recognize that the ICC is an
independent organization. That status raises concerns
about proposals to cover its expenses with United
Nations assessed funding.

of delegations that have decided to take part in the
debate. I also thank the delegation of Guatemala for the
very comprehensive concept note (S/2012/731, annex)
prepared for the purpose, which raises very interesting
ideas on various aspects of the functioning of the ICC.
We trust that, on future occasions, the Council will
return to the issue, which is of great relevance within
the framework of strengthening the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The interests of peace, security and international
criminal justice are best served when the Security
Council and the ICC operate within their own realms
but work in ways that are mutually reinforcing. We
should not accept the false choice between the interests
of justice and the interests of peace. As we work
to strengthen accountability, we support the States
parties’ decision to delay until 2017 a final decision on
the Court’s exercise of jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression. That delay would allow for consideration
of issues about the aggression amendments that require
attention and enable the Court to consolidate its progress
in the investigation and prosecution of atrocity crimes.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
introducing today’s topic, and Judge Sang-Hyun Song,
President of the ICC, and Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko,
the representative of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC, for their briefings.

How we act to halt violence against civilian
populations and hold accountable those who perpetrate
such crimes is a fundamental test of our time. The
United States continues to press for accountability
in the Syrian Arab Republic, without prejudging the
ultimate venue for it. As the independent international
commission of inquiry has recognized, the Syrian
people should have a leading voice in determining how
to deal, in a manner consistent with international law,
with those responsible for atrocities. We continue to
help Syrians document abuses and collect evidence to
ensure that the perpetrators of horrific violence against
the Syrian people are ultimately held accountable.
In conclusion, we must rededicate ourselves to
preventing atrocities from happening and ensuring
accountability in their aftermath. We have made
progress on both fronts, but much work remains. The
United States will not rest until those responsible for
perpetrating mass atrocities face justice and those who
would commit such crimes know that they will never
enjoy impunity.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for having taken the initiative of
organizing this debate. It is the first time that the Security
Council has devoted a meeting to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The welcome that the proposal
has received is directly reflected in the large number
12-55207

Colombia is a State party to the Rome Statute.
As such, it has repeatedly expressed its clear support
for the International Criminal Court and the cause of
international criminal justice.
We have addressed the crimes under the jurisdiction
of the Court in our national legislation, adopted specific
laws on cooperation with the Court, and were among
the first countries of the western hemisphere to reach
agreement with the Court on the execution of sentences.
We participated actively in the Kampala Review
Conference of the Rome Statute, and we are currently
studying the amendments adopted there with a view to
incorporating them into our legislation. We therefore
ascribe the greatest importance to the holding of this
debate as we mark the first 10 years of the Court’s
work, as was noted by the Council during Colombia’s
presidency in July.
I will focus my statement on some current issues
that have arisen with regard to the interaction between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court.
First of all, we believe that the Council should
take the greatest care when considering referrals new
situations to the Court in application of the provisions
of article 13 of the Rome Statute. We must recall that
the possibility of triggering the court’s jurisdiction
through this mechanism was enshrined in the Rome
Statute in order to prevent the need to establish new ad
hoc jurisdictional bodies. What the Rome Conference
participants sought was to provide the Council with
a viable alternative to which to turn when it has
concluded that criminal trials of certain individuals at
the international level would contribute to maintaining
international peace and security.

9

S/PV.6849

Naturally, my country assigns the greatest
importance to the principle of complementarity, which
is the very backbone of the international criminal justice
system enshrined in the Rome Statute. In this regard,
it is worth stressing that complementarity is called on
to play a fundamental role in all cases submitted to
the Court, including those referred by the Council, as
was clearly demonstrated in the case of Libya and the
criminal trials resulting from resolution 1970 (2011).
We believe that one of the factors the Council
should assess when considering the potential referral of
a situation to the ICC is the existence of legal standards
and institutions in the country concerned, based on
which it would be possible to consider referral to the
Court on the basis of complementarity.
The broad powers vested in the Council under
article 13 of the Statute are limited in practice because
of other provisions of the Statute that seek to put into
practice the principle of complementarity, as is the
case with norms relating to the admissibility of cases
and challenges thereto. An essential component of
this mechanism is the premise that relevant decisions
of the Council will be rigorously implemented if
adopted under Chapter VII and after the Council had
determined that there was a threat to international
peace and security. Therefore, when the Court issues
arrest warrants and they are not carried out, what is
at stake is the credibility of the Council’s decisions
and authority. It may be wort considering alternative
formulations for inclusion in the particular resolution
referring a given situation to the ICC.
In the cases of Darfur and Libya, the solution
adopted consisted of imposing two series of obligations.
On the one hand, the main obligation of the stakeholders
directly involved — the Government of the Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur, in the first
case, and the Libyan authorities, in the second — is to
cooperate with the Court and to provide the offer of the
Prosecutor all necessary assistance. On the other hand,
all States and regional and international organizations
are called on to cooperate with the Court.
Another issue related to Council referrals that has
arisen recently is that of the financing of trials. The
situation that has arisen on both occasions when the
Council has resorted to this mechanism has led to
various concerns for States parties to the Statute, which
affect the application of the Relationship Agreement
between the ICC and the United Nations. We believe
that these concerns are valid and should be considered
10

frankly and openly by both the Security Council and
the General Assembly, as well as by the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute.
Furthermore, the alternative mechanism provided
for in article 16 of the Rome Statute has been made
little use of. Again, given what was decided at the
plenipotentiary diplomatic conference that gave rise to
the ICC, Chapter VII of the Charter must be invoked
and the evaluation by the Council of the potential merit
of requests for the application of this provision must
involve a decision to apply Article 39 of the Charter.
This should be kept in mind by those States approaching
the Council to request use of the deferral procedure
provided for under article 16.
When a conflict situation threatens international
peace and security and the Security Council is called on
to act and exercise the responsibilities entrusted to it by
the Charter of the United Nations, situations may arise in
which accountability has become a necessary measure
for overcoming crises and restoring international peace
and security. In such situations, the Council can use the
instrument of international criminal justice established
in the Rome Treaty and already provided an invaluable,
not only in pursuit of international justice and the fight
against impunity, but also and above all in the search
for international peace and security.
Mrs. Kaur (India): At the outset, I would like to
welcome you, Mr. President, to the Security Council
and to thank you for presiding over this meeting. I
would also like to thank the Guatemalan delegation
for convening this debate, which is very important and
timely. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Judge Sang-Hyun Song, President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and Mr. Phakiso
Mochochoko for their valuable statements.
Peace and justice are intertwined. There is no
peace without justice and there is no justice without
peace. To be just implies acting in accordance with the
rule of law. A coherent application of the rule of law at
all levels of governance is a precondition of avoiding
conflicts and ensuring peace and justice. This applies
to both international and national affairs.
India believes that the advancement of the rule of
law at the national level is essential for the protection
of democracy and of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as well as for socioeconomic growth. This
should be the primary objective of States. Similarly, the
rule of law at the international level is a sine qua non

12-55207

S/PV.6849

for ensuring peace and justice among States. We recall
the wisdom of world leaders who, in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), recognized the
need for universal adherence to and implementation of
the rule of law at the national and international levels.

agreed definition of the crime of aggression during
the Review Conference of the Rome Statue in 2010
and the possibility of States parties opting out of the
jurisdiction of the Court for the crime of aggression is a
case in point when we talk of double standards.

Since then, this topic has been on the agenda
of the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly.
The High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law held
recently during the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly reaffirmed the commitment of the
international community to implementing the rule
of law at the national and international levels with a
view to achieving the objectives of the maintenance of
international peace and security, peaceful coexistence
and development.

There is also a need to promote the rule of law
as a core value across the United Nations system. For
that, we have to reform the architecture of international
governance, including the Security Council, so that it
may be reflective of contemporary reality.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is an important
tool in the maintenance of international peace and
security and in the promotion of the rule of law. The
Security Council needs to lay more emphasis on
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations so
as to promote peaceful settlement of disputes rather
than take coercive measures.The International Court
of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, also has its role under the Charter and as per
its Statute in adjudicating disputes between States.
Since the rule of law serves as a key element of
conflict prevention and peacekeeping, as well as of
conflict resolution and peacebuilding, India has always
supported international cooperation for the development
and codification of international criminal law.

India’s reservations about the Rome Statute and the
International Criminal Court are well known. The role
given to a political body like the Security Council in its
work has prevented the ICC from becoming a universal
institution, and three of the five permanent members
of the Council are not parties to the ICC. Furthermore,
the selectivity with which the Security Council has
made referrals under Article 16 of the Rome Statue has
raised concerns about political considerations playing
a dominant role in such referrals, which also raises
questions about the independence of the International
Criminal Court. Under such circumstances, the solution
to ensuring peace and justice at the national and
international levels is not the ICC or the establishment
of ad hoc international criminal tribunals. The solution
lies in building national institutions through capacitybuilding efforts so that they can function in a way
consistent with the rule of law.

India firmly opposes impunity for serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. Refusing to tolerate impunity is the only
way to ensure truth and reconciliation and to establish
peace and justice.

In conclusion, the Council needs to promote the
pacific settlement of disputes. The United Nations
system and international judicial institutions have to
promote the rule of law in their work and avoid political
biases. And the international community has to provide
greater resources for empowerment, empowering States
to build institutions that promote the rule of law and
help their citizens realize their legitimate aspirations.
Only that will ensure that the world community is able
to meet the challenges that face us today at the national
and international levels, including the resolution of
conflict situations and post conflict peacebuilding.

At the same time, India firmly believes that
international efforts to address the issues of serious
crimes of international concern and impunity should
be anchored in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. We need to strengthen the rule of
law at the international level by avoiding selectivity,
partiality and double standards, as well as by freeing
the international criminal justice institutions from
the clutches of political considerations. The final

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala,
Mr. Harold Caballeros, for presiding over today’s
meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Judge Sang-Hyun Song, President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), and the representative of
the Prosecutor, Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko, for their
statements. I would like to make the following points
on the question of the achievement of peace and justice.

India has also been a supporter of international
cooperation to suppress and deter heinous crimes of
international concern through the relevant judicial
instruments.

12-55207

11

S/PV.6849

First, peace and justice are two fundamental
values of human society. Without justice there cannot
be sustainable peace, and without peace there can be
no justice to speak of. Peace and justice reinforce and
complement each other. However, if handled improperly
the two may clash. China believes that justice cannot
be pursued at the expense of peaceful processes, nor
should it impede the process of national reconciliation.
Secondly, the Charter of the United Nations and its
purposes and principles constitute the backbone of the
rule of law at the international level. The promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security must be guided by the
purposes of the Charter and the fundamental principles
of respect for national sovereignty and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. The ICC, as an integral
part of the international system of the rule of law, must
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter and
play a positive role in maintaining international peace
and security. It must not be reduced to a tool available
to certain countries in pursuing their individual goals
and interests. Since the Charter entrusts the Security
Council with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
hope that the ICC will exercise caution in carrying
out its functions and avoid impeding the work of the
Security Council by seeking political settlements to
international and regional conflicts.
Thirdly, States bear the primary responsibility
to punish international crimes, eliminate impunity
and achieve justice. The ICC can supplement but not
replace national jurisdiction. We believe that the ICC
should respect the judicial traditions and requirements
of the various realities existing in different countries
and regions, including their choice of the timing and
modality of seeking to enforce justice. China supports
the national efforts of countries to build capacities and
to exercise jurisdiction in matters of grave international
crimes.
China supports all efforts to establish a just and
peaceful world. Therefore, we need not only to eliminate
impunity but also to establish political processes,
facilitate national reconciliation, promote economic
and social development and eradicate the root causes
of conflicts.
Mr. Massod Khan (Pakistan): We are grateful
to the Guatemalan presidency for organizing this
debate, and we thank you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for
presiding over it. We thank the Secretary-General for
12

his important statement. We welcome Judge SangHyun Song, President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), as well as Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko, of
the Office of the Prosecutor.
The quest for justice and the rule of law has been
central to the march of civilization. The rule of law is
critical for a just world and international peace and
stability. International law contributes directly to world
peace. The rule of law is strengthened if there are no
exceptions or double standards in the application of
international law. The Security Council would promote
the rule of law by greater use of the means for the pacific
settlement of disputes and more frequent recourse to
the International Court of Justice.
There should be no impunity for the most egregious
crimes and mass atrocities. Peace and justice go hand
in hand. In post-conflict situations, however, there is
a time for healing, a time for moving on, a time for
closure and a time for reconciliation — reconciliation
that is not motivated by political expediencies but
that aims to unify hostile and disparate segments of a
population.
Every conflict situation has its own dynamics.
Durable peace is best pursued through a comprehensive
approach that is not restricted to retributive justice. In
post-conflict societies it should take into account the
long-term imperatives of national reconciliation, ethnic
harmony and social stability.
The rule of law needs to be integrated into postconflict institution-building efforts. The Security
Council has done seminal work in that regard.
The tension between demands for justice and peace
must be resolved in a balanced and sustainable manner.
Threats of prosecution can act as a deterrent, but, at
the same time, such threats must not fuel conflicts or
complicate peacebuilding efforts. Other strategies,
such as truth and reconciliation commissions, have
been used effectively in many situations. The views of
regional organizations in that regard should be given
due weight.
Justice should not be reduced to punishment. It
should recognize injury, establish truth, acknowledge
victims’ dignity and preserve their narrative in
collective memory. From that perspective, restorative
justice is preferable because it heals wounds and
promotes societal reconciliation. Restorative justice is
more effective when it is neither externally imposed nor
culturally alien.
12-55207

S/PV.6849

The principle of complementarity and the need to
strengthen domestic judicial systems are important. The
ICC is a court of last resort. The primacy of national
jurisdiction has to be respected. Where national criminal
justice systems are not robust, reforms of judicial
systems, prisons and the security apparatus may be
undertaken. The objective of ending impunity must be
attained by strengthening local courts, enhancing the
investigative capacity of national police, establishing
forensic laboratories, supporting local prosecutors and
improving conditions in prisons.
Pakistan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute.
However, we acknowledge the rights and obligations of
States parties to the Statute. We are of the view that
no action of the Security Council should lead to the
use of the ICC for political purposes. It is necessary
to maintain the distinction between the Council and
the ICC so as to ensure the objectivity, credibility,
impartiality and independence of the Court.
Since its inception, only a few situations, mostly
from one part of the world, have been referred to the ICC.
The 2004 Relationship Agreement between the United
Nations and the Court spells out the parameters of the
relationship between the ICC and the United Nations.
At this stage, more diligent scrutiny of empirical
and accumulated evidence is required to assess the
contribution of the ICC in relation to the work of the
Security Council and the correlation between the Court
and the Council.
Today’s discussion will deepen our understanding
of the role of the ICC and its relationship with the
United Nations, especially with the Security Council.
We support the role of the Security Council and the
international judicial system in fostering a culture of
the rule of law in order to promote international peace
and security.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over
this important debate.
(spoke in English)
I wish at the outset to thank the Secretary-General,
President Sang-Hyun and Mr. Mochochoko for their
statements, which were very useful indeed, as is the
excellent concept note (S/2012/731, annex) prepared by
the Mission of Guatemala.
For many years now, international justice has gone
hand in hand with peace and security, with the Security

12-55207

Council playing a pivotal role in building the legal
framework necessary to bring to justice those most
responsible for the gravest of international crimes, such
as genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The Tribunals established by the Security
Council — either directly, such as the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, or under its oversight,
such as the Special Court for Sierra Leone — all have
made important and useful contributions, through their
practice and jurisprudence, to international criminal
justice in general and the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in particular.
As we watch those international tribunals
discontinuing their activities as they gradually fulfil
their mandates, we see the ICC becoming firmly rooted
in their important legacy and rising as a permanent
global Court to fight impunity for the most serious
crimes.
We must remind ourselves that while the ICC is a
treaty-based body, its model was clearly influenced by
the Security Council, its recent history and its strategic
approach to countering impunity and upholding
accountability, as reflected in its resolutions. That is
why this Security Council debate is fully justified, and
we thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative.
The ICC was established as a result of open
intergovernmental negotiations. That was also the
case with the negotiation of the Statute amendments
recently agreed in Kampala on the crime of aggression
and article 8 of the Statute. There also, States parties
and non-parties both had the opportunity to interact
to achieve an outcome which, in our view, managed to
successfully fill the gap left open in Rome on the set of
crimes covered by the Statute. In Kampala, the Security
Council was yet again called to play an important role in
the exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court as concerns
the crime of aggression.
With such an influential background and with
the number of States parties growing — there are
now 121, almost two thirds of the United Nations
membership — the ICC can claim today to be an
instrument of peace and justice representing a broad
international convergence. Yet efforts must continue
to bring the ICC closer to universality, which is an
important goal that we all in the general membership
have an interest in pursuing.

13

S/PV.6849

First and foremost, States parties have a role to that
effect: by preserving the integrity of the Rome Statute,
making sure that the ICC has the appropriate resources
to work with, and ensuring that justice is served through
a widely recognized independent judicial system, with
highly qualified judges, prosecutors and staff.
But the Security Council also has a role to play,
for instance, through the way in which it exercises its
referral powers and how it follows up those decisions
in terms of supporting the Court in its functions, in
particular in matters related to cooperation, and when
cooperation is failing, in full respect, naturally, for the
independence of the Court.
Moreover, it is important that the general
membership, on behalf of which the referral decision is
taken by the Council, be called on to share the financial
burden resulting therefrom, not leaving it exclusively
to States parties, as if the decision affected only them.
Here the Security Council and the General Assembly
also have a role to play in ensuring, as is the case with
other Council decisions, the distribution of the costs
associated with a referral decision that is taken on
behalf and in the interest of the general membership.
These matters have been discussed recently in
various forums, prompted by the experience of recent
Council referrals. Last year we organized, with the
International Peace Institute and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, a workshop
where those issues were tackled and recommendations
were made to have an indicative checklist to guide
the Council’s engagement with the ICC at the time of
its consideration of referrals. Those were some of the
issues identified, and we think that they merit further
consideration by the Council. It is not only the credibility
of the ICC that is at stake, but also the efficacy of a
decision of the Council on a matter of peace and justice.
Finally, I would like to highlight an important
aspect concerning the ICC as a privileged preventive
tool in conflict situations under the Council’s agenda.
Indeed, at a time when the Council is increasingly
focused on prevention, this is an important aspect that
merits special attention.
Indeed, the potential application of the Rome
Statute, as has been highlighted in several recent
reports of the Secretary-General, can have an important
deterrent effect, discouraging potential perpetrators of
criminal acts or altering their behaviour because they
fear they may be subject to investigation by the Court,

14

because they know that once they are caught in the net
of justice, justice will proceed until it is done, either
through the ICC or through national courts under the
complementarity mechanisms of the Statute.
There is a huge potential for the ICC, as an
instrument of prevention, as was mentioned earlier today
by the representative of the Prosecutor, to complement
Council action in its pursuance of peace. Successful
prevention, in these particular situations, means lives
effectively saved. That is the most important reason
for the Council, States parties and the international
community to join hands in strengthening the ICC and
supporting it on its path to universality.
Portugal remains fully committed to the following
objectives: strengthening the rule of law in the
international sphere and fighting impunity and bringing
all those responsible for the gravest international
crimes to justice, independent of any political
consideration. That is an indispensable path on the way
to strengthening peace and security in the world.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Guatemalan presidency and you
personally, Mr. Minister, for convening this important
open debate on peace and justice and for submitting a
concept note on the topic (S/2012/731, annex). We also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, President of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) Judge SangHyun Song and Mr. Phasiko Mochochoko of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC for their briefings.
It is obvious, but perhaps it should be reiterated, that
there can be no peace without justice. Such an approach
provides that no peace settlement can be reached that is
inconsistent with international law, particularly where
peremptory norms are concerned, such as the prohibition
of aggression, genocide and racial discrimination and
the obligation to respect the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of States. Suffice it to say that the need to
establish the truth concerning the egregious violation
of international law, including the violation of human
rights and international humanitarian law, the provision
of effective and adequate reparation to victims and the
need for institutional action to prevent the recurrence
of such violations are all a necessary adjunct to true
conflict resolution.
In recent years, international attention to the
importance of the rule of law has significantly increased.
International law has moved towards concretizing
the need for justice, and the question of impunity has

12-55207

S/PV.6849

rightly assumed great prominence. Important steps
have been taken at the national and international levels
on the prevention and punishment of wrongs, including
the development of international jurisprudence. Today,
it is incontrovertible that no official or political status
cloaks the person concerned with immunity for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community.
Azerbaijan is not party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless,
we proceed from the strong understanding that
the protection and vindication of rights, as well as
insistence on international accountability, contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and that they are therefore the responsibility of the
international community as a whole. We welcome
the consensus decision to amend the Rome Statute to
include a definition of the crime of aggression, as well
as the condition for the Court’s exercise of jurisdiction
over that crime. The crime of aggression is the most
serious and dangerous form of the illegal use of force
between States, which is usually committed together
with other crimes.
We believe that the competence of the International
Criminal Court to investigate and prosecute those
suspected of the crime of aggression will contribute
to the efforts of the Security Council and the broader
international community to ensure the accountability of
States and individuals acting in breach of international
law, undermining the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and ignoring the Security Council
resolutions that explicitly condemn such behaviour.
The activity and jurisprudence of ad hoc and
mixed tribunals have helped to develop international
law, particularly the law on war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and, in certain well-known cases,
have contributed to advancing the rule of law and to
restoring peace. Their practice, as appropriate, can
obviously benefit other national efforts to pursue
post-conflict justice, especially in those situations
where the prevailing culture of impunity for serious
crimes represents a considerable obstacle to peace and
reconciliation.
Indeed, serious challenges remain. Unfortunately,
the violation of international humanitarian and human
rights law in some situations of armed conflict,
including those of a protracted nature, have not received
due attention and a response at the international and

12-55207

regional levels. More resolute and targeted measures
are required to end impunity for such violations.
As the concept note emphasizes, there are strong
indications that past wrongs left unpunished and
unrecognized have played a key role in the eruption of
new conflicts and the commission of new crimes. In
addition, it should be taken into account that combating
impunity is important not only for the purpose of
prosecuting crimes and bringing those responsible to
justice but also to ensure sustainable peace, truth and
reconciliation. In any event, the conflict resolution
initiatives considered by the Security Council and
regional arrangements must ensure that peace and
justice work together effectively.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in
order to achieve the goal of the rule of law, we should
uphold fundamental principles, adhere to the uniform
application of international law and promote the
democratization of international relations.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I thank you and
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on peace and justice and the roles of the International
Criminal Court and the Security Council. I also thank
you for your presence here today, which is an indication
of the importance that your country attaches to the rule
of law.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, President
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) Judge SangHyun Song and Mr. Phasiko Mochochoko, who was
speaking on behalf of the ICC Prosecutor, for their
briefings this morning.
This debate comes at a time when the United Nations
is focusing on the rule of law. Less than a month ago,
heads of State and Government gathered at the United
Nations for the High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law
at the National and International Levels, where they
adopted a declaration on the matter (General Assembly
Resolution 67/1). In January, during the South African
presidency, the Security Council held an open debate
on the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security (see S/PV.6705) and adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/1). This debate is
therefore timely.
I also thank you, Mr. President, for the
comprehensive concept note (S/2012/731, annex), which
touches on key elements relating to the fight against
impunity. The relationship between the International

15

S/PV.6849

Criminal Court and the Security Council needs to be on
the agenda. Nonetheless, allow me first to make some
observations on the general aspects of peace and justice
touched upon in the concept note.
Peace and justice are inextricably connected. One
without the other is, at best, short term and, at worst,
futile. That empirical statement is normatively validated
in both the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome
Statute. Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter provides
that one of the purposes of the United Nations is to take
action in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law in order to maintain international
peace and security.
The relationship between peace and justice is
reflected most starkly in article 16 of the Rome
Statue, which provides for the Council to defer ICC
investigations in the exercise of its primary mandate
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Therefore, applying the provisions of the Charter,
a deferral should only be granted if the Council
determines that the deferral would contribute to the
maintenance or restoration of peace in a given situation.
While there is the view that that is a situation of
potential conflict between peace and justice, in our view
it reflects a dynamic relationship. That is particularly
true since, as observed in the concept note, article 16
does not deprive the Council of jurisdiction, nor does it
grant any amnesty.
As a State party to the ICC, we recognize the
important role that the Court plays in fighting impunity
and in promoting the rule of law. That is the primary
mandate of the ICC and we trust that, as we head towards
the ICC’s second decade of existence, the importance
of that mandate will become clearer to those that are
still on the outside looking in. We are of course also a
Member of the United Nations, which has the primary
mandate for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
The United Nations and the ICC therefore represent
opposite sides of the peace and justice coin. The
dynamism of the relationship between peace and justice
is reflected in the fact that each organization also has
a role to play in the mandate of the other. No one could
dispute that the search for peace is irrelevant to the ICC,
just as it cannot be asserted that justice is not important
to the United Nations.
Nonetheless, it is important to emphasize that the
United Nations and the ICC, while they are closely
16

related and both are institutionally normative, are
independent organizations with independent mandates.
In that respect, it should be recalled that article 2 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the ICC provides that each organization must
respect the other’s mandate. Similarly, while, as the
concept note explains, article 3 does provide for close
cooperation between the two bodies, that cooperation is
intended to ensure that their respective responsibilities
are discharged effectively and in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and the Statute.
I have emphasized these points to caution against
any interpretation of either the peace-and-justice
relationship or the cooperative relationship of the ICC
and the United Nations as suggesting that one or other
organization should sacrifice the pursuit of its own
mandate to help achieve the mandate of the other.
The relationship between the Security Council
and the ICC must be based on mutual respect for their
respective mandates. The Council should therefore
avoid undermining the ICC, just as the ICC should not
undermine the Council. In that regard, I wish to raise
four issues relating to Council practices that could have
the effect of undermining the Court.
First, to date, the Security Council’s referrals
of situations to the ICC have not obliged all Member
States, as is the norm with Chapter VII resolutions, to
cooperate with the Court. Under resolutions 1593 (2005)
and 1970 (2011), the Council obliges only the situation
countries to cooperate. As we all know, the reason for
this is to exempt some permanent members from their
duty to cooperate. Secondly, both resolutions grant
exemptions from ICC jurisdiction for nationals of some
States for alleged ICC crimes in the situation countries.
Thirdly, both resolutions preclude the possibility of
United Nations funding for related ICC investigations
and prosecutions, notwithstanding the fact that when
the Council acts under Chapter VII, it does so on behalf
of the United Nations. Finally, when there have been
instances of non-cooperation, the Council has not
followed up, behaving as if referral was an end in itself.
Collectively, this pattern raises a question about the
seriousness with which the Council takes the ICC as a
dispenser of justice. How can it appear to be supportive
of the ICC if it is unwilling to subject its members
to the duty to cooperate, to fund the activities of the
Court that flow from referrals, or to act when there is
non-cooperation? How can the Council begin to trust
the Court and, consequently, expect others to trust it,
12-55207

S/PV.6849

when it is unwilling to subject nationals of its member
countries to the scrutiny of the ICC?
In a way, the relationship between the ICC and
the Security Council embodies the relationship
between peace and justice. If the Council behaves in
a manner that undermines the ICC, it undermines this
relationship, too. We hope this debate will contribute
to an honest stocktaking within the Council of how to
better manage that relationship.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on holding a debate on a subject that is so central to
the United Nations peace mission. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his introductory
remarks and to pay tribute to his personal commitment
to strengthening the rule of law in the service of the
values of peace and justice. Finally, I welcome the
participation of the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and of the representative of the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor, whom we thank for their
briefings.
Maintaining and strengthening peace, achieving
sustainable development and promoting human rights
are at the heart of the mission of the United Nations.
In our common quest for a multilateral response to
these fundamental and complex issues, we remain
thoroughly convinced of their universality and
indivisibility. Nevertheless, faced with the complexity
of conflict and post-conflict situations, it is difficult if
not delusional to attempt to offer societies affected by
conflict prefabricated solutions to finding peace again
and satisfying their desire for justice.
Strategies and measures aimed at redressing
flagrant violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law must take into account the specific
context of every situation in order to prevent the
recurrence of crises, ensure social cohesion and promote
national reconciliation. Experience has shown that only
holistic approaches that address realities and are owned
by the populations concerned can ensure sustainable
peace. Peace and stability are sustainably maintained
if the structural causes of the conflict are investigated
and then dealt with by, inter alia, the establishment of
a credible, independent judicial system dedicated to the
primacy of the law.
In that context, the Charter of the United Nations
and other international legal standards must represent
our universal point of reference in our efforts to achieve

12-55207

our shared goal of peace and justice. The principles of
sovereignty, equality and respect for the national unity
and territorial integrity of States must continue to
guide the activities of the United Nations, including the
Security Council and all the institutional mechanisms
we have created to help achieve our shared goal of
peace and justice.
National judicial systems should continue to be the
place of first resort for implementing the principle of
responsibility. Primary responsibility for prosecuting
the perpetrators of serious crimes affecting the
international community devolves on the States, while
the international community is there to help strengthen
their national capacities to bring those perpetrators to
trial. Nevertheless, when national systems are unable
or unwilling to prosecute such international criminals,
that is where the International Criminal Court comes
in. According to its Statute, it is the Court’s task to help
the international community to fight impunity and to
prosecute those responsible for genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and crimes of aggression,
based on the principle of complementarity.
We cannot forget the valuable contribution of
other mechanisms serving our shared cause of peace
and justice, particularly the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, which continue to play a significant role in
strengthening peace and restoring the rule of law. Nor
must we forget the contribution of the so-called hybrid
mechanisms, which have made justice accessible to the
peoples concerned, rehabilitated the legitimacy of State
institutions, and strengthened national legal systems.
Finally, we cannot ignore the considerable contribution
that traditional judicial mechanisms have made to
assuring the right to justice, truth and compensation,
and to ensuring that crimes committed during a conflict
will not go unpunished.
In that context, we commend the Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels (resolution 67/1), held on 24 September, which
recognizes that justice is an indispensable factor of
sustainable peace in countries in conflict or postconflict situations. In that regard, we are pleased that
transitional justice programmes have been widely
integrated into United Nations work in the areas of the
rule of law and of strategic planning for post-conflict
situations.

17

S/PV.6849

In a demonstration of our commitment to the
international community in combating impunity for
serious crimes, article 23 of Morocco’s new Constitution,
adopted last year, states that genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and all serious and systematic
violations of human rights are punishable by law.
That commitment is part of the sweeping reforms my
country has recently introduced to strengthen the rule
of law and the independence of the judiciary, and we
will pursue it at the international level by reinforcing
our commitment to peacekeeping activities and to
maintaining security under the aegis of the United
Nations.
Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in Spanish): I am
very grateful to the presidency of Guatemala for having
taken the initiative of convening this very important
debate. We welcome your personal presence in the
Council today, Mr. Minister.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, as
well as the President of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Judge Sang-Hyung Song, and Mr. Mochochoko
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC for their
briefings.
Germany aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later during this debate.
Ten years after the entry into force of the Rome
Statute, the Council and the ICC have developed an
enduring relationship based on common objectives.
Sustainable peace and security must solidly rest on
justice, the rule of law and human rights. Justice itself
requires accountability. Both are crucial aspects of a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention and
conflict resolution. The Council’s recognition of that
linkage has materialized through its own creation of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. Given their largely overlapping constituency,
it is only natural that the Council and the ICC should
closely collaborate. While the Council exercises its
responsibility on behalf of all 193 Members of the
United Nations, 121 States have now acceded to the
Rome Statute, bringing the ICC ever nearer to the goal
of universality. Allow me therefore to congratulate
Guatemala for having become the most recent State
party to the Rome Statute.
The Rome Statute of the ICC has provided the
Security Council with important options to directly
18

pursue the path of justice. It has expanded the range of
action under the Council’s mandate. In turn, the Council
has repeatedly recognized the important contribution
of the ICC and the other international Tribunals to
the fight against impunity for the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community. That was
reiterated most recently when the German Minister
for Foreign Affairs, in his capacity as President of the
Security Council, addressed the General Assembly
during the High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (see A/67/PV.3), on
24 September. At the same time, we need to recognize
the respective characteristics and differences of both
organs, which define the essence, scope and limits of
their mutual relationship. The Council is a political
organ and the ICC is an independent court of justice.
Therefore, despite their often complimentary functions,
any notion of one organ serving the other is misguided.
Furthermore, not all Council members have acceded
to the Rome Statute. Some Council members have at
times voiced scepticism vis-à-vis the Court. They have
even questioned its role regarding the interplay of
peace and justice. At the same time, the Council has
demonstrated unity on such issues when referring the
situations in both Darfur and Libya to the ICC. On
other occasions, the Council has been deeply divided
and, as a consequence, remained inactive. Syria is a
case in point where not only peace and security are at
stake, but where victims of daily and well-documented
crimes cry out for justice.
In the context of referrals, there are a number of
steps that the Council, the United Nations as a whole
and the individual Member States concerned can take in
support of the ICC in exercising fully the responsibilty
that stems from interacting with the Court. First, with
regard to referrals by the Security Council, by referring
the Darfur and Libya situations to the ICC, the Council
has proven its readiness to incorporate that option in
its tool box of measures. The Council must retain its
willingness to use that tool as a last resort, as an act of
political responsibility by the Council. A referral does
not prejudge the findings of the Court and its organs. At
the same time, we look forward to the ratification of the
Rome Statute by the greatest possible number of States
so that referrals become more and more obsolete.
Secondly, with regard to cooperation, just a few
months ago the former ICC Chief Prosecutor expressed
in this Chamber his intense frustration at the fact that
the four arrest warrants in the Darfur case had not been

12-55207

S/PV.6849

implemented (see S/PV.6778). Germany fully shares
that frustration, as the lack of cooperation seriously
undermines the Court’s credibility. But just as much as
States must cooperate with the Court, the responsibility
of the Security Council does not end with a decision to
refer a situation to the Court; rather, the Council needs
to carefully watch over all steps and measures taken
by the Court and the Prosecutor in following up on the
Council’s requests to investigate a given situation.
With regard to notifications of non-cooperation,
the Council should actively take note of such a breach
of States’ obligation to cooperate and clearly express
its views on the matter. The cooperation of States also
encompasses allowing the full application of the Rome
Statute, including those provisions that relate to the
privileges and immunities of ICC staff in exercise of
their functions, as well as to the full application of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court.
Thirdly, with regard to financing, both as a State
party to the Rome Statute and a member of the Security
Council, we have the strong view that when the Council,
acting on behalf of the international community, refers
a situation to the ICC, ensuring the expenses on the
ICC side should be borne by the United Nations rather
than by the State parties. We do not concur with the
position taken by some Council members in that regard
that implies that the pursuit of justice should be a free
ride. Accordingly, the Security Council should avoid
any reference to the apportionment of costs in possible
future referrals. Both the Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and the General Assembly have in respective resolutions
recently opened the way for the ICC and the United
Nations to jointly address that issue. We look forward
to a solution that is a clear expression of international
support for the practice of referrals.
Finally, I would like to thank again the presidency
for having organized this important debate. Germany
would support the holding of regular debates on this
topic.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Guatemala and its
Minister for Foreign Affairs for having taking the
initiative to convene this Council meeting on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security, with
a special focus on the interaction between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court (ICC)
12-55207

in ending impunity. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the ICC and the
representative of the Office of the Prosecutor for their
statements.
Owing to its role and mandate under the Charter,
the Security Council has a special part to play in
strengthening the legal foundation of international
relations. The Council makes an extremely important
contribution to developing the system of international
relations based on the rule of international law. That
means that the Council itself must serve as an example
in strengthening the authority of international law. It
is extremely important that decisions by the Council
rely on the provisions of the Charter and take into
account the rules of international humanitarian law and
universally recognized human rights standards. The
Council cannot afford to take hasty decisions that are
not well founded or to manipulate Chapter VII of the
Charter. It cannot allow irresponsible actions, dictated
by short-sighted interests, to lead to the disintegration
of the entire system of international law.
Since the establishment of the International
Criminal Court in 2002, issues relating to its work
have appeared on the Council’s agenda. Today the
Council considers those issues on a regular basis,
recognizing the great potential of the Court in the area
of international justice.
In discharging its mandate for the maintenance
of international peace and security the Council must
address the fight against impunity. It has acquired solid
experience in that area, including its establishment of
ad hoc tribunals and its participation in setting up other
judicial organs having international elements. With
the appearance of the Court, the Council now has a
serious new tool with which to achieve that goal. In that
sense, the Council and the Court must interact within
the framework of their respective mandates and with
mutual respect.
Given that interrelationship, when a situation
is simultaneously before both the Council and the
International Criminal Court, it is particularly important
to achieve a harmonious combination of measures to
restore peace and steps to ensure accountability for
crimes, especially crimes committed during a conflict.
It is no easy task to achieve a proper balance between the
interests of achieving peace and punishing the guilty.
While it is important that the Court independently
conduct its functions in the criminal-legal sphere, its

19

S/PV.6849

activities must be carried out in the light of common
efforts to settle crisis situations.
The accumulated experience shows that the Security
Council’s referral of a case to the International Criminal
Court often gives rise to serious political and legal
consequences that do not lead to any straightforward
solution.
On the question of issuing warrants, there is a
question of States’ cooperation with the Court. In
particular, resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970 (2011)
did not establish a legal framework for appropriate
obligations of States not party to the Rome Statute.
The resolutions left out the question of the immunity
of high officials. Meanwhile, in the absence of a
direct instruction, Security Council resolutions do not
abrogate the norms of general international law on the
immunity of heads of State in office.
A careful analysis is required on how to choose
the time for the Council to refer a case to the Court.
Moving either too fast or too slowly in this matter can
lead to complex consequences with regard to prospects
for finding a peaceful settlement.
It is clear that persons guilty of particularly serious
crimes under international law must be brought before
the Court. We believe that the primary role in carrying
out that task, in the light of the Court’s jurisdictional
complementarity, is to be played by the national
judiciary.
Under the Rome Statute, for a situation to be
transferred to the International Criminal Court, and
for an investigation to be suspended, a decision by the
Council is required under Chapter VII of the Charter.
In that context we note that it is inadmissible to dilute
the fundamental criteria whereby the Council may
exercise its Chapter VII powers only if there is a threat
to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression.
An important matter for the International Criminal
Court is the question of including it its Statute the crime
of aggression. The Kampala compromise is understood
in various ways by States and experts. We have concerns
about the Court exercising jurisdiction with regard to
the crime of aggression in the absence of any definition
of the crime of aggression by the Security Council.
The crime of aggression has a clearly pronounced
political character. It is always committed not only by
individuals, but by political leaders under the power of
their Government. Accordingly, the crime of aggression

20

cannot occur without an act of aggression by the State.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, which is
the most universal treaty with primacy over all other
international treaties, the power for determining the
existence of an act of aggression belongs to the Security
Council. Unfortunately, the Kamapala compromise
does not fully take into account the powers of the
Council.
The International Criminal Court is young and
needs broad support by States. It must live up to the
trust placed in it. The extent to which it can work in
a mature and balanced way and find its own place in
the international system will determine whether it
can become a truly universal organ of international
criminal justice.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): First, I
wish to congratulate you, Minister Caballeros, and
your country, Guatemala, on having inscribed on the
Council’s agenda the important issue of peace and
justice, with a particular accent on the role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
I also thank the Secretary-General, the President of
the International Criminal Court and the representative
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court for their
introductory remarks on the issue under consideration
by the Council today.
Since the International Criminal Court was created
10 years ago, it and the Security Council have both
been working in the framework of their respective
statutes and mandates to achieve the objectives of
international peace and security and promotion of the
rule of law. In that regard, we welcome the Council’s
quick reaction via a press statement following the
detention of some ICC officials in Libya (see SC/10674).
Both institutions are working towards those objectives
through the fight against impunity and promotion of a
culture of accountability with respect to violations of
humanitarian law and other international instruments
when such violations threaten international peace and
security.
The Togolese delegation believes that to eliminate
impunity and promote accountability in cases of threats
to international peace and security, relations between
the Security Council and the ICC should not just follow
the same principles of rule of law and equitable justice.
Those relations should be seen in the application of
the rule of complementarity decreed by the Rome

12-55207

S/PV.6849

Statute, other relevant regional and international legal
instruments and the general principles of law.
The debate on the role of the ICC and its relation
with the Security Council in the area of promoting and
strengthening the rule of law through the maintenance
of international peace and security can be dealt with
through various key points. Those points — which in
fact are challenges if they are to be well understood
and responded to — will enable the two institutions to
better achieve the common objectives set for them.
First, there is the relationship between the ICC and
the Security Council, which assumes a complementarity
between the two institutions. It is true that in the
name of the principle of the separation of powers,
the International Criminal Court should, in principle,
not have relations with the Security Council. It is
also true that relations between the Security Council
and the ICC are seen as a necessary evil and as an
exception to the principle of the separation of powers.
As a consequence, and like all exceptions, the rules
governing relations between the two institutions must
be applied in a restricted manner, so as to preserve the
Court’s independence.
The proof is that the drafters of the Rome Statute
did not desire a very broad intervention by the Security
Council in the mandate of the ICC. Nevertheless,
a combined reading of articles 13 (b) and 16 of the
Statute of the ICC confers on the Security Council a
very important power that is not always in accord with
international law.
There is therefore reason for concern, hence the
need to avoid any extension of relations between the
Court and the Council beyond the terms and the spirit
of the Rome Statute. For that purpose, the agreement
between the ICC and the United Nations can serve as the
general framework for thinking to clarify the aspects
that particularly concern the Security Council. In that
regard, if it is acknowledged that the Security Council
can follow up the affairs of the ICC beyond the ICC’s
periodic reports, it must be determined whether such
follow-up will be limited only to those cases referred by
the Council, or will also involve those cases with which
the ICC is seized or becomes seized of, under its own
initiative without the Council’s intervention.
Furthermore, concerning the referral of cases to the
ICC by the Security Council, it should be noted that, for
reasons of their own, there are members of the Council,
including Togo, that are not yet States parties to the

12-55207

Rome Statute. The fact that, as things stand, the Security
Council is far from being representative of States
parties to the Rome Statute should cause the Council to
declare itself not competent to apply articles 13 (b) and
16 of the Rome Statute. For the Security Council to take
action under those articles is comparable to a regime’s
executive and political bodies applying laws to citizens
while exempting themselves from those same laws.
Moreover, certain somewhat ambiguous situations
strengthen that view. Even if most African situations
currently before the ICC were referred by African
States themselves, the only two situations referred by
the Council to the ICC to date pertain to Africa. The
question then arises as to why similar situations that
are taking place elsewhere have not provoked the same
interest on the part of the Security Council. That is
why we believe that, in order to achieve impartiality,
consistency and transparency, criteria will have to be
established for the Council to use in identifying, among
the situations that pose a threat to international peace
and security, those that should be referred to the ICC,
regardless of where they are taking place.
Another important issue to address is that of
funding the ICC. In principle, the fact that the Security
Council refers cases to the ICC without participating in
financing such procedures runs counter to article 115
(b) of the Rome Statute, which deals with the issue of
the use of the financial resources of the United Nations,
especially when it comes to referrals to the Court by the
Council. Even if we were unfamiliar with the Council’s
criteria for referring situations to the ICC, one could
envision situations in which the Council would make
such a decision on the rationale that the Council and the
United Nations would have established an ad hoc, hybrid
or international jurisdiction had the ICC not existed.
Those jurisdictions would of course be financed either
fully, as was the case with the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia, or
partially, as was the case with the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. In
that regard, it would be enough to transfer to the ICC
the funds that would have been allocated to such ad hoc
jurisdictions.
Finally, when it comes to cooperation between the
Security Council and the ICC, it is true that the role of
the Security Council could be crucial, since the ICC, like
any other international jurisdiction of its kind, cannot
carry out its mandate without the active cooperation
of States and the international community. However,

21

S/PV.6849

if the Council wishes to intervene so as to promote
or to trigger such cooperation, relevant modalities
must be established, with full respect not only for the
relevant international legal instruments, but also for
the principle according to which cooperation is at the
discretion of States. In that regard, we should think
about and decide under what circumstances and with
what means States could be encouraged to cooperate,
without being coerced, given the gravity of the situation
and the obligation to fight impunity in the case of a
threat to international peace and security.

to the Rome Statute — 121 to date. It is interesting
to see that the Court’s work, which often targets
very important persons, has not discouraged that
trend towards universalization. The Court represents
a guarantor of protection for all those who wish to
definitively turn the page on atrocities. We welcome in
that respect the announcements by Côte d’Ivoire and
Haiti, who will soon be ratifying the Rome Statute.
The signing of a partnership agreement between the
International Organization of la Francophonie and the
ICC will further enable such ratifications.

The experience of ad hoc jurisdictions shows
that Council resolutions have rarely obliged States to
cooperate if they themselves do not decide to do so, and
that dialogue and diplomacy have been more effective
in achieving cooperation than Council resolutions. As
proof of that, those jurisdictions have rarely reported
States that do not cooperate to the Council, especially
since the reporting or the threat of reporting could lead
the State concerned to take a more extreme position.

I would like to address the increasingly close and
mature relations between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court. That is no surprise, as
the ICC, a permanent court with a potentially global
scope, is charged with intervening in times of conflict.
In that respect, the agendas of the two bodies overlap,
whether on Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Libya or Côte d’Ivoire.

In conclusion, it is possible to imagine mechanisms
that would improve relations between the ICC and the
Security Council. In doing so, we will have to avoid
using informal mechanisms and arrangements that
run the risk of bypassing transparency or control
and open the way to arbitrariness. We believe that
one such mechanism could be the establishment of a
committee or working group on the ICC within the
Security Council in order to ensure better monitoring
of issues having to do with the implementation of
the ICC mandate and its relations with the Council.
Nevertheless, the mechanism to be established should
ensure the equitable application of the Rome Statute in
order to avoid negative remarks about the Court.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I associate
myself with the statement that will be made by the
observer of the European Union.
I would like to think Guatemala for having taken
the initiative of organizing this debate.
We have heard, in the opening statements, how
the International Criminal Court (ICC) has become an
increasingly active player in the multilateral system.
On 24 September, the General Assembly recognized,
in its Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution
67/1), the central role of the ICC for all States. That is of
course related to the growing number of States parties

22

The facts speak for themselves. The Office of
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda is carrying out preliminary
studies, with enormous potential for prevention, in eight
countries and on four continents. It is also carrying out
investigations in seven countries. Seven of the countries
concerned have been discussed by the Council during
the past two years.
Nobody expected, however, such a swift evolution
in the relationship between the Council and the ICC.
It is worth recalling how it happened. Resolution
1593 (2005), on Darfur, contained the first referral
by the Council to the Court. That was followed by
the memorandum of understanding giving the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo a mandate to support
the arrest of persons sought by the ICC upon the request
of the Government. Presidential statements increasingly
referred to the ICC, as did thematic resolutions,
including those on the protection of civilians, children
and armed conflict, sexual violence, and the rule of
law. There have been increasingly in-depth discussions
between the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the ICC.
Then there was resolution 1970 (2011), adopted on
26 February 2011 under Chapter VII of the Charter,
referring the situation in Libya to the ICC. That was
a historic moment — a text adopted unanimously by
the 15 members of the Council, including those that
had not acceded to the Rome Statute. Lastly, there have
been increasing references to the ICC in geographical

12-55207

S/PV.6849

resolutions, including the self-referral by the Offices of
the Prosecutor in Côte d’Ivoire and Kenya and States’
referrals, the most recent being resolution 2071 (2012),
on Mali.
Besides those documents, which now represent in
themselves a significant body of law, both the Council
and its subsidiary organs have effectively dealt with
requests for cooperation from the ICC.
I am thinking of the lifting of the travel ban on
Thomas Lubanga and, more recently, Laurent Gbagbo
by the sanctions committees so that they could be
transferred to The Hague.
Of course, there are disagreements and gaps. The
first and most obvious is the lack of referral to the Court
of a situation like that in Syria. As France declared in
March 2012 to the Human Rights Council, the extent
and nature of the atrocities committed in Syria and the
apparent lack of willingness of the Syrian authorities
to prosecute the perpetrators of those crimes warrant
a Council referral to the Prosecutor under article 13
(b) of the Statute. Silence has never served peace or
justice. The inability of the Council to demonstrate its
unity against mass crimes is, rather, an incitement to
the Syrian authorities to pursue the path of violence.
I take this opportunity to recall that the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Laurent Fabius,
has called for the establishment of a code of conduct
between the permanent members of the Council by
which they would undertake collectively not to use the
veto in situations where massive crimes are committed.
The second gap, which is more insidious, is the lack
of monitoring by the Council of its own resolutions. It is
not right that the Council, when it has made a referral to
the Court, should fail to guarantee consistent political
support for the Court and to react to instances of
non-cooperation to which the Court draws our attention.
It is not right for the Council to fail to apply the strict
guidelines issued by the office of Ms. Bensouda on
contacts with the accused.
Today’s debate therefore offers an opportunity to
move forward and think about concrete ways to make
the interaction between the Council and the Court more
efficient. How do we get more consistency and followup, in particular with respect to arrests and instances of
non-cooperation? How do we get more dialogue?
First of all, we must contribute more to the
preventive role of the Court. That is what the Secretary-

12-55207

General is doing when he recalls that justice must follow
its course in all situations that have been referred to the
Court and when he asks his representatives not to meet
persons indicted by the ICC. That is what his Special
Representatives, Ms. Zerrougui and Ms. Bangura, do
when they refer to prosecutions against the perpetrators
of child recruitment and sexual violence. If we really
want to deter criminals and implement prevention, we
must be more of a sounding board for the activities of
the International Criminal Court.
Secondly, in the context of the sanctions regime,
we could consider not only a more automatic listing of
individuals who are the subject of an arrest warrant by
the International Criminal Court, but also an exemption
clause of the travel ban in cases transfer of an accused
to The Hague. Let us consider it.
Finally, in the area of cooperation, the subjects
are varied and range from requests for the freezing of
assets to issues related to the planning of arrests. The
Prosecutor and the President of the Assembly of States
Parties, Ambassador Intelmann, whose presence in the
Chamber I welcome today, have repeatedly called our
attention to those issues. The representative of South
Africa underscored in his statement the importance of
dealing with non-cooperation cases.
We could no doubt better organize our dialogue
in the informal working group on the model of what
we have done in the past with the ad hoc tribunals. We
could consider a change in the mandate of the informal
working group on the ad hoc tribunals to give it a
broader mandate.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Sir, for giving us the opportunity to discuss such an
important issue and for underlining its importance by
presiding personally over today’s debate. The timing
is particularly relevant, given the tenth anniversary
this year of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and the sad fact that the need to expand peace, justice
and accountability is as urgent now as ever before. In
that context, we are grateful to the Secretary-General,
President Song and Mr. Mochochoko for their briefings
and their calls to action.
The rule of law is critical to the preservation of the
rights of individuals and the protection of the interests
of all States. To borrow the words of the great humanist
Erasmus, justice restrains bloodshed, punishes guilt,
defends possessions and keeps people safe from
oppression. That is why the Government of the United

23

S/PV.6849

Kingdom is a strong supporter of international justice
in general and of the International Criminal Court in
particular. We have learned from history that there
cannot be lasting peace without justice, accountability
and reconciliation. The Arab Spring has reminded
us again that nations cannot maintain long-term
stability and prosperity without human rights, political
participation and economic freedom for their citizens.
The International Criminal Court has a central role
to play in achieving an end to impunity. It is in that
context that cooperation with the Court is so essential.
We agree with President Song that, in making future
referrals, the Council should underline clearly the need
for Member States to cooperate fully with the Court.
The Security Council and the Court have a
mutually reinforcing relationship. That is evidenced in
the Council’s resolutions and statements, which have
regularly recognized the importance of the Court and
the role that it plays in helping to deliver peace and
reconciliation. Most obviously there are the resolutions
referring the situations in Darfur and Libya to the
Court and the briefings that flow from them. But there
are also other resolutions that recognize the role of the
ICC, and we would highlight resolutions 2053 (2012)
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2062 (2012)
on Côte d’Ivoire, and 2071 (2012) on Mali as examples
from this year, not to mention the various presidential
and press statements that refer to the Court’s role and
work.
The Security Council, however, also needs to
be ready to respond to issues that hinder the Court’s
activities, such as the failure by a State to implement the
Court’s outstanding arrest warrants, notwithstanding
an obligation to do so under either the Rome Statute
or a Chapter VII resolution. Those issues are not
straightforward; they raise real challenges. But as we
work to support the Court we must keep the victims
in mind and recognize that in those instances the
International Criminal Court may be the only path to
justice.
Achieving the universality of the Rome Statute is
the key to deepening and broadening the reach of the
rule of law. We need all States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the Rome Statute, and we need
States parties to live up to their responsibilities. Until
then, where impunity is unchecked and accountability
denied, the Security Council must be prepared to live
up to its responsibility and take action. The Council
and the Court must continue to send a strong message
24

to those leaders who would commit atrocities that they
will be held to account by the International Criminal
Court, if not by their own national courts.
In Syria, the world is calling for a stop to the
State-sponsored killing and torture machine that has
already claimed thousands of victims and for an end to
the vicious cycle of violence. So far, our efforts have not
succeeded, but as our Foreign Secretary has made clear,
we remain committed to ensuring that those responsible
will be held accountable, and we will offer every
support to those seeking to ensure that this happens.
The path to peace and justice can be long and difficult,
but progress is possible as long as we strengthen our
commitment to the international rule of law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Guatemala.
It is very encouraging that the important subject
we have selected has attracted such great interest and
so many participants. Guatemala, as the latest State
party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, suggested the topic as a contribution to the fight
against impunity and to strengthening the rule of law,
particularly in the work of the Security Council. By
doing so, we are raising to the international level our own
domestic struggle against impunity, an effort in which
the United Nations and many donor countries — some
represented in the Security Council — have contributed
through the International Commission against Impunity
in Guatemala. We have chosen a topic that seems to
some to be philosophical. For our part, we find that it is
very practical and relevant in the current state of world
affairs.
The Rome Statute recognizes the essential link
between peace and justice. Every day the Security
Council faces situations that demand justice so
that a lasting peace may prevail. The concept note
(S/2012/731, annex) that we prepared for the Council
attempts to identify links common to both bodies, along
with challenges and proposals as to how to address
them. Today is the first time the Security Council is
addressing the relationship between both bodies in a
comprehensive manner, even though they have been
formally collaborating with each since 2005. We expect
that the debate will initiate a dialogue that would draw
the Council and the Court closer together, especially
noting that 2012 is the tenth anniversary since the
Rome Statute entered into force.

12-55207

S/PV.6849

As a tool of preventive diplomacy, the Court is
within the reach of the Security Council, and offers its
members a powerful option that serves to restore the
confidence of Member States in the ability of the United
Nations to prevent and resolve conflicts in an efficient
manner. It also contributes to reaffirming the primary
responsibility of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security, and it recommits the
Council once again to fulfilling that responsibility in
cooperation with its partners.
We also believe that any debate on the use of tools
available to the Security Council to fulfil its mandate
should not be focus on whether States are or are not
parties to the Rome Statute. In our view, the stability
of the relationship between the Council and the Court
should not depend on what countries take turns sitting
at this table every two years. Rather, it needs to be
founded upon the universal conviction that some crimes
are so heinous that they must not go unpunished.
I would therefore underscore three principles
that we believe are in the interests of the Security
Council to promote: complementarity, cooperation and
universality.
With regard to the first principle, we consider it
necessary to support the primacy of national criminal
jurisdictions in investigating or prosecuting perpetrators
of crimes covered by the Rome Statute. It is not only for
reasons of respect for State sovereignty, but also due to
the practical constraints of limited resources. The sad
reality is that the Court does not have the capacity to
take up all the most serious crimes in the world, just as
the Security Council cannot remain seized of all crises.
It is a Court of last resort, and we should all work to
ensure that the situations before it do not arise again.
Considering the second principle, it is essential to
take the measures necessary to intensify cooperation
at all levels in order to end impunity and ensure that
those responsible for the worst atrocities are brought to
justice. We consider cooperation critical if the Council
is to at least follow through on its own decisions
and adequately follow up on its referrals, especially
where there is evident reluctance to cooperate. Such
cooperation can also serve as a deterrent against the
commission of future crimes.
With regard to the third principle, we believe that
the Security Council should promote the universality
of the Rome Statute. With each State that ratifies the
instrument, there will be a diminished need to resort

12-55207

to referrals, which in turn will also decrease the cases
of breach of the Court’s decisions. Universality would
also serve to further other fundamental principles of
the United Nations, including respect for the rule of
law, human rights and accountability.
In the light of all this, we call on the entire
membership to maximize the advantages the Court
offers the Security Council as a tool for preventive
diplomacy. We hope that this aspiration will extend
beyond this debate. The Council can undoubtedly
facilitate the Court’s work, but its true effectiveness
will depend for the most part on broad ratification,
proper financing and independence in its functioning.
I now resume my capacity as President of the
Security Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Vice-Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Grant Duchy of
Luxembourg.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
wish to express my appreciation, Mr. President, for the
Guatemalan initiative to organize this open debate on
the subject of peace and justice, with special focus on
the role of the International Criminal Court.
There can be no lasting peace without justice. That
statement resonates throughout the world, particularly
in post-conflict situations. The pursuit of justice and
the quest for peace are not mutually exclusive; they
complement each other.
The International Criminal Court plays a crucial
role in fighting impunity for the most serious crimes
of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes
and, in future, the crime of aggression. I welcome the
presentation made by the President of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Sang-Hyun Song, whom I had the
honour of hosting in Luxembourg last week during a
celebration of the tenth anniversary of the entry into
force of the Rome Statute.
The Rome Statue offers important options to the
Security Council, especially in situations in which it is
confronted with mass atrocities. The functions of the
Council and of the Court are complementary. Both aim to
25

S/PV.6849

protect populations at risk. The perpetration of crimes,
as defined by the Rome Statute, threaten international
peace and security. The prevention of such crimes and
insistence on international accountability contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The deterrent effect of the very existence of the Court
contributes to strengthening conflict prevention.
The cases of Darfur in 2005 and of Libya in 2011
clearly show that appropriate use by the Council of
its authority to refer a situation to the International
Criminal Court significantly enhances accountability
for the most serious crimes. In future, once the Court is
able to exercise jurisdiction with respect to the crime of
aggression, the fight against impunity will have made
further progress. My country has already included
the crime of aggression in its criminal code. By early
2013, as we pledged on 27 September at the Highlevel Meeting on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels, Luxembourg will have completed
ratification of the amendments to the Rome Statute,
including the crime of aggression, that were adopted
in June 2010 at the Kampala Review Conference on the
Rome Statute.
We were invited to make suggestions as to how
to strengthen interaction between the Council and
the International Criminal Court. I would like to
mention two on the basis of the excellent concept note
(S/2012/731, annex) made available to us.
First, the Council could better strengthen
interaction with the Court if it is sufficiently wellinformed about crimes being committed on the ground.
In that respect, we welcome the increasingly frequent
participation of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in the deliberations of the Council.
We would encourage the Council to continue in
that vein and to make full use of other sources of
information, such as the reports of commissions of
inquiry. The information that the Council has received
from those sources on crimes committed in Syria in
recent months is overwhelming. We firmly believe
that those responsible for such terrifying violence, war
crimes, egregious human rights violations and crimes
against humanity committed in Syria will one day have
to answer for them.
Secondly, it is important to stress the principle
of complementarity. The Court is complementary
to national criminal jurisdictions, which are the first
line of defence against impunity. The Council can
play a useful role in that context by ensuring that the
26

peacekeeping operations it mandates in post-conflict
situations have adequate capacities or are able to carry
out appropriate measures to effectively support the
strengthening of the rule of law and national courts.
Luxembourg is committed to strengthening the
principle of complementarity. That is why we started
a partnership several years ago with the International
Center for Transitional Justice and why we support
the Justice Rapid Response initiative, which aims
to train national justice professionals to investigate
international crimes. It is in the same spirit that we
support the strengthening of the justice sector as well
as national reconciliation, in the framework of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Finland.
Mr. Tuomioja (Finland): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Finland. As
staunch supporters of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), we wish to congratulate you, Sir, and Guatemala
for its recent ratification of the Rome Statute and to
express our thanks for the convening of this debate.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General, President
Song and Mr. Mochochoko of the Office of the
Prosecutor for their contributions.
This is a fitting moment to take stock of the
relationship between the ICC and the Security Council.
We also wish to recognize the increasing number of
ICC-related decisions and actions by the Security
Council and encourage further interplay between the
two institutions.
The ICC has come a long way since its establishment.
The number of States arties to the Statute is currently
121 and the number of country situations has grown
to seven. The number of judicial proceedings is also
rapidly increasing. The Security Council has twice
referred a situation to the Court. That confirms that the
ICC has become the centrepiece of our international
criminal justice efforts and a key actor in fighting
impunity for the most serious crimes.
The resolve of the negotiators of the Rome Statute
stemmed from the grim reality of the twentieth century,
during which millions of children, women and men had
been made the victims of unimaginable atrocities. In
this century, too, we continue to face such crimes that,
in the words of the Statute’s preamble, deeply shock the
conscience of humanity.
12-55207

S/PV.6849

The victims of such crimes are entitled to justice.
In situations where effective and genuine national
trials are not possible for various reasons, the ICC
plays a central role in ensuring accountability. The
Rome Statute system, which includes the Trust Fund
for Victims, also provides for an important restorative
function. Fair administration of justice complemented
by a comprehensive transitional justice strategy is
an essential element in peace efforts. There will be
no lasting peace without justice and due attention to
victims.
The goals of preventing conflict and protecting
populations who are at risk of mass atrocities unite the
Security Council and the ICC. We signed onto the Rome
Statute of the ICC — and I quote from the preamble —
“determined to put an end to impunity for the
perpetrators of these crimes and thus to contribute to
the prevention of such crimes … [and] recognizing
that such grave crimes threaten the peace, security
and well-being of the world”.
The Security Council can, through a referral to
the ICC, send a strong message that crime does not
pay. Justice will be done. Security Council referrals
show that, while the ICC is an independent judicial
institution, it is not alone on the international scene. It
needs to interact with other actors, and it needs support
from them. The Statute contains important provisions
on the relationship between the Court and the Security
Council, ranging from the power of referring situations
to the Court to that of temporarily deferring investigation
or prosecution by the ICC and addressing instances of
non-cooperation. In due course, the provisions on the
crime of aggression will also become operational. We
urge the Council to approach all of those provisions in a
consistent manner and with due regard to their purpose
and intent.
We also urge the Council to assist the Court in
fulfilling its tasks in situations referred to it by the
Council. The mandate of the Court is limited and does
not extend to issues such as the execution of arrest
warrants or taking action in cases of non-cooperation.
Several arrest warrants have been outstanding for
a number of years. Non-essential contacts with
individuals subject to an arrest warrant issued by the
Court should be avoided. Arrest warrants must be
executed. In that context, we welcome the Council’s
action earlier this year, reminding the international
community of the obligations stemming from the
relevant Council resolutions.
12-55207

Meeting the budget demands of the Court, including
those arising from referred situations, is a real concern.
Ensuring the necessary resources should be a shared
responsibility for all United Nations Member States.
The Nordic countries have time and again repeated
that impunity for the most serious international crimes
must not be tolerated. We welcome that the world
leaders came together recently to affirm the Declaration
adopted at the General Assembly High-level Meeting
on the Rule of Law at the national and international
levels.
We are horrified by the continuous atrocities in
Syria and urge the Council to take decisive steps to
secure the accountability of those most responsible in
that serious situation.
The High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
also recognized the role of the ICC in a multilateral
system that seeks to establish the rule of law. The ICC
not only plays an important role in ensuring that those
who have committed the gravest crimes cannot escape
justice; the ICC and the Rome Statute system also have
a role to play in the broader framework of fostering the
rule of law and thus in building sustainable peace.
That is because the Rome Statute recognizes that
States bear the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute even the most serious international crimes.
That is the essence of the principle of complementarity,
which governs the Court’s jurisdiction. The ICC only
steps in when and if a State is unable or unwilling to
exercise that responsibility. In order to assist States with
their responsibility, other actors — including the Court,
the United Nations and regional organizations — can
also play an important role. Progress in that area of
positive complementarity leads to the strengthening
of the rule of law and in turn the prevention of new
conflicts.
It is our firm conviction that only a just peace is a
lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Estonia.
Ms. Intelmann (Estonia): I am speaking in my
capacity as President of the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute and as Estonia’s Ambassador-atlarge.
I would like to join others in thanking Guatemala
for having organized this timely and indeed longawaited debate to look into the relationship between the
27

S/PV.6849

Security Council and the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In making this statement, Estonia aligns itself
with the statement that will be delivered on behalf of
the European Union.

non-cooperation. On that subject, I would like to
mention that the Assembly of States Parties has in
place its own mechanisms to follow up on instances of
non-cooperation by States parties.

In recent years, issues of the rule of law and justice
have gained prominence in the Council, becoming part
of the mainstream of Council discussions. The fact that
the Council has increasingly been able to refer to the
Court’s work in its resolutions and its presidential and
press statements is indeed very welcome. It is evident
that the Council has recognized the contribution of the
Court to the fight against impunity and to international
peace and security.

The referral of situations to the Court by the Security
Council creates a financial burden that has been borne
entirely by States parties to the Rome Statute. That
situation was not foreseen by the Rome Statute, which
assumes, in its article 115, that the United Nations will
reimburse the Court for the costs incurred as the result
of referrals. The ICC is a relatively small court with
a relatively limited budget. Budget discussions among
States parties at the end of last year, shortly after the
adoption of resolution 1970 (2011), showed that the
present practice may not be sustainable.

The Rome Statute system is first and foremost a
consent-based arrangement. However, Article 13 (b)
of the Statute enables the Council to refer situations to
the Court, thereby extending the reach of the Court and
making justice and accountability possible in States
that are not parties to the Rome Statute.
That represents a great opportunity to bring to
justice perpetrators of crimes that would otherwise
go unpunished. Resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970
(2011) took crucial steps in the fight against impunity
by referring the situations in Darfur and Libya to the
ICC. While recognizing those achievements, we must
also be conscious of the challenges faced by the Court
with respect to the two referrals, which are a subject of
continuous discussion among States parties.
Allow me to share a few thoughts, bearing in mind
the possibility of future referrals by the Council. The
Security Council receives periodic reports from the
Prosecutor concerning both of the situations it has
referred to the ICC. Given their complicated nature,
the Court, and indeed the Council itself, would greatly
benefit from a more efficient and vigorous follow-up of
the situations, including using the Council’s sanctions
mechanisms.
In particular, the Council could consider imposing
sanctions against individuals who are sought by the
Court, especially when there are already appropriate
sanctions committees in place. There should also
be coordination between the sanctions committees
and the ICC to ensure that frozen assets belonging to
individuals can be claimed by the Court to finance the
defence of individuals before the Court and, ultimately,
reparations to victims.
The Court would greatly benefit from a followup by the Council with regard to instances of
28

Effective cooperation and assistance by all States
and international and regional organizations is essential
for the ICC, and it was also essential for the tribunals
previously set up by the Security Council. In future
referrals, the Security Council might consider imposing
an obligation to cooperate with the Court on all States
Members of the United Nations.
After 10 years of existence, the Court and the
States parties are engaged in a lessons-learned exercise
to make the ICC and the whole of the Rome Statute
system more efficient. That includes a consistent focus
on cooperation with the ICC, including the execution
of the more than 10 outstanding arrest warrants. After
two referrals, it would be useful for the Security
Council to establish a working group or a Rome Statute
caucus to examine the practice of past referrals and the
effectiveness of investigations stemming from them,
and to look into the modalities for future referrals.
Given the common goal of the Council and the Rome
Statute, namely, the fight against criminal atrocities,
I am sure that both the Council and the ICC would
benefit from such an exercise.
The States parties stand for the integrity of the
Statute. They also advocate for universal ratification
of the Rome Statute, since that is the ultimate way to
ensure accountability for international crimes. I call on
all States that have not yet done so to ratify or accede
to the Statute.
Before concluding, allow me to offer some thoughts
about victims. Victims are indeed at the very centre of
the Rome Statute system. Successful investigations
and prosecutions assist in restoring dignity to victims
by acknowledging their suffering and help to create

12-55207

S/PV.6849

a historical record that protects against those who
will seek to deny that atrocities occurred. Let us not
fail those who have suffered as the result of criminal
atrocities and look to us for help.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Román-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It
is a great honour to speak in the Council under the
presidency of Guatemala.
Let me express the thanks due to Guatemala for its
important initiative in focusing the Council’s attention
for the first time on the relationship between the
Council and the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The timing is apt, because this year we celebrate the
tenth anniversary of the Rome Statute’s entry into
force. We agree that enough time has now passed for
us to take stock and identify pending issues with regard
to that relationship, so as to further strengthen the fight
against impunity for what the international community
agrees are the most serious crimes. The concept note
from the presidency (S/2012/731, annex) is very useful
in its systematic and detailed focus on the issue.
My delegation believes that four topics need
especially to be discussed. First are referrals by the
Security Council to the Court under article 13 (b) of
the Rome Statute. The conditions for such a referral are
set out in the Statute and refer to a situation in which
it appears that one or more crimes falling under the
Court’s jurisdiction have been committed, assuming
that the Court’s jurisdiction is complementary to
national criminal jurisdictions. We therefore need
to stress that the referral of a situation to the Court
does not relieve the Council of its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
On the contrary, the Court merely contributes to the
maintenance of international peace and security in
matters within its jurisdiction.
Political considerations must not sway the Council
from referring a situation to the Court. That sends a
message that impunity is permitted — a message that
we would certainly reject if we honoured and adhered
to the principles that gave birth to the Organization.
That brings us to the matter of reforming the working
methods of the Security Council, such that referrals
are not perceived as being selective or restricting the
Court’s proceedings or jurisdiction.

12-55207

Our second point is about the relationship of the
Security Council with the Court and with the States
Members of the United Nations. Clearly, a referral by
the Council to the Prosecutor does not end the Council’s
responsibility in the matter. Rather, it is the Council’s
responsibility to follow up on the actions that the
Prosecutor and judges take within their jurisdictions.
That means that the Council should always be ready to
take concrete actions, if needed by the Court in order
to carry out its work in the field, such as in protecting
victims and witnesses, discovering and freezing assets,
capturing suspects and executing arrest warrants. Such
measures are covered under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, with which all States are required
to comply.
Our third point has to do with the financing of
referrals made by the Security Council. Until now, the
Council’s resolutions have not provided for funding
on the part of the United Nations. In other words,
investigations and judgments of matters referred to the
Court by the Council are not provided with sufficient
economic means to sustain them. We should further
recall that budgetary questions fall properly under
the jurisdiction of the General Assembly, and not the
Security Council. Moreover, the concept of referrals to
the system created by the Rome Statute derives from
Chapter VII of the Charter. The Organization is no
stranger to that concept, and indeed the United Nations
no longer needs to establish ad hoc tribunals. Now is a
very appropriate time for us to act on what is provided
for in the Statute with regard to relations between the
United Nations and the Court.
Our fourth point is about the amendments to the
Rome Statute adopted in Kampala, especially on the
matter of the crime of aggression and the jurisdiction
of the Court in referrals by the Council, given that the
conditions set out in article 15 (3) of the Statute have
been met.
We must do our utmost to ensure that the
amendments are ratified by as many States as possible
so as to try to prevent any impunity for crimes falling
within the jurisdiction of the Court.
Lastly, allow me to reiterate my country’s gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate in the Council. Opportunities such as this
will undoubtedly lead to a better understanding of
the relationship between peace and security — two
indissociable concepts that are not competing but

29

S/PV.6849

complementary. We therefore believe that we must
consider follow-up mechanisms that are comprehensive,
in terms of both substance and participation, with
respect to what has been discussed at this meeting.

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list. I intend, with
the consent of the Council, to suspend the meeting until
3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

30

12-55207
