S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9392

nd meeting
Thursday, 3 August 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield/Ms. Saha/Mr. Wood/Mr. Kelley.

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Cruvinel Barenho
Mr. Zhao Shuai
Mr. Fiallo Karolys
Ms. Lebatteux
Ms. Oye
Ms. Arhin
Mr. Nakagawa
Ms. Micallef
Mr. Buanahagi
Mr. Adrianov
Mr. Carpenter
Mr. Azzam
Ms. Kalis

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Famine and conflict-induced global food insecurity
Letter dated 26 July 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2023/560)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-23024 (E)
*2323024*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was resumed at 3 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of August. I
would also like to thank you, Madam President, for
inviting the briefers who spoke on the role of businesses
in fundraising. Involving the private sector begins with
including industry leaders in the conversation, and
Jordan commends you, Madam President, for leading
that effort at the highest political level.
The hunger of people displaced by conflict is
the gravest form of food insecurity. The cycle of war
and famine triggers a security challenge that is less
visible but no less urgent, with overburdened resources
preventing countries hosting refugees from providing
food to those who need it. No country can tackle that
challenge alone, especially developing countries in
climate hotspots. In Jordan, where conflict-driven food
insecurity affects three of four refugees and nearly 5 per
cent of the total population, the need for international
solidarity is acute. With one of the lowest levels of water
available per person in the world, Jordan has watched
increasingly frequent climate-related shocks strain
an agricultural industry that is now expected to feed
more. Desertification has deepened the vulnerability of
Jordan’s staple food needs, 80 per cent of which are met
through imports.
The mounting needs of refugees are outpacing the
pledges of aid. Chronically underfunded United Nations
agencies are forced to feed the starving at the expense
of the hungry. In Jordan, the World Food Programme
(WFP) is meeting the basic food needs of nearly half
a million refugees. But just three days ago, the WFP
ended cash handouts for more than 50,000 refugees in
Jordan, escalating its withdrawal from the two largest
refugee camps in the Middle East after it had reduced
food subsidies by a third for all of the 120,000 refugees
in the Za’atari and Al-Azraq refugee camps last year.
In that regard, it should be stressed that it is incumbent
on donor States to allocate additional and sufficient
resources to meet any new commitments to countries
2/47

03/08/2023

affected by other conflicts, and not to undercut funding
for existing programmes, including funding allocated
to the WFP.
The countries that bear the brunt of the hungerinducing consequences of conflict have agreed to
shoulder a tremendous weight, based on a promise
that the burdens they have assumed on behalf of the
international community will be shared. However,
those promises are not being fulfilled, and we worry
that prioritizing humanitarian assistance based on
the political importance of the conflict to the donor
community will expose millions of refugees all over
the world to a heightened risk of hunger. Countries
that host refugees are performing a global public
good, demonstrating solidarity with the priorities of
the international community. When Jordan supplies
work permits and training to hundreds of thousands
of refugees, and when it provides quality health and
education services, it sends a message that countries
will go beyond their responsibilities as they wait for
members of the international community to accept their
own responsibility. We expect the Council to assume
its responsibility in facilitating sustainable solutions to
refugee crises, and the wider United Nations to work
towards enabling the safe, dignified and voluntary
return of refugees to their homes.
Jordan will be engaged in the Summit of the Future
and its preparatory ministerial meeting this autumn
to highlight the generational challenge of addressing
food insecurity in refugee and host communities. We
are eager to hear the Secretary-General’s report next
year on the progress in following up on this year’s
Food Systems Summit, and we are ready to help carry
the momentum through to the next global stocktaking
in 2025. Our collective and swift coordination, as an
international community, is key to preventing the world
crises that may lie ahead. In the words of His Majesty
King Abdullah II in reference to achieving global food
security, we must keep working together if we wish
to succeed.
Finally, I would like to remind all States of their
obligations under international law concerning the
protection of civilian populations during armed conflict
and in situations of occupation. The suffering and
deprivation of the Palestinian people as a result of the
Israeli occupation over the decades are a clear example
of the need for the Security Council to act to stop such
violations against protected populations, something it
has consistently failed to do.
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Larsen (Australia): I have the honour today to
speak on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and my own
country, Australia (CANZ).
I thank the United States for its leadership on the
issue. I also thank the United Nations Famine Prevention
and Response Coordinator, Ms. Reena Ghelani, for her
tireless work to strengthen food security and resilience
in a time of unprecedented need. This year more than
345 million people are facing acute food insecurity,
more than twice the number in 2020. Of those, more than
43 million are now on the brink of famine and nearly
1 million are expected to face catastrophic conditions.
We know that food insecurity exacerbates existing
inequalities, with women and girls especially affected.
The growing scale of food insecurity and human
suffering is cause for deep concern.
With climate change, economic shocks and
inequalities driving food insecurity, conflict and
violence remain the primary causes of hunger,
malnutrition and famine. The world is currently facing
the highest number of violent conflicts since 1945.
We condemn Russia’s decision to walk away from
the Black Sea Grain Initiative with full knowledge
of the impact that would have on global food prices
and the world’s most vulnerable. Russia’s deliberate
targeting and destruction of Ukrainian agricultural
and other civilian infrastructure, in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian law, has caused terrible
loss and damage to Ukraine and exacerbated global
food insecurity.
We call on Russia to return to the negotiating table
and end its war in Ukraine. We commend the unwavering
efforts of Secretary-General Guterres and Türkiye to
sustain the vital Black Sea Grain Initiative lifeline. The
Initiative remains critical for the stabilization of global
food prices and for ensuring that those most vulnerable
in Africa, the Indo-Pacific and the Middle East have
access to predictable supplies of affordable food.
CANZ will continue to support multilateral
approaches to humanitarian challenges. We commend
the courage of impartial humanitarian organizations to
stay and deliver in increasingly complex environments.
We reiterate our strong calls for all parties to adhere
to international humanitarian law, including the
requirement to ensure timely, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access to all civilians in need.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

We recognize that multifaceted crises are stretching
humanitarian organizations and the humanitarian
system to their limits. We urge all parties to armed
conflict to protect civilians, civilian infrastructure
and objects essential to the survival of the civilian
population, including agri-food systems. We recall the
Security Council’s repeated unanimous condemnation
of starvation as a method of warfare and the need for
accountability under international law. We heard the
Secretary-General’s call to action at the Food Systems
Summit and affirm the need to accelerate action on
food security and the drivers of conflict in order to get
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development back
on track.
Finally, we call for solutions that place humanity
above politics.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Oman.
Mr. Al Rubkhi (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the Member States of the
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf
(GCC), namely, the Kingdom of Bahrain, the United
Arab Emirates, the State of Kuwait, the State of Qatar,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and my country, the
Sultanate of Oman, in the context of this debate on
famine and conflict-induced global food insecurity.
I would like to begin by thanking the friendly
United States of America, President of the Security
Council for this month, for inscribing this important
issue on the Council’s agenda, stressing at the same time
that the GCC States are following with great interest
the developments of the situations on the regional and
international arenas as well as the resultant multiple
crises and conflicts. The GCC States believe that
the continuation of those crises and conflicts would
undermine the ability of the international community
to face their repercussions for food security and the
stability of States, not to mention their humanitarian
impacts on States and peoples alike.
The GCC States would also like to refer in that
regard to resolution 2417 (2018), which highlighted
the link between armed conflict and violence, on the
one hand, and food insecurity and the risk of famine,
on the other. It totally rejected practices that violate
international humanitarian law, including the illegal
prevention of aid and humanitarian material delivery
while denying civilians access to life-saving materials.
The resolution was submitted by the State of Kuwait,

23-230243/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

in partnership with the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Sweden and Côte d’Ivoire, was adopted by consensus
and has received wide international support.
The GCC States call for the implementation of the
recommendations contained in resolution 2417 (2018)
in order to alleviate the effects of the conflict-induced
international food crisis and its negative effect on food
security. The GCC States call on all parties to armed
conflicts to comply with their commitments pursuant
to international humanitarian law with regard to the
respect and protection of civilians; to commit to not
target civilian objects and installations, including
those necessary for the production and distribution of
food, medicine and vaccines; to refrain from targeting,
destroying or damaging any object necessary for
the survival of civilians; and to respect and protect
humanitarian personnel and shipments.
The GCC States are concerned about the rising
level of global humanitarian needs and the threat of
famine to many civilians and communities worldwide.
Taking General Assembly resolutions 46/182 and
58/114 into account, we emphasize the need to and
importance of totally committing to the principles and
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, foremost among which is respecting
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and
respect for good neighbourliness. In accordance with
Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, Member
States must settle international disputes through
peaceful means and refrain from the use or threat of use
of force in international relations. Any move contrary
to those principles must take place legally and officially
through a clear mandate of the Security Council, in
coordination with the States concerned.
The Council is aware of the efforts made by the
GCC States to provide humanitarian assistance in
order to address urgent needs, including ensuring food
security. In addition to the conflicts we are facing, we
note that climate change exacerbates the food insecurity
crisis. We therefore believe it is critical to coordinate
our international efforts, boost climate action and
enhance the resilience of Member States, especially
developing countries.
The GCC States call on the international community
to redouble its efforts to resolve crises and conflicts
on an equal footing. Armed conflicts, violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, food insecurity and
4/47

03/08/2023

starvation policies targeting civilians are among the
factors that lead to forced displacement. In countries
affected by armed conflict or foreign occupation,
those could have a detrimental effect on agricultural
production, food security and basic living needs.
The GCC States therefore call on all parties to
armed disputes and conflicts to respect international
humanitarian law and to provide safe and unimpeded
access for humanitarian workers to assist civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I thank the
United States for convening this open debate and
welcome the Security Council’s continued attention to
this important topic.
As highlighted in various recent reports and at
the forty-third session of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations Conference,
held last month in Rome, our world faces increasing
changes to food security. Even though most sectors
have recovered — more or less — from the pandemic,
access to food remains an acute problem in many parts
of the globe. The causes of food insecurity are complex
and manifold, ranging from natural to socioeconomic
factors. But it is not accidental that hunger and famine
nowadays loom mainly in conflict-affected countries.
The correlation between conflicts and conflict-induced
hunger has been widely recognized. More joint efforts
are needed to break this vicious cycle.
In that connection, I would like to highlight
several points.
First, the most effective way to prevent hunger
and famine in conflict-affected areas is to address
the violence and build peace. The Security Council
needs to play a more effective role in addressing the
root causes of conflicts, thereby reducing the risk of
conflict-induced food insecurity.
Secondly, the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, especially humanitarian law, must be
strictly upheld in all conflicts. All parties must refrain
from any act that threatens the subsistence of civilians
in conflict-affected areas, including attacks on and the
destruction of objects indispensable to the survival of
the civilian population, as stipulated in resolution 2417
(2018) and resolution 2573 (2021), submitted by Viet
Nam in April 2021. Civilians, especially women and
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

children, must not be deprived of access to humanitarian
assistance, including food aid.
Thirdly, it is imperative that the United Nations
takes a whole-of-system approach to promoting
sustainable peace and development and addressing food
insecurity. The Security Council needs to work in close
coordination with relevant United Nations agencies,
such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the World Food Programme, as well
as international donors to combat hunger in conflictaffected areas. Cooperation with regional organizations
is also critical, especially when it comes to fostering
resilient and accessible food systems and securing
global food supply chains.
Having gone through decades of war and
transformation from a hunger-stricken country to one
of the world’s largest exporters of rice and agricultural
products, Viet Nam understands first-hand the vital
role of food security in sustaining peace and vice versa.
Today, food security is both a goal and a means in Viet
Nam’s socioeconomic development strategy, in which
we prioritize the development of low-emission and
climate-resilient agriculture and aspire to become a
food-innovation hub in the region. Viet Nam continues
to actively contribute to global food security through
stable exports of rice and various other agricultural
products and stands ready to work closely with the
international community to address famine and
conflict-induced food insecurity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): I wish to
congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August and to express appreciation to Secretary of
State Blinken for convening and presiding over this
important open debate on famine and conflict-induced
food insecurity this morning. Our thanks also go to
the United Kingdom for the fruitful presidency of the
Council last month. And we appreciate the insights
provided by the briefers for today’s discussions.
What do the Global Report on Food Crises 2023,
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2023/345)
and the most current data of the World Food Programme
(WFP) have in common? They all point to armed
conflict and war being the most significant driver at
present of hunger and food insecurity.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

The Global Report on Food Crises 2023, released
in May, showed that more than a quarter of a billion
people are facing acute hunger, with economic shocks,
extreme weather and conflicts contributing to the
increase in that number.
The report of the Secretary-General issued in May
2023 amplifies the connection between armed conflict
and violence and conflict-induced food insecurity.
And the Hunger Hotspots. FAO-WFP early warnings
on acute food insecurity: June 2023 to November 2023
outlook of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and WFP warns that acute food
insecurity is likely to deteriorate further in 18 hunger
hotspots from June to November this year, most of
which are in conflict situations. And the WFP has
indicated that 70 per cent of the world’s hungry people
live in areas affected by war.
The conclusions are clear: the bad global situation
regarding food insecurity is made even worse by
war and armed conflict. And there are immense
humanitarian consequences. That is why resolution
2417 (2018), which condemns the starving of civilians
as a method of warfare, as well as the unlawful denial
of humanitarian access, is so significant. The urgency
is pressing. The responsibility is ours. So, we need to
strengthen collective efforts to address food insecurity
exacerbated by armed conflict.
To that end, our focus should be on the following
three areas.
First, we must protect civilians in all situations,
especially in situations of armed conflict, from hunger
and starvation. Thailand stands against the use of food
as a weapon of war and calls on parties directly involved
in conflicts to commit to taking action with the aim
of ensuring that food and the starvation of civilians
will never be employed as a tactic of warfare. We call
on every Member State and all parties to conflict to
respect and fulfil their obligations — humanitarian and
legal — to protect civilians in conflict situations and to
ensure their food supply. Infrastructure indispensable
to the survival of civilians, including objects related to
agricultural and food production and distribution, must
also be safeguarded.
Secondly, we must ensure a more resilient and
better functioning food system to prevent widespread
food insecurity and starvation. The impacts of conflict
on the food system are more pronounced now than ever
and extend far beyond the areas of conflicts owing to the

23-230245/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

global nature of the food supply chain. Food insecurity
induced by conflicts has disproportionate impacts on
low-income and developing countries as they are most
exposed to the disruptions on trade in food, agricultural
products and fertilizers. Those same countries are also
most vulnerable to the fluctuations of food and energy
prices, resulting from conflicts and instability.
It is therefore vital to strengthen our global food
system and ensure the sustainability of the entire food
supply chain. We need to ensure both food affordability
and food availability in order to prevent the problem
of hunger from escalating to becoming the problem of
famine. In that connection, rules and regulations under
multilateral trade frameworks need to be conducive
to promoting international trade in agricultural and
food products. The supply chain should remain open
for the unimpeded flow of essential goods such as
food, fertilizers and energy. And in certain cases,
food assistance and concessional financing should be
provided for those in need.
Thirdly and lastly, we must promote more effective
climate action for greater food security. Climate change
and extreme weather events are threat multipliers. As
the Secretary-General has put it, the era of global
boiling has underscored the catastrophic consequences
of biodiversity loss, extreme weather and unpredictable
weather patterns on food production and transportation.
Climate-related supply shocks such as crop failures and
damage from flooding can drive up food prices even
further. Science and technology should therefore be
leveraged to ensure sufficient food supplies, as well
as improve food storage. Sustainable production of
food and agricultural products needs to be promoted to
mitigate the risks of vulnerable agricultural areas, food
supplies and transportation infrastructure and routes.
In the long run, an investment in effective climate
action is an investment in the security of the production
of food and agricultural products and therefore an
investment in combating hunger and starvation.
In conclusion, enhancing food security and the need
to prevent starvation and hunger as a result of armed
conflict are not only humanitarian imperatives but also
signs of the inextricable linkage between sustainable
development and international peace, security and
stability. Starvation and hunger in conflict situations
remind us that without peace, security and stability,
sustainable development will be out of our reach and so
will the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals. So, let us try to, at
6/47

03/08/2023

the very least, minimize, if not eliminate, the starvation
of civilians as a consequence of armed conflict, because
that remains central to our continuing and committed
efforts to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to promote food security for all for the
long haul.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Slovenia aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union. We wish
to make additional remarks in our national capacity.
We also express our gratitude to the United States for
the organization of this open debate and extend our
appreciation to the briefers.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to three
key points.
Slovenia is deeply concerned by the alarming trends
in global food insecurity. It is disheartening to witness
the world regressing in its efforts to eradicate hunger,
food insecurity and malnutrition in all its manifestations.
In 2022, over a quarter of a billion people experienced
acute hunger in 58 countries and territories, with many
of them in armed conflict situations.
As highlighted in resolution 2417 (2018), there
is a vicious cycle between armed conflict and food
insecurity. Those two issues are intertwined and
perpetuate one another.
We acknowledge that conflict and insecurity are the
primary drivers of acute food insecurity for 117 million
people in 19 countries and territories.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians (S/2023/345) reveals several
concerning trends regarding the impact of conflict
on food and water availability. Behind each trend lies
numerous distressing stories: children forced to abandon
their education owing to food scarcity, women and
girls facing heightened risks of sexual violence while
collecting water after dark and fertile agricultural land
contaminated with explosive ordnance. Those trends
paint a daunting picture. Climate change, manifested
through droughts, heavy rainfall, floods and other
phenomena, further aggravates hunger in various
conflicts. Its repercussions for peace and security are
evident and have tangible consequences for millions
of people.
The statistics we refer to represent real individuals
on the ground. That brings me to my second point,
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

which is the imperative to uphold international
humanitarian law and provide gender-sensitive
humanitarian assistance that caters to people’s diverse
needs. Respect for international humanitarian law has
multiple layers. It entails facilitating rapid, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access, as well as preventing
any hindrance to that access. It involves preventing the
weaponization of access to clean water and food and
ensuring the protection of civilian objects, including
those necessary for food production and distribution.
It also entails respecting and safeguarding civilian
personnel. All the parties to a conflict have the
obligation to respect and ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law in all circumstances.
Lastly, we must enhance coordination to strengthen
global food systems. With the increasingly complex root
causes of food insecurity and conflicts linked to natural
resources, more must be done to address the challenges
on the ground and bolster global efforts in the areas of
food security, nutrition and resilience. In that regard,
we welcome the establishment of the United Nations
Famine Prevention and Response Coordinator. We also
hope to see further insights into potential strategies for
strengthening the work of the High-Level Task Force
on Preventing Famine, which brings together United
Nations entities, international financial institutions and
non-governmental organizations.
Slovenia remains committed to doing its part. Last
year we increased our financial support for food security
sixfold. As an incoming member of the Security Council,
we are looking forward eagerly to collaborating with
other members on tangible, action-oriented objectives.
Numerous steps can be explored, including improving
coordination between humanitarian and development
actors, translating early-warning signs into early action
using existing tools such as the Framework for Action
for Food Security and Nutrition in Protracted Crises
and expanding the donor base.
In conclusion, let us not forget that behind our
discussions are the lives of real people who are facing
the consequences of global food insecurity. Our
constructive deliberations in this Chamber can make
a meaningful impact on their lives, but only if we are
able to foster international cooperation and strengthen
their resilience.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark.
At the outset, I would like to thank the United States
for convening this important open debate, as well as
the briefers for their statements this morning and most
importantly, of course, for the work that they and their
colleagues are doing every day to help people in need.
This year has seen conflicts produce devastating
effects in many regions, further compounded by the
destructive consequences of climate change. The
combined effects have upended the lives of millions.
Hunger is on the rise and people are suffering. We
must do what we can to stop hunger and not accelerate
starvation and food insecurity. In that context, the
Nordic countries deeply deplore Russia’s decision
to withdraw from the Black Sea Grain Initiative and
condemn its subsequent attacks on Ukrainian ports and
grain facilities — facilities that are key to food security
in many parts of the world. The Initiative has been
critical in helping us to avoid a further deterioration
of the global food crisis. It has also helped to stabilize
global food prices, which have already shown signs of
increasing following Russia’s withdrawal.
Resolution 2417 (2018), which was unanimously
adopted by the Security Council five years ago,
strongly condemns the use of starvation as a method
of warfare. It urges the parties to armed conflicts to
protect civilian infrastructure and ensure the proper
functioning of food systems and markets. In that
vein, the Nordic countries have proudly joined the
cross-regional group of countries that have co-signed
the joint communiqué presented by the United States
condemning the use of food as a weapon of war, and we
encourage others to join. We must not weaponize food.
In line with resolution 2417 (2018), we urge all parties
to armed conflict, wherever they are, to fully comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, ensure safe, rapid, unrestricted humanitarian
access and not deprive civilians of things indispensable
to their survival.
Conflict often leads to hunger, and hunger often
leads to conflict. However, by developing long-term,
sustainable and effective global food systems, we can
contribute to ending hunger and preventing conflict.
But we need to adopt policies and financial instruments
to support robust, sustainable and scalable agriculture
and food production. And in order to address the issue of

23-230247/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

hunger and conflict effectively, we need to work closely
and efficiently across the humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus and to include climate action in the
equation. Likewise, collaboration across the public and
private sector, as well as with the populations affected,
is crucial to delivering the results that people need. To
do that, we must ensure full, equal and meaningful
participation, as well as protection and access to
assistance, in particular for women and girls, who are
disproportionately affected by hunger worldwide.
The Nordic countries consider anticipatory action
an important tool for taking action ahead of climate
shocks to mitigate, reduce and sometimes even avert
humanitarian needs and to safeguard long-term
development investments. Anticipatory action is a costeffective tool, saving more lives and livelihoods from
climate-induced hunger through the pre-positioning
of supplies, including food items and items for food
production. In the end, however, nothing can be
achieved without adequate, flexible and predictable
financial support to both humanitarian and development
assistance efforts — and the Nordic countries are and
will continue to be reliable contributors of that type
of funding.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the Nordic
countries will always stand firm on the side of
international humanitarian law, and in that context, we
call for the universal ratification of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court and the two 1977
Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions. That
would further strengthen international cooperation
in the fight to end the use of starvation as a method
of warfare.

03/08/2023

humanitarian crises, conflicts and instability, especially
in fragile situations in which Governments have limited
means to help their populations adapt. In the face of
that, we need to protect the most vulnerable and take
immediate action to save lives by improving the security
environment and humanitarian response with a focus
on building more resilient and peaceful communities.
In that regard, we look forward to the discussions
on the New Agenda for Peace and the proposed Pact
for the Future, with a view to strengthening crosscutting action across the pillars of the United Nations,
through which we can advance our fulfilment of the
Sustainable Development Goals and prevent and
address humanitarian crises and conflicts in a coherent
and complementary manner in order to ensure world
peace and security. We also believe that the multilateral
system has much to do in terms of mobilizing resources
and their means of implementation, including through
the use of science, technology and innovation for the
most vulnerable countries as well as partnerships with
the private sector and civil society. As the SecretaryGeneral said in his opening remarks at the Food
Systems Summit,
“There is more than enough money to fund
efficient and sustainable food systems to feed the
world, while supporting decent work for those who
grow the food we eat”.

The alarming data on food crisis levels in the
Global Report on Food Crises 2023 reflects the highest
such figures seen in the past seven years, owing to
interconnected factors such as conflict, insecurity,
economic crises, climate change and inequality, which
are stretching the capacities of food systems to provide
nutritious, safe and affordable food for all.

We deeply regret that the Russian Federation
has terminated the Black Sea Grain Initiative and
withdrawn its security guarantees for ships sailing in
the north-western part of the Black Sea, given the direct
negative impact it will have on humanitarian operations
contributing to alleviating global hunger through the
more than 32 million metric tons of food products
shipped from Ukrainian ports. The Russian Federation’s
illegal, unjustified and unprovoked aggression against
Ukraine and the actions it has taken since the outbreak
of hostilities have jeopardized global food security and
caused a macroeconomic destabilization of food prices,
with devastating consequences that include people’s
forced displacement and lost access to livelihoods
and income, which in turn require the deployment of
a humanitarian response. Finally, Guatemala calls for
more determined joint action to prevent the structural
challenges that cause conflicts and imperil world peace
and security, and to make progress on finding robust
solutions to those challenges.

It is urgent to address climate change while recalling
that it is a dangerous risk multiplier that exacerbates

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala is grateful for the convening
of this open debate and thanks the briefers for their
inspiring contributions.

8/47

23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Hinds (Guyana): Guyana welcomes the
convening of this high-level open debate on famine and
conflict-induced global food insecurity. We commend
the United States for bringing this important issue to the
fore and express our appreciation for the briefings we
heard this morning. We also welcome the appointment
of Ms. Reena Ghelani as the United Nations Famine
Prevention and Response Coordinator.
The right to food is a human right and a
humanitarian imperative. No one anywhere in today’s
world should live with hunger or suffer malnutrition.
Through Sustainable Development Goal 2, our
global community has committed to ending hunger,
achieving food security and improved nutrition and
promoting sustainable agriculture. Guyana is resolutely
committed to that goal, as is the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), whose efforts in that regard Guyana has
the honour to lead.
Food must never be used as a weapon of war.
The international community must unite around that
principle and ensure that it is fulfilled in practice
through solutions that meet the needs of all who are
affected. This year we marked the fifth anniversary
of the unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018),
which pointed to the links between armed conflict
and conflict-induced food insecurity and the threat of
famine. We have an important opportunity to renew our
high-level political commitment to its full and effective
implementation and to work collectively to enhance
the protection of civilians against food insecurity in
situations of armed conflict.
The disconcerting Global Report on Food Crises
2023 reveals that more than a quarter of a billion people
in 58 countries are acutely food insecure and in need of
urgent food assistance. That is one in every 32 persons
on the planet. Conflict remains one of the main drivers
of acute food insecurity, with 117.1 million people
affected — not to mention others such as the impact
of economic shocks and weather extremes, which have
left an additional 83.9 million and 56.8 million people,
respectively, in acute food insecurity. Guyana would
like to express its solidarity with the countries affected,
including our CARICOM sister State of Haiti. Taken
together, those numbers are the highest in the sevenyear history of the Global Report on Food Crises, and
yet an additional 400 million to 500 million human
beings faced hunger in 2022, according to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Those multiple and interlinked challenges, and
the associated impacts of disrupted supply chains
and higher prices for food, fuel and fertilizer, are not
beyond our collective ability to address. They demand
our urgent attention and represent a real call to united
action in the true spirit of multilateralism. In that
connection, Guyana underscores the need to address
global food insecurity holistically, through the pursuit
of targeted and path-breaking initiatives such as the
United Nations Food Systems Summit+2 and its recent
Stocktaking Moment, as well as regional and national
efforts. Guyana urges for renewed efforts by all the
parties concerned in the Black Sea Grain Initiative to
bring it back on track.
Urgent action is required to transform agrifood
systems to make them more resilient and lower the cost
of nutritious food and healthy diets for all. As the lead
member of CARICOM for agriculture, agricultural
diversification and food security, Guyana is working with
its sister States on ambitious initiatives to reinvigorate
the growth and development of the agrifood sector,
boosting regional production with a view to reducing
the regional food import bill by 25 per cent by 2025
and enhancing food and nutrition security in the region.
Our national efforts are in concert with those objectives
and aim to fortify and diversify our agrifood sector,
including through increased budgetary allocations,
investment in research and supportive infrastructure
and the adoption of climate-smart technologies.
In closing, Guyana remains a committed partner in
efforts to promote food security and address the causes
of food insecurity, including those induced by conflict.
In that spirit, Guyana is pleased to subscribe to the joint
communiqué condemning the use of food as a weapon
of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Kayalar (Türkiye): I thank you for convening
this debate, Madam President, and the briefers for
their presentations.
Türkiye attaches the utmost importance to
the preservation and smooth functioning of global
supply chains in order to safeguard food security in
all circumstances, including during pandemics and
conflict situations. We stand firmly against attempts
to undermine food security for political or military
motives. All parties to armed conflicts should respect
core humanitarian principles. Through its competent

23-230249/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

agencies such as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations is well
positioned to play a leading role in coordinating
international efforts involving States, civil society and
the private sector.
Since ensuring food security remains a critical
challenge worldwide, it is also at the heart of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Although
the international community has made considerable
progress in that regard, much work remains to be done
to achieve the relevant Sustainable Development Goals,
as we are still a long way from attaining our goals
of zero hunger, food security and nutrition. Security
and food crises are mutually reinforcing and create
a vicious cycle. On top of that, the effects of climate
change put additional stress on agricultural systems,
making it even more difficult to satisfy the needs of
rapidly growing populations.
The ongoing war in Ukraine between the
world’s two key agricultural producers has further
jeopardized our already fragile global food security.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative has functioned as an
effective mechanism for addressing that fragility and
stabilizing food prices for almost a year. Its termination
unquestionably poses a challenge that we must tackle
together. If our efforts are to yield concrete results,
all sides should refrain from escalatory steps. Given
our role in the launch and implementation of the
Initiative, Türkiye remains committed to sustaining its
endeavours to revive the Initiative and to taking part in
the international efforts to mitigate the impact of the
war in Ukraine on global food security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Sabo (Ethiopia): We congratulate the United
States of America on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of August and
appreciate the opportunity to contribute to this
important discussion on food security.
Regrettably, despite the enormous efforts we are
making to address the challenge of food insecurity,
it continues to be a source of serious concern. Like
other factors that affect societal well-being, conflict
undermines people’s ability to access sufficient safe
and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs. The
recent Sustainable Development Goals Report 2023:
Special Edition indicates that 2.4 billion people are
facing food insecurity, with 830 million of them affected
10/47

03/08/2023

by hunger. If the current level of implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals stays the same, by the
end of 2030 8 per cent of the global population will still
be suffering from hunger. We consider that alarming
and therefore deserving of globally concerted action at
every level.
While global income inequality is a major factor
in people’s inability to attain food security, low levels
of productivity and production and a lack of resilience
to the impacts of climate change are also important
contributing factors. In our discussions today, we have
listened to many statements that put Africa at the centre
of the food security predicament. While that situation
is extremely disheartening, it is also a clarion call to
action for Africans. We believe it is unacceptable that
the people of Africa are facing food shortages while
their continent is endowed with land, water and human
resources that should be able to feed the entire world.
Global solidarity and a unity of purpose in assisting
us in harnessing our national endowments would make
a difference.
The African Union has a continental agenda that
targets the complete elimination of hunger and food
insecurity on the continent. We are also working to
reduce food imports and increase intra-African trade in
agriculture by 50 per cent. Based on that continent-wide
aspiration and our national development objectives,
Ethiopia is on track to achieve that target. Our summer
irrigation initiative has enabled us to produce surplus
wheat for export after covering the national demand.
Our national nutrition programme, known as Yelemat
Tirufat — which roughly translates to “bounty of
the basket” — is changing production patterns and
having a positive impact on attitudes and practices
related to food and nutrition. Our own experiment has
convinced us that food security is an attainable goal
for all of Africa. It is on that basis that we call on the
international community, including the United Nations
and international financial institutions, to support our
agriculture and food production sector. In that regard, I
would like to make three points.
First, food insecurity is primarily a manifestation of
extreme poverty and underdevelopment. Accelerating
development and collective action for the attainment of
the Sustainable Development Goals should be a rallying
point for our course of action.
Secondly, trade practices that perpetuate African
countries’ dependency on food imports must be
transformed. Increasing production on the continent
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

and strengthening intracontinental trade is crucial and
deserves the necessary support.
Thirdly, as can be seen in the Secretary-General’s
report Making food systems work for people and
planet, financing the transformation of food systems
is ranked as the first area of support requested by
Member States. For Africa, increased productivity
requires modern agriculture and added value, as well
as enhanced investment to attract and retain young
people in the agriculture and food production sector.
International financial support to ensure long-term
development goals, even in situations of conflict, is
therefore imperative.
In conclusion, while enhancing our support for the
resolution of conflicts, we should also be mindful of
emergency measures and the provision of humanitarian
assistance. In the meantime, we need to ensure that we
do not lose sight of the lasting remedy that is enhancing
productivity, strengthening resilience and alleviating
food insecurity. Through development we can break the
cycle of poverty, conflict and food insecurity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the United States for convening this open
debate and takes note of the briefings and contributions
we have heard. We wish the United States every success
during its presidency of the Council this month. I will
read an abridged version of our statement today in
order to respect the time limit, and we will circulate the
full version.
We would like to reaffirm the responsibility and
importance of multilateral work in ensuring joint and
coordinated responses to the world’s severe food and
humanitarian crisis. We believe it is vital for each
Member State to safeguard its citizens’ right to food
and strengthen the assets that form the basis of its
national food system, with the aim of contributing
to food and nutrition security now and in the future.
However, conflict, climate change, terrorism, violent
extremism, the use of explosive devices, proliferating
armed groups and economic instability mean that
famine and food insecurity persist, making it impossible
to foster a healthy food environment and promote
the consumption of a nutrient-rich, balanced and safe
diet. We call on the international community to step
up innovation, learn from successful and replicable
experiences and promote programmes and initiatives

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

that can strengthen the production of essential food
for national and local consumption in areas that are
sensitive where international peace and security are
concerned. We call for respect for and compliance with
resolution 2417 (2018).
We want to emphasize that one of our chief
concerns here is the fact that women, children,
indigenous peoples and elderly persons are the main
victims of food insecurity and conflict. There is no
question that gaps in access to food resources for those
groups need to be urgently reduced. In that regard, we
would like to highlight the role of women in family
farming, small-scale agriculture, artisanal fishing and
small-scale aquaculture, as they are capable of making
improvements in adverse circumstances and where
production chains barely exist. It is therefore essential
to promote initiatives that enable women to access
land, productive resources and marketing channels so
that they can strengthen their decision-making power
in agricultural production, generate economic income
and improve their living conditions.
Another aspect we want to highlight is the urgent
task of correcting market distortions and failures in
order to facilitate coordination between the various links
in in food production supply chains. We are disturbed
by the fact that some Member States have taken steps
such as closing markets or imposing unilateral coercive
measures or unjustified barriers to trade in food and
related products, among other things, because such
measures completely contradict the goal of reducing
hunger and violate basic humanitarian commitments.
We believe in food trade based on the rules of the World
Trade Organization. In that regard, we reaffirm our
commitment to maintaining fair, open, inclusive and
predictable agricultural markets to ensure a continued
flow of agricultural products and elements essential to
agricultural production, including fertilizers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Greco (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union and would like to add a few remarks in its
national capacity.
The importance that the United States traditionally
attaches to this dossier, which is also a priority for us, is
highly appreciated. We therefore thank the presidency
for convening today’s meeting to discuss and report
on the risk of conflict-induced famine and widespread

23-2302411/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

food insecurity. That risk is unfortunately a current and
gloomy picture in too many countries, and the topic is
now more urgent and alarming than ever. We deeply
regret the decision taken by the Russian Federation to
oppose the renewal of the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
a beacon of hope for many countries in Africa and
elsewhere. We reiterate our call on Russia to rejoin
the initiative, stop using food as a weapon and cease
its illegal blockade of Ukrainian sea ports. We will
continue to support all efforts towards a resumption of
that key initiative.
Italy once again stresses the importance of
resolution 2417 (2018) and its unanimous adoption a
mere five years ago. We have all the tools to safeguard
civilians at risk. We just need to demonstrate the
necessary political commitment and take action.
Respect for international humanitarian law is not
optional. Humanitarian personnel should be able to
travel safely in any circumstances, particularly when
food supplies and distribution are at stake. The use of
starvation as a method of warfare is explicitly prohibited
by international law, which too many people seem to
forget. Italy also remains dedicated to addressing global
food insecurity, particularly considering its role as the
host country of the United Nations food agencies. Last
week in Rome the Italian Government organized the
United Nations Food Systems Summit+2 Stocktaking
Moment to assess the results of the efforts made so far.
During three intense days of work we saw proposals for
concrete, innovative and inclusive solutions addressing
the challenges that we are facing today. The linkages
among food security, climate and security were also
thoroughly addressed. Following all the discussions
and the engagement that we just renewed in Rome,
food security will also be at the top of the agenda of
the Italian presidency of the Group of Seven next year.
Italy urges the international community to redouble
its efforts and take decisive action to address the
pressing challenges of food insecurity, protect essential
services and create a safer and more dignified future
for all civilians affected by conflicts worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by expressing
my delegation’s appreciation to the United States for
its presidency of the Security Council and bringing
into focus the crucial issue of conflict-induced food
insecurity. Given the time constraints, I will be
12/47

03/08/2023

brief and submit the following suggestions for the
Council’s consideration.
First and foremost, we must work together to find
common solutions through dialogue and diplomacy.
Choosing peace, cooperation and multilateralism will be
essential to building our collective future. Strengthening
the international architecture and governance systems
to protect the global order, global laws and global values
must therefore be a shared responsibility.
Secondly, addressing the growing food grain
shortages requires us to go beyond the current
constraints. As far as India is concerned, we are
fully committed to playing our part in addressing
contemporary global challenges, as reflected in
our membership as Champions in the Global Crisis
Response Group.
Thirdly, India supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in continuing the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and hopes for an early resolution to the current impasse.
Recent developments regarding that issue have not
helped to secure the larger cause of peace and stability.
I would like to say very briefly that India has
always been proactive in assisting its partners in times
of distress. Even in the middle of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, India provided food aid in the form
of thousands of metric tons of wheat, rice, pulses
and lentils to a number of countries, including in our
neighbourhood and in Africa, in order to strengthen
food security. In view of the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan, India has commenced a
donation of 50,000 metric ton of wheat to the people
of Afghanistan. Similarly, we have continued our
humanitarian support to Myanmar, including with a
grant of 10,000 tons of rice and wheat. We have also
assisted Sri Lanka, including with food assistance,
during its difficult times. All of that is in keeping with
our foreign-policy priority of Neighbourhood First
and our firm belief in the abiding ethos of vasudhaiva
kutumbakam, by which India sees the world as one
large interconnected family.
In leveraging its presidency of the Group of 20,
India has advocated for greater efforts to accelerate
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), including SDG 2, calling for zero hunger. In
our Prime Minister’s words, the Indian presidency is
committed to
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

“[d]epoliticizing the global supply of food,
fertilizers and medical products so that geopolitical
tensions do not lead to humanitarian crises.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I would like to warmly
congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August.
Food is the most fundamental human need and
therefore pivotal to any comprehensive discussion of
international security, development and human rights.
In the Horn of Africa and the Sahel, to take just two
prominent examples, more than 29 million people are
food insecure today. The crisis is directly linked to
civil wars, terrorism, regional conflicts and inadequate
development models. It is also reasonable to argue
that the military coups across the Sahel may lead to
serious shortfalls in trade and investment, potentially
restricting people’s access to affordable nutrition. We
are encouraged to suggest that the effectiveness of
preventive diplomacy and mediation emerges as the
most important intervening factor in this area. United
Nations specialized agencies, and their international
and regional counterparts, must also strive to do a better
job of linking humanitarian action with development
and livelihood support. Strong climate action linked to
peacebuilding and security, including robust investment
in the Loss and Damage Fund agreed to at the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP27), will be indispensable to addressing global
food insecurity. We urge the membership to embrace
those recommendations at the inaugural Africa Climate
Summit, to be held in Nairobi, and at the Sustainable
Development Goal Summit in September and COP28,
in November. We also call for a ceasefire in Ukraine,
and a resumption of negotiations on and ultimately the
unconditional renewal and reinvigoration of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which facilitates the exports of
both Ukrainian and Russian food and fertilizers.
In the face of dire emergencies, we must do more
than express alarm without taking action. I would
like to direct the Council’s attention to Haiti, a nation
grappling with unprecedented food insecurity. The
World Food Programme has reported that the number
of food-insecure Haitians has tripled since 2016. Nearly
half of the country’s population struggles to find
enough to eat, and 1.8 million are facing emergency

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

levels of food insecurity. The situation is particularly
dire for children, 22 per cent of whom are chronically
malnourished, with 66 per cent of those under five
years of age suffering from anaemia. The contributing
factors are diverse. In the context of today’s debate,
they include the gangs that are controlling large parts
of the country. Kenya is encouraged by the Security
Council’s willingness to consider authorizing a
multinational police force to work with the Haitian
authorities to counter gang violence and secure critical
infrastructure. We recently announced our readiness
to volunteer a police contingent and look forward to
working with the Bahamas and other Member States
willing to step up to fulfil that responsibility.
However, such a force, while necessary, is not
sufficient on its own. We urge the United Nations and
relevant actors to concurrently develop a coordinated
package that learns from the past and at a minimum
includes
peacebuilding,
constitutional
review,
institutional reforms, community mediation, support
for victims of sexual violence and social and economic
development, including the reconstruction of civilian
infrastructure. Those interlocking initiatives must
be anchored in strong partnerships, including with
the Caribbean Community, to respond cohesively to
Haiti’s urgent needs. It will be an opportunity to show
solidarity with the people of Haiti, as well as to renew
the faltering efforts of the United Nations in ensuring
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Camelli.
Mr. Camelli (spoke in French): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina and the potential
candidate country Georgia, as well as Andorra, Monaco
and San Marino, align themselves with this statement.
I would first like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on the start of your presidency of the
Security Council, and to thank you for convening this
particularly important debate.
Russia’s decision to end the Black Sea Grain
Initiative has only exacerbated the global food crisis.
With the solidarity lanes between the European Union
and Ukraine, the partial reopening of Black Sea ports
helped stabilize and even lower food prices. Those
prices reached unprecedented levels because of Russia’s
war of aggression on Ukraine. We therefore reiterate

23-2302413/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

our call on Russia to stop using food as a weapon,
rejoin the Black Sea Grain Initiative and cease illegally
blocking Ukrainian seaports.
We are moving in the wrong direction. Despite
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) five
years ago, conflict-induced food insecurity is on the
rise. Regrettably, we are seeing it in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burkina Faso, Mali, the Sudan,
Yemen and Haiti. We all have a collective responsibility
to eradicate hunger and save lives. The European Union
has been at the forefront of global efforts to combat
food insecurity and malnutrition. In 2022, we allocated
more than €1 billion in humanitarian food and nutrition
assistance. Today I would like to make three points.
First, the starvation of civilians as a tactic of
war is a violation of international humanitarian
law and can constitute a war crime. Yet in too many
conflicts we have continued to see the weaponization
of access to clean water and food, which are crucial
to civilians’ survival. Too often, parties to conflict
intentionally hinder humanitarian access. And too
often, humanitarian workers dedicated to saving others
become targets themselves. This should be universally
condemned. We call on all parties to armed conflicts to
respect international humanitarian law. That includes
facilitating rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access. For their part, the European Union and its
member States will continue to advocate for compliance
with international humanitarian law, accountability for
violations of that law and the systematic implementation
of resolution 2417 (2018). The European Union also
funds an initiative aimed at enhancing evidence-based
reporting on conflict-induced hunger by reinforcing and
complementing existing accountability mechanisms.
Secondly, the unprecedented global food crisis
we are dealing with requires urgent, coordinated and
unified action. The United Nations Food Systems
Summit+2 reignited momentum in that regard. It is
now more vital than ever that we remain united in
our purpose. That means we must strive for greater
complementarity between humanitarian, development
and peace actions at every level if we are to protect
essential resources. We need those efforts to enable us
to address the root causes of hunger and conflict. In
that regard, the European Union fully supports the role
and leadership of the United Nations in the response to
the global food crisis, and we call on the international
community to maintain its levels of funding in order
to address the growing needs. However, as long as the
14/47

03/08/2023

conflicts continue, funding alone will not be enough to
achieve food security.
Thirdly and lastly, we must address the linkages
among food security, climate and security. Climate
change and extreme weather are both drivers of hunger
and sources of conflict. Millions are forcibly displaced
every year by flooding and drought, increasing food
insecurity. We must change course and shift from
reactive approaches — even if they continue to be
necessary — to a proactive vision aimed at preventing
the humanitarian consequences of climate change and
hunger crises. We must work together to strengthen
anticipatory action systems and ensure that emergency
actions also reach remote communities and those
affected by conflict, including women and girls.
Thanks to Team Europe’s comprehensive approach,
the European Union and its member States remain
committed to supporting investments to address the
root causes of food insecurity and malnutrition in
fragile and conflict-affected settings.
The President:
Mr. Beresford-Hill.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Mr. Beresford-Hill: I would like to express my
appreciation and congratulations to you, Madam
President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank the United States and the Council members
for organizing today’s crucial debate and granting us
the privilege of being part of the discussion. I also
want to express my appreciation for the successful July
presidency of my United Kingdom colleagues.
Earlier today we heard harrowing and heartbreaking
testimonies from three briefers, who gave us a very
human perspective on the dilemma that is facing our
world, and I thank Reena Ghelani, Navyn Salem and
David Miliband for their contributions. The statistics
are undeniable. Imagine a quarter of a billion human
beings experiencing hunger, standing on a huge desert
plain. A mile away, in verdant pastures with cool
running waters, we see enough food, loaves of bread,
fish, meat and vegetation to fill all of those people
and millions more. And between those two images
of hunger and plenty we see barbed wire, landmines,
trenches, destroyed bridges and roads and eyes staring
across the divide with hatred. That is what humankind
has been reduced to. And that is why we are here today.
It is a problem that we are all called on to solve.
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The topic holds immense significance for us at the
Sovereign Order of Malta because we have diligently
dedicated ourselves to providing humanitarian care and
medical services to the poor and sick across the globe
for 900 years. Operating in 122 countries and holding
bilateral and diplomatic relations with 114, we have a
special focus on the Middle East and Africa, providing
humanitarian aid through health care, water, sanitation
and hygiene, disaster preparedness and food security.
Regrettably, the Ukrainian conflict, especially through
the breakdown of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, has
significantly hindered our humanitarian efforts in the
Middle East and Africa. As reported by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
Initiative played a significant role in reducing global
food prices by more than 23 per cent over the past year,
benefiting food security across many regions. However,
since the collapse of the Initiative, wheat prices have
risen in global markets, leading to challenges in
securing affordable food supplies. In particular, our
extensive involvement in food distribution operations in
Ethiopia, Kenya and South Sudan relies heavily on the
supply of grain from Russia and Ukraine. Consequently,
escalating expenses from sourcing agents, along with
higher costs for distribution, have nearly doubled
operational costs, and there are expectations of further
increases. Furthermore, those developments have
created immediate humanitarian crises in numerous
countries in which we function.
The breakdown of the Initiative has far-reaching
consequences, not only worsening food security issues
in various regions but also placing an additional burden
on affected populations seeking medical assistance due
to malnutrition. There is a thin line between nutrition
and health care, as an increase in illness and loss of
life from starvation and malnourishment burdens
the aid workers, volunteers and medical providers
striving to build and maintain a sustainable future in
developing nations. Seeking parallels in history, we
think of South Asia, particularly Bangladesh between
1970 and 1974, where we saw how environmental and
human-made factors can combine to have significant
repercussions for the civilian population. During that
period, the interplay between inadequate preparedness
and a lack of post-crisis care against a backdrop of both
natural disaster and military conflict led to the loss of
approximately 2 million lives due to undernutrition
and starvation.
The recent collapse of the Black Sea Grain Initiative
raises concerns about the potential for a similar

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian disaster, particularly in vulnerable parts
of Africa, if the underlying issues are not promptly
addressed. In conclusion, I would like to quote the
words of Pope Francis, who recently said,
“I appeal to my brothers [and sisters], the
authorities of the Russian Federation, so that the
Black Sea Initiative may be restored, and grain may
be transported safely”.
To that prayer, I think we should all say “Amen”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-dobhany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Madam President, and thank the briefers for
their valuable briefings.
Over the past few years, the coronavirus disease
pandemic has created many challenges that have
greatly affected food security throughout the world.
Food prices have reached record highs owing to
demand and transport costs that have increased, as well
as imbalances in the work of ports. Today, the ongoing
conflicts at the international level increase the existing
challenges and the make global food crisis even worse.
The Government of my country is aware of the
urgency of addressing famine and conflict-induced
global food insecurity. Yemen is one of the countries
listed in the Global Report on Food Crises 2023.
According to the report, more than 24 million Yemenis
are in need of humanitarian assistance while more than
20 million people are facing famine. That bleak picture
of the situation in Yemen is due to the war waged by the
Houthi militias against the Yemeni people since 2014.
The Government of my country is deeply concerned
by the exacerbation of food insecurity in Yemen, and
it is struggling owing to a contraction of the national
economy by half as a result of the war and the continued
threats and terrorist attacks by the Houthis against vital
economic facilities and oil ports. Since August 2022,
my country has lost nearly $1.5 billion earmarked for
improving public services and paying salaries across the
country. Developments in world events also increased
the food crisis in Yemen and other third-world countries
affected by conflicts and climate challenges.
Yemen is aware of the challenges facing the world
and the vital role that all of us can play in promoting
food security and addressing famine through the
following actions.

23-2302415/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

We must act together to promote proactive measures
that strengthen our ability to predict and avert food
supply crises. In that regard, we stress the need to
adopt effective measures to address challenges early on
through coordination and exchanging information and
data among various parties, as well as developing crisis
analysis and urgent response mechanisms.
Yemen is one of the countries that produce least
amount of carbon dioxide. However, it is most affected
by climate change. Since the coup by the Houthi
militias nine years ago, Yemen has been left behind
in many sectors especially those related to promoting
agriculture and rural development in order to address
the root causes of food insecurity.
Like other countries in conflict or post-conflict
situations, Yemen is in dire need of strengthening the
capabilities of State institutions in order to effectively
respond to the threats of climate change. We stress in
that regard the need for support from Member States
and the private sector to improve our agricultural
capabilities. We need the necessary funding to
establish food security at the State level and to enable
the agricultural communities to address challenges
and adapt to environmental changes while dealing
with water scarcity and soil degradation along with
promoting sustainable agriculture.
As a State with a long coastal border, Yemen is
aware of the importance of sustainable fisheries to
achieving food security. We call on the international
community, donors and international organizations to
support our fishing and aquaculture sectors in order to
improve the lives of coastal communities and enhance
food security. In that context, I thank once again the
United Nations Development Programme and other
donors that have helped us to address the FSO SAFER
oil tanker, whose rescue operation we hope will be
completed very soon.
Yemen is in need of more humanitarian aid to meet
urgent need for food of millions of Yemenis. We hope
that the humanitarian response plan will be supported
in order to provide food, clean water, basic health
care and protection. I take this opportunity to thank
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its recent donation
of $1.2 billion to make up for the budgetary shortfall
in Yemen.
Due to the conflict in Yemen, we need more
humanitarian aid, especially for the most vulnerable.
We call on the international community to put pressure
16/47

03/08/2023

on the Houthi militias to ensure safe, unhindered
and sustained access to life-saving humanitarian aid,
especially for children under five and for women and
girls who are more vulnerable to acute malnutrition.
The Houthi militias must refrain from using starvation
of civilians as a method of warfare, especially when this
heinous tactic is used against civilians, especially those
residing in Taiz, a city that has been under blockade for
more than eight years.
We must invest in long-term strategies to promote
resilience and improve livelihoods for vulnerable
communities. Specialized international organizations
and agencies can play a vital role in supporting smallscale farmers in the rural part of Yemen, who make
up 70 per cent of the population, in order to enhance
agricultural practices and create more jobs. That would
lead to livelihood diversification, enhancing peaceful
coexistence and depending less on humanitarian aid.
My country’s Government encourages partnership
between private and public sectors to benefit from the
expertise and resources of both sectors in order to address
food insecurity. Investment, technology and innovation
must be enhanced to promote agricultural productivity
and food distribution. We must make efforts to protect
production activities and marketing necessary to meet
the domestic and international demand. Supply chains
must continue to operate, which leads to the protection
of existing infrastructure in order to provide crops,
livestock, food and other logistics systems.
In conclusion, women must have a role in the food
production and distribution process. All restrictions
imposed on women, especially in areas controlled by
the Houthi militias, must be lifted. We call for enabling
women farmers and businesswomen through improving
access to resources, financing and training. That will
lead to the promotion of food security within families
and communities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate you,
Madam President, on your presidency of the Security
Council this month and to assure you of Morocco’s
full cooperation. We also thank you, Madam, for
organizing this debate, which has been enriched by the
participation the Secretary of State of the United States,
His Excellency Antony Blinken. We commend you,
Madam, on the adoption this morning of the important
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

presidential statement S/PRST/2023/4 presented by the
United States. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the briefers for taking part in this open debate
and for their comprehensive briefings.
The world is currently facing a number of tensions
that have exacerbated a multifaceted crisis in terms
of food, energy, climate and finance, which has a
particular impact on the most vulnerable countries,
including the African countries. In this fragile context
marked by interconnected crises, which are eroding our
capacity for a collective response, the implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 2 on ending hunger,
achieving food security and improving nutrition is at
great risk. That requires a collective response that is
humanitarian in nature, conducive to development
and centred on peace, with a special focus placed on
prevention, and strengthened by a food security expert
with a particular focus on prevention.
Five years ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2417 (2018), which highlighted links
between armed conflict and violence, on one hand, and
food insecurity caused by conflict and famine, on the
other. That resolution strongly condemns violations of
international humanitarian law and wilful obstruction
of the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Moreover,
as stipulated in operative paragraph 9 of the resolution,
the Council must adopt sanction measures against
individuals or entities obstructing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, or access to, or distribution
of, humanitarian assistance.
In addition, we believe it is crucial to strengthen
the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in making
food security a key element of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, taking into account the specific
characteristics of each country concerned and
mobilizing the necessary efforts to that end.
Food security and the sustainability of food
systems are priorities for Morocco at the national,
regional international levels. Those priorities are at the
heart of the South-South cooperation of Morocco with
fraternal countries, in particular African countries, in
accordance with the guidelines of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI. At the initiative of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, Morocco launched, during the twentysecond Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 22),
held in Marrakesh, the initiative for the Adaptation
of African Agriculture to Climate Change. Similarly,
the Initiative on Sustainability, Stability and Security

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

is aimed at increasing the sustainability, stability and
security of Africa through the vector of agriculture.
There was also the African Action Summit on the
sidelines of COP 22. Furthermore, three commissions
on climate change have been established in Africa to
combat climate change, which is the main driver of
food insecurity. Morocco is providing policy, financial
and technical support for the effective implementation
of their important mandate.
Moreover, and in order to strengthening food
security in Africa, Morocco has allocated millions of
tons of fertilizer adapted to African soil and culture
to the continent for several decades and has supported
more than 44 million African farmers. In 2023, Morocco
is allocating more than 4 million tons of fertilizer to
African farmers, which is more than double what we
did in 2021. And we are providing millions of tons of
fertilizer to developing countries in other regions of
the world.
Furthermore,
Morocco
is
pursuing
the
implementation of its broad-scale programme to
address food security in Africa through a scientific and
holistic approach. Our efforts are aimed at mobilizing
and aligning governmental resources, development
partners and private sector funding to unleash Africa’s
food production potential through South-South and
triangular cooperation with a view to ending food
insecurity and thereby preventing potential conflicts.
In conclusion, Morocco reaffirms its full support
to the Secretary-General in the implementation of the
mandate of his Global Crisis Response Group on Food,
Energy and Finance. We call for proactive international
solidarity to put an end to the serious threats posed by
hunger and food insecurity in a number of regions of
the world, particularly in Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Brandt (Kingdom of the Netherlands): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Madam President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August, and thanking you for organizing
this debate.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Benelux countries — Belgium, Luxembourg and
my own country, the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We
align ourselves with the statement delivered on behalf
of the European Union.

23-2302417/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Benelux countries would like to stress the
continued importance of resolution 2417 (2018), which
we consider a landmark resolution, because it marked
the first time the Council recognized the link between
conflict and hunger. Today we reiterate the call for
collective action and renewed commitment for its
implementation. Sadly, as we heard from the briefers
this morning, five years after the resolution’s adoption,
conflict continues to be the main driver of hunger and
famine, with 70 per cent of the people facing food
insecurity living in areas affected by conflict. Allow
me to briefly touch on a couple of points.
First, in a context of ever-increasing conflictinduced humanitarian needs, we need to realize that this
is a global challenge that we cannot leave to humanitarian
organizations alone. We all have a responsibility to break
the vicious cycle. Access restrictions in particular often
pose obstacles to the effective delivery of humanitarian
aid. Through resolution 2417 (2018), we have all
committed to the prompt, safe and unimpeded delivery
of assistance, in line with humanitarian principles. That
includes allowing for a cross-border mechanism so that
humanitarian aid can continue to reach those in need
in Syria.
Secondly, resolution 2417 (2018) reminds us
that under international humanitarian law, using
the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare is
unacceptable. While we underline that it is the primary
responsibility of States to protect the populations
on their territory, all parties to armed conflict have
to respect international humanitarian law. Those
responsible for violations must be held accountable,
including through international mechanisms when
national efforts fail. Member States can contribute to
ensuring accountability by supporting the capabilities
of human rights organizations and others to investigate
violations of international humanitarian law related
to conflict and hunger, and by ensuring that the
importance of impartial investigations of allegations of
hunger-related violations of international humanitarian
law are reflected in resolutions such as those adopted
by the Human Rights Council.
Thirdly, resolution 2417 (2018) calls on the
Secretary-General to report to the Security Council
when conflict may lead to acute food insecurity. It also
commits Council members to acting on such reports.
We urge the Council to step up its efforts in that regard.
More frequent reporting and more action on the part of
18/47

03/08/2023

the Council are vital if we are to seriously address the
issue of conflict-induced hunger.
Finally, the destruction and deliberate targeting
of agricultural land and infrastructure, such as we are
now seeing in Ukraine, should stop. The effects on
the civilian population and on global food prices and
availability are devastating, particularly for the most
vulnerable countries and people. It is therefore crucial
for the Russian Federation to immediately return to the
Black Sea Grain Initiative and end the war. For our part,
the Benelux countries remain committed to supporting
countries in combating food insecurity around the
globe. Five years ago, we committed to breaking the
cycle of conflict and hunger. It is now more important
than ever that we live up to that commitment. It is a
collective responsibility, and we count on Council
members to hold us and themselves to it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Action on Conflict and Hunger, co-chaired by Ireland
and Ecuador.
We want to start by thanking the United States for
once again convening a Security Council debate on this
important issue. We also thank the briefers for their
remarks. Their words serve to underline the need for all
of us work together to counter the threat that conflictinduced hunger and famine pose to millions of people.
Despite the adoption five years ago of resolution
2417 (2018), the severity of conflict-induced hunger has
only increased. Nearly 258 million people in 58 countries
and territories experienced acute food insecurity in
2022. Women and girls are particularly affected by food
insecurity, which exacerbates gender inequalities and
risks of gender-based violence. Resolution 2417 (2018)
requested the Secretary-General to swiftly report to
the Council when “the risk of conflict-induced famine
and widespread food insecurity occurs”. That reporting
serves as an early-warning mechanism. It assists the
Council in responding to situations in which conflictand violence-induced famine is an immediate danger
and when lives could be saved if we acted quickly. As
we meet today, there are numerous situations that meet
that threshold.
In June, the Secretary-General, through the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, made such a report,
focusing on three situations. In Haiti, one in two people
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

were projected to face acute food insecurity by the end
of June. In Burkina Faso, with 2.2 million people acutely
food-insecure, including 22,500 risking starvation and
death, the food security situation has never been worse.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 25.8 million
people were projected to be acutely food-insecure by the
end of June. Those are clearly more than just areas of
concern. They are crises that merit an urgent response
from the Council and the international community.
The Group of Friends appreciates that the Council
did meet to discuss the contents of the most recent white
note last week, in the format of an informal interactive
dialogue. However, we believe it is essential for the
Council to convene timely and open discussions. Open
meetings can facilitate greater awareness of those crises
and help mobilize support for the Council’s efforts to
address the country-specific recommendations of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). We welcomed resolution 2692 (2023) on Haiti,
and we commend the co-penholders, Ecuador and the
United States, as well as all members of the Council for
including strong language on food security in the text,
taking into account OCHA’s update on food security
risks in Haiti, in accordance with resolution 2417 (2018).
Those three country situations are part of a global
emergency. Across the world, people’s access to food
is threatened by conflict and violence. As we heard
from Ms. Ghelani this morning, conflict and violence
increase the risk of hunger, especially in vulnerable
areas where food systems are already under severe
pressure from climate change, ecological degradation
and extreme weather events, among other factors. We
urge the Russian Federation to return to the Black Sea
Grain Initiative to avoid even greater adverse impacts
on global food security. It is high time for accelerated
action by the Council, United Nations Member States
and the international community. The Group of
Friends, which was established to support and bolster
the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), would
like to highlight three areas for action.
First, there should be renewed efforts by all
Member States to respect international law, implement
resolution 2417 (2018) and prevent conflict-induced
hunger, including through greater support for locally
and regionally led responses. That should also include
a gendered response to food crises and increasing
support for women’s leadership in combating famine
and building peace, in part through further support to
women-led and women’s rights organizations.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, we must work to ensure the sufficient,
safe, rapid and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance and civilians’ access to critical services that
they rely on for food security. The parties to conflicts
must allow and facilitate humanitarian access to people
in need, in line with their obligations under international
law, in particular international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, and accountability
must be pursued for related violations. They include
the use of starvation as a method of warfare and the
destruction of objects indispensable to the survival of
the civilian population. Such violations of international
humanitarian law cannot be tolerated.
Thirdly, and most importantly, we must work at
every level to encourage conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Conflict is a leading driver
of food insecurity and famine, and preventing conflict
is the most effective way to prevent conflict-induced
hunger. Ultimately, we need a renewed, sustained
global effort to combat the deadly scourge of conflictinduced hunger, with Member States, humanitarian and
development organizations, peacebuilders, civil society
and others working together. The Group of Friends of
Action on Conflict and Hunger will continue to do
its part.
I will now say a few words in my national capacity.
During Ireland’s recent term on the Security Council,
we urged the Council to do more in response to the
increasing phenomenon of conflict-induced hunger.
As co-focal points on conflict and hunger, we did so
first with our colleagues from the Niger and then with
Brazil, and I commend Brazil and Switzerland for
continuing that important work. Yet far too often, when
we sought to move the discussion from a theoretical one
to seeking proactive Council action to prevent conflictinduced hunger in a particular country or region, we
failed to receive the support we needed from other
Council members. Many reasons were given, but it
was ultimately a dereliction of the Council’s duty as
outlined in resolution 2417 (2018). Such intransigence
on the part of the Council costs lives, and it continues.
Despite the dire food insecurity, with no end in
sight, the Council finds itself having to meet behind
closed doors when these issues are raised, and we feel
that is unacceptable. If at an open debate we all lament
conflict-induced hunger, if we say that starvation as a
method of war is wrong and that it must not happen, the
Security Council must do something about it when it
has the opportunity. That means meeting in public and

23-2302419/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

taking measures as foreseen in resolution 2417 (2018).
Fine words do not prevent conflicts, and they certainly
do not fill bellies, but action can.
We saw that Council members can be extremely
effective when they want to. The Council can come
together. In 2016, following the Secretary-General’s call
to action to prevent four famines, the Council mobilized
a global response, and that experience was a catalyst for
the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018). Ireland remains
committed to the conflict and hunger agenda and to the
actions laid out by the Group of Friends of Action on
Conflict and Hunger, and we hope that all members of
the Council will do so too.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Let me begin by
congratulating the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and commending it
for convening today’s debate on famine and conflictinduced global food insecurity. I would also like to
thank Ms. Reena Ghelani and the other briefers for
their very insightful briefings this morning.
The world is facing a critical moment in global food
insecurity. More than 780 million people, or 10 per cent
of the world’s population, are experiencing hunger today,
a proportion that remains above pre-pandemic levels.
Intensifying global challenges, such as geopolitical
conflicts in various parts of the world, climate change
and economic volatility, have exacerbated food
insecurity worldwide and contributed to rising food
prices. Food security is an existential concern for many
small countries and small island developing States,
including island nations such as Singapore. Singapore is
highly dependent on imported food. In fact, we import
more than 90 per cent of the food that we consume.
That means we are disproportionately affected by any
disruptions in global food supply. The world needs
urgent and collective action to address the global food
crisis and to strengthen food systems’ resilience, and in
that regard I would like to make three points.
First, it is imperative that we keep global food
supply chains free and open. That includes upholding
the rules-based multilateral trading system, ensuring
unimpeded movement of such essential items as food
and agricultural commodities and refraining from
imposing export prohibitions or restrictions in a manner
inconsistent with the relevant provisions of the World
Trade Organization.
20/47

03/08/2023

Secondly, food security should not be politicized
or weaponized. We must not allow the vicious cycle
between conflict and hunger to be perpetuated. In that
regard, we strongly support the Secretary-General’s
call for a resumption of the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
including his commitment to facilitating unimpeded
access to global food markets for food products
and fertilizers from both Ukraine and the Russian
Federation. We also call on all Member States not to
politicize humanitarian aid and to ensure the safe and
timely delivery of food assistance to people in need.
Thirdly, we need to invest in building sustainable
and resilient global food systems. Food security is
not merely a local or regional problem but a global
challenge, because of our interdependence and because
food crises can have spillover effects and broader
implications. We therefore need to collectively invest in
global food systems as a global public good, and to shift
away from the mindset that the only way to address
the issue is through aid. We should also address food
insecurity as part of a broader ecological crisis that
includes climate change, biodiversity loss and water
scarcity. From enhancing supply-chain connectivity to
developing new agrifood solutions, there are many areas
where we can cooperate here at the United Nations.
Addressing the global food crisis requires collective
responsibility and action. Singapore will continue
to do its part, and we are prepared to work with all
Member States, including the members of the Security
Council, to strengthen collaboration and coordination
in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): I thank the United
States presidency for convening this crucial debate and
the briefers for their insightful contributions.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and would
like to highlight several key points on behalf of Ukraine.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council is taking
place amid the grave consequences of food insecurity,
which poses a significant threat to international
peace and security in multiple countries worldwide.
During the United Nations Food Systems Summit+2
Stocktaking Moment on 24 July, the Secretary-General
underscored the severity of the situation, saying that
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

“global food systems are broken — and billions of
people are paying the price. More than 780 million
people are going hungry while nearly one third of
all food produced is lost or wasted”.
Recent data has shown that more than 250 million
people faced acute food insecurity in 2022 and are
in urgent need of food assistance. Countries such as
Afghanistan, Haiti, Nigeria, Burkina Faso and Mali in
the Sahel, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and Yemen
are particularly vulnerable, with populations likely to
face starvation or death if immediate humanitarian
intervention is not provided.
In November of last year, the President of Ukraine
presented a 10-point peace formula, outlining the
necessary steps for comprehensive, just and lasting peace
for Ukraine and for global security. On 23 February, the
General Assembly overwhelmingly adopted resolution
ES-11/6, entitled “Principles of the Charter of the
United Nations underlying a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in Ukraine”, which reflected the vision
proposed in Ukraine’s peace formula. The initiative
includes a specific point addressing food security,
urging all Member States to cooperate in solidarity to
address the global impacts of the war on food security.
Today’s discussion is particularly important, owing
to Russia’s recent decision to terminate the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, a move that will further exacerbate the
global food crisis and directly affect the lives of tens
of millions of people worldwide. In a single year under
the Initiative, Ukraine exported 33 million tons of
agricultural products to 45 countries, with 60 per cent
of the volume going to countries in Africa and Asia.
The figures would have been much higher if not for
Russia’s systematic efforts to obstruct the Initiative’s
normal functioning. Russia’s blockade of Ukraine’s
food exports from Black Sea ports since February
2022 and its attacks on our farms and grain storage
facilities have had severe effects in regions already
struggling with food insecurity. The recent attacks on
port infrastructure and civilian vessels have caused
immense destruction, with approximately 220,000 tons
of grain crops destroyed. The Russian Federation’s
actions in Ukraine, along with its blackmail tactics, are
strikingly reminiscent of the Holodomor, the genocide
committed by Russia’s predecessor in Ukraine between
1932 and 1933. We appeal urgently to Member States to
prevent the Russian Federation from causing famine in
the world.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

We are calling for support for Ukraine’s initiative to
establish a humanitarian maritime corridor in the Black
Sea, which will help re-establish vital food-supply
routes to regions in dire need. We call on States to
join the Grain from Ukraine humanitarian programme
launched by President Zelenskyy, which has 34 States
on board and has already raised $200 million in
donations and sent 170,000 tons of wheat to Ethiopia,
Somalia, Yemen and Kenya. We must take appropriate
measures to prevent the Russian Federation from using
food as a weapon against the world. Ensuring the safety
of navigation in the Black Sea is crucial to global food
security. We must unite our efforts to combat hunger
and prevent conflicts arising from food insecurity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United States for convening this timely
and important meeting.
Our food systems are failing. Food prices in global
markets have soared to their highest levels in three
decades. Hundreds of millions of people go to bed
hungry every day. Children are starving. The unequal
impact of the imminent crisis is felt in developing
countries, affecting the most vulnerable communities.
We are witnessing the most devastating impacts in Haiti,
Yemen, the Sudan, the Sahel region and elsewhere,
while the international response is lagging behind. The
World Food Programme recently announced the cutting
of life-saving food programmes due to a chronic lack of
funding. Despite its best efforts, it has found that is not
currently possible to address the growing humanitarian
needs around the world and meet the minimum
recommended calories for all. We are leaving people in
need behind, and the international community must act
to reverse that trend.
The United Nations Food System Summit’s
Stocktaking Moment, which took place last week in
Rome, has underlined the need for urgent action on a
global scale to tackle the unprecedented food crisis.
Slovakia has reiterated its full support for transforming
agricultural and food systems with a view to creating
greater sustainability and resilience, specifically
through Slovakia’s strategic plan for 2023–2027, the
European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy and
Slovakia’s vision for building modern agriculture for
2035. We remain committed to the implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 2 for zero hunger, and
as part of the European Union, we are at the forefront

23-2302421/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

of combating food insecurity and malnutrition through
funding and assistance.
Slovakia has co-signed the joint communiqué
condemning the use of food as a weapon of war. In
our view, that principle should be self-evident. The
starvation of civilians as a method of war is a serious
violation of international humanitarian law, and those
who perpetrate it should be held accountable. Yet we are
unfortunately witnessing the use of food as a weapon of
war by a permanent member of the Security Council.
For a long time, global food security has been under
strain due to climate change and the pandemic. That
dire situation has been further exacerbated by Russia’s
continuing war on Ukraine and its recent refusal to
renew the Black Sea Grain Initiative. That deplorable
act has put millions of people around the world at risk
of malnutrition and famine due to disrupted production
and supply chains. Let us not be fooled. Russia’s
subsequent symbolic handout of grain shipments to
selected countries will not help to stabilize the crisis.
Lastly, we urge the Russian Federation to stop using
food as a weapon, rejoin the Black Sea Grain Initiative
without further delay and cease its illegal blocking of
Ukrainian seaports. Hunger is both a consequence and
a cause of conflict, and that vicious cycle can be broken
only through international cooperation, respect for
international law and enhanced solidarity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Jiménez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I join other delegations in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council this month. I wish you every success in
the discharge of your responsibilities and thank you for
convening this important debate on a crucial issue for
the international community.
Spain aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and would like to add
some remarks in its national capacity.
We share the concern expressed by speakers
throughout today’s debate about the alarming increase
in food insecurity, and consider that an urgent,
coordinated and comprehensive response is needed to
alleviate the suffering caused by food shortages. In that
context, Spain condemns the decision of the Russian
Federation to terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
which has played a crucial role in stabilizing and
reducing food prices. We reiterate the call on Russia to
22/47

03/08/2023

reconsider its decision and rejoin the initiative. Using
hunger as a method of warfare undermines the four
dimensions of food security — availability, access,
utilization and stability — and constitutes a violation
of international humanitarian law.
For our part, the criminal code in Spain
punishes those who intentionally starve civilians
as a method of warfare, while our recently approved
humanitarian diplomacy strategy includes support
for the implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), the
promotion of multilateral and bilateral measures to
prevent and prosecute acts that cause food insecurity
in conflicts, and the promotion of the ratification of the
amendment to the Rome Statute that criminalizes the
intentional starvation of civilians in non-international
conflicts as a crime under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. To address food
insecurity, in September 2022 Spain committed a total
of €226.5 million for the next three years. In January
2023, an additional €14.4 million was approved for a
shock plan against food insecurity by the World Food
Programme, primarily in African countries.
Finally, we believe it is necessary to continue
working on the triple nexus approach, ensuring respect
for humanitarian principles and the quest for peaceful
solutions to conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): I thank the United
States for convening this meeting and all the briefers
for their presentations.
It is truly concerning that armed conflict remains
one of the most significant drivers of food insecurity,
while the number of people affected continues to
increase. The way in which conflict in one part of the
world has affected millions of vulnerable people on the
other side of the globe is equally concerning. Decisive
and coordinated global actions need to be taken to
ensure that food, a basic human right, is accessible and
available to all. On that note, I would like to emphasize
three points.
First, we must take concrete measures to break the
vicious cycle between armed conflict, violence and food
insecurity. The Security Council should work in synergy
with other United Nations entities to address the root
causes of conflict in order to sustain peace and achieve
sustainable development. Indonesia urges all parties to
conflicts to comply with international humanitarian
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

law and refrain from using famine as a weapon of war.
Humanitarian workers, medical facilities and critical
infrastructures, particularly those related to water, food
and energy, must also be protected.
Secondly, we must enhance capacities and bolster
resilience. Many countries are prone to global shocks
such as rising food commodity prices, which have
a greater impact in conflict areas. In the short term,
people in those situations urgently need immediate
assistance to survive, especially women and children.
The international community must increase its support
to humanitarian agencies to provide much-needed aid.
Technical and financial assistance, as well as capacitybuilding, are also vital to achieving food security.
In the medium and long term, greater investments,
particularly for smallholder farmers, are required for
more innovative, sustainable and resilient agriculture
and food systems. In relation to the worsening impacts
of climate change on food security, climate adaptation
strategies also need to be taken into account.
Thirdly, we must strengthen international
cooperation and multi-stakeholder collaboration.
International efforts and coordinated actions among
Governments, international organizations, the private
sector and all relevant stakeholders must be synergized
and avoid duplication. We primarily support the
international efforts to keep food supply chains
functioning under challenging circumstances. In our
region the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
together with its dialogue partners, has also developed
cooperation on food security and nutrition, including
in times of crisis. We must continue to ensure the
accessibility, affordability and sustainability of food
and food products for those in need, particularly the
vulnerable communities in developing and leastdeveloped countries.
In view of the recent global dynamics, we regret
that the Black Sea Grain Initiative and related measures
are in limbo, interfering with the much-needed global
supply of grain and fertilizers. Indonesia hopes to see
the initiatives resumed and emphasizes that they should
be implemented in their entirety and aimed at reaching
those who need them the most — developing countries
and the poor.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Indonesia’s
commitment to contributing to and being part of the
solution in addressing global food insecurity.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like
to express our appreciation for the United States’
leadership, Mr. President, in continuing to address the
issue of conflict-driven food insecurity over the past
three years. My gratitude also goes to the three briefers
for their insightful presentations.
In the twentieth century, humankind dreamed of a
world in which no one suffered from hunger, thanks to
modern science and agricultural technologies. To our
dismay, however, that dream has not been realized. As
articulated in resolution 2417 (2018) and noted in this
year’s report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/345)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
devastating impacts of armed conflict on food security
require urgent action on the part of the international
community. In that regard, my delegation welcomed the
Security Council’s adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/4 this morning and is pleased to join the
joint communiqué condemning the use of food as a
weapon of war. We also call for the extension of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, through which 32 million
tons of grain were released to the global market over
the past year.
We note with grave concern that climate change
is exacerbating both conflict and food insecurity.
The Council should facilitate thorough climate-risk
assessments and call for climate-informed early
warning, prevention and peacebuilding in vulnerable
environments. Those compounding effects are
especially concerning for Africa, which has also felt
the biggest impact from the increase in food prices
since the war on Ukraine began. The Republic of Korea
has pledged to double its rice aid to Africa to 100,000
tons a year. And in May, at the Group of Seven Summit,
President Yoon Suk Yeol announced the K-Ricebelt
project, designed to help African countries produce
rice locally. After its completion five years from now,
the project is expected to continue to provide rice to
30 million people in eight African countries.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight the
serious food insecurity that exists in another part of the
world, where the situation is no less grave than in areas
of conflict. The long-standing acute and chronic food
shortages in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
have recently deteriorated further. And that food crisis
is unquestionably regime-induced, the result of three
wrong choices — nuclear and missile development, the

23-2302423/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

closure of the border and a market-distorting policy.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has wasted
its scarce resources, which have exploded vainly in the
skies thanks to the unprecedented scale and frequency
of its missile launches over the past year and a half,
12 of them intercontinental ballistic-missile launches.
According to some estimates, the resources expended
on them would have been enough to cover the country’s
annual food shortfall last year.
Moreover, the coronavirus disease pandemic
provided a pretext for sealing off the border, thereby
curbing access for the United Nations and international
humanitarian assistance to the people of North Korea.
Late last year, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea adopted a new policy banning private commerce
in grains, with the aim of tightening central control
over food distribution. That has exacerbated hunger
among ordinary North Koreans, who, except for the
top brass, have relied on local private markets for
food, because the State distribution system has not
functioned since the mid-1990s. I feel obliged to bring
the issue to the attention of the global community,
because I am seeing our Korean brothers and sisters
across the border suffering from chronic and humanmade food shortages.
We need to remember that it is innocent, ordinary
people who endure the brunt of food insecurity, whether
conflict- or regime-induced. As an elected member of
the Security Council starting next year, the Republic
of Korea looks forward to actively contributing to the
Council’s noble endeavours to maintain international
peace and security, including the critical issue of
food security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Ms. Mocanu (Romania): I thank the United States
for convening this debate and the briefers for their
insights. I also wish you success, Mr. President, in
implementing the objectives of your presidency, which
has just begun. Let me also inform you that Romania
did not hesitate to join the communiqué proposed by the
United States condemning the use of food as a weapon
of war. It is consistent with our strong belief that
food must not be used as a weapon of war. Depriving
individuals of their right to food is against international
law, deeply unethical and an illegal tactic that inflicts
further suffering on civilians.
24/47

03/08/2023

The recently published report on The State of Food
Security and Nutrition in the World notes that one
in five people in Africa are going hungry in 2023. It
also notes that almost 600 million will be chronically
undernourished by 2030, which is 23 million more
than there would have been if Russia’s war against
Ukraine had not happened. Not only has the war shaken
important pillars of the global food system, it has
disrupted supply chains, raising the cost of energy and
fuelling inflation, especially in the import-dependent
countries of Africa and Asia. After Russia’s withdrawal
from the Black Sea Grain Initiative last month, grain
prices rose to their highest levels since the beginning
of the war.
In the past 10 days we have witnessed aggressive
actions by Russia designed to disrupt grain exports to
third countries by targeting port infrastructure on the
Danube, close to Romania’s territory. But the civilian
ports on the Danube River have a special mission at
this moment in history — to provide alternative ways
to export grains from Ukraine to the world and to
ensure the safety of ships and their crews. Since the
very first hours of the bombing of Ukrainian ports on
25 July, and consistent with our stance on Ukrainian
refugees, we have allowed boats on the Danube River
to seek shelter at Romanian ports to save their crews’
lives and safeguard their cargoes. What is unfolding is
a global humanitarian crisis, and it requires all of our
attention. Romania has facilitated the export of more
than 20 million tons of grain from Ukraine to the world,
in addition to the 32 million tons that were shipped via
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. But we need to return to
the spirit of the Initiative if we are truly committed to
leaving no one behind.
Food prices are now skyrocketing. Wars and
conflicts are one of the causes. The other is climate
change, which is having a visible impact on the soil
and people’s lives. We see it in the Horn of Africa,
sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and, increasingly,
the northern hemisphere. It is a threat that cannot be
overlooked. After last week’s Food Systems Summit
Stocktaking Moment, and in anticipation of the
Sustainable Development Goal Summit to be held in
September, action is needed more than ever. We cannot
afford to simply stand by and watch a vicious cycle
in which food supplies are deliberately disrupted or
destroyed, agricultural lands ravaged and access to
vital resources blocked. Present and future generations,
particularly vulnerable civilians — children, including
the very young, women and the elderly — will endure
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

starvation, malnutrition and even famine. We need to
redouble our efforts to avoid a global humanitarian
crisis before it is too late to save lives. And we need
to act in accordance with international law with regard
to secure food delivery, unrestricted access for aid
workers and funding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Ganou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): First
of all, allow me to thank the United States for giving us
the opportunity to take part in today’s open debate of
the Security Council on famine- and conflict-induced
global food insecurity. I commend this morning’s
briefers for their excellent briefings, which describe a
troubling situation that requires action.
In Burkina Faso, a combination of structural
factors linked to climate, poverty and external shocks
has been undermining livelihoods, with concurrent
sporadic famines, for a long time now. The worsening
of food insecurity over the past few years is due, to
a large extent, to the security crisis. Terrorist attacks
have indeed caused a humanitarian crisis that has
displaced approximately 2 million people — nearly
80 per cent of whom are women and children — and
led to the confiscation of arable land and livestock.
Terrorists have also attempted to brazenly prevent the
regular delivery of food and medicine to areas facing
major security challenges.
Given the difficult security and food situation,
in the spirit of recovery and resilience, Burkina Faso
adopted the Stabilization and Development Action
Plan 2023–2025, which has the following priorities: to
combat terrorism, restore territorial integrity, address
the humanitarian crisis, rebuild the State and improve
governance, and, lastly, strive for national reconciliation
and social cohesion. To support that Action Plan, the
United Nations system and the transitional Government
have agreed on the United Nations Interim Action Plan
for Sustainable Development 2023–2025, the goals of
which are aligned with the Government’s priorities.
At the operational level, concerning efforts to
combat food insecurity, since 2012, Burkina Faso and
its partners have been developing and implementing
a plan to respond to and support populations at
risk of food insecurity and malnutrition. The 2023
response plan, adopted in May and which will cost
$357 million, now has a financial shortfall of nearly
$161 million. In addition to the plan, a presidential

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

initiative for agricultural production was also adopted
in May. It set the goal for 190,000 tons of grain to
be produced between 2003 and 2024, for a total cost
of approximately $35 million. The plan is aimed at
meeting national grain demand and preparing for the
return of combatants and internally displaced persons
to jobs in agriculture once territorial integrity is
restored. Off-season crops, the distribution of fertilizer
and the agricultural mechanization programme are all
initiatives that require the efforts of all stakeholders in
our fight against food insecurity.
In conclusion, allow me to add the following
recommendations to our debate. It is crucial to ensure
improved coordination among the various stakeholders
in order to support national initiatives, as mentioned
earlier, and regional initiatives, and to do so in a
timely manner. With regard to regional initiatives,
the Economic Community of West African States has
specific mechanisms and agencies for that purpose,
including the Regional Agency for Agriculture and
Food and the Regional Food Security Reserve. Support
for those initiatives should allow for the development
of more resilient and sustainable agriculture on the one
hand and, on the other, for food stocks to be brought
closer to those in need, while taking into account their
dietary habits by supplying them with local products.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): We warmly congratulate
the delegation of the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. We welcome the convening of today’s timely
debate and thank the briefers for their valuable remarks.
The global food security landscape, a critical
component of overall human security, has been
significantly affected by conflict and climate change in
recent years. Bangladesh is no exception. The ongoing
war in Ukraine and related sanctions and countersanctions have severely affected our import bills and
therefore jeopardized our efforts to ensure food security
for the 168 million people of Bangladesh. Yet, we are
trying our best to tackle the challenges, including
through difficult policy measures, such as withdrawing
subsidies in the energy sector, limiting imports and
reducing public expenditure. As long-term measures,
we have prioritized investments in agrifood systems.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has encouraged all to
cultivate unused lands in every household.

23-2302425/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

At the international level, we support all global
efforts in addressing food insecurity. As one of the
Champions of the Secretary-General’s Global Crisis
Response Group, our Prime Minister is advocating
for and facilitating global consensus on actions to
prevent, mitigate and respond to the food crisis and
related challenges.
Given the systemic nature of the crisis, we need
collective endeavours. Allow me to highlight four
specific points in that regard.
First, it is essential to address factors that affect
food prices and access, especially during conflict. We
support the Secretary-General’s call to keep markets
open, remove unnecessary export restrictions and
release food reserves to improve the food supply. It
is also critical to keep the Black Sea Grain Initiative
alive. Equally important is to continue strengthening
diplomatic efforts to end wars — the very cause of
human suffering.
Secondly, we denounce the use of famine and
starvation as weapons of war, which are prohibited by the
1977 Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions.
Furthermore, the Rome Statute recognizes such actions
as a direct violation of international law, constituting
crimes against humanity. We call upon all Member
States to remain committed to those obligations. We
also call upon parties to armed conflict to refrain from
attacking critical infrastructure that is essential for the
production, distribution and transport of food.
Thirdly, climate change and related disasters have
serious impacts on food security. To address those
impacts, we have implemented various innovative
agricultural practices. In the past 14 years, our
scientists have developed 690 improved and highyielding crop varieties, including salinity-tolerant
rice varieties. We are now working on drought and
submergence-tolerant varieties.
It is critical to further invest in those sectors.
We reiterate our call for international cooperation,
including South-South cooperation, climate financing
and technology transfer, to support vulnerable
countries such as Bangladesh. The development of a
food stockholding mechanism for the least developed
countries, as stipulated in the Doha Programme of
Action, should also be pursued seriously.
Finally, Bangladesh is also affected by the endless
conflicts and insecurity in Myanmar. For the past six
years, we have been hosting more than 1.2 million
26/47

03/08/2023

Rohingyas who have fled persecution and violence
in Myanmar. However, due to multiple humanitarian
emergencies, the United Nations and other humanitarian
partners are now facing funding shortfalls in supporting
the Rohingyas sheltered in Bangladesh. The World
Food Programme has had to implement rations cuts
twice. As mentioned by Secretary Blinken earlier
today, a Rohingya receives only 27 cents a day for food
intake. That dire situation is leading to malnutrition,
insecurity and violence in the camps.
We call upon the Council to pay urgent attention
to the lingering conflict in Myanmar and help to create
an environment conducive to the safe and sustainable
repatriation of the Rohingyas. The international
community must also continue providing adequate
funding to the humanitarian response plan for displaced
Rohingyas until they are able to return to Myanmar.
In conclusion, I wish to flag the need for addressing
food waste as a crucial aspect of global food insecurity
and call for building a broad-based social movement to
prevent that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to congratulate
the United States on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and thank it for convening this
important open debate.
According to the World Food Programme, 60 per
cent of the people suffering from hunger throughout
the world live in conflict zones. The most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2023/345) underscores the fact
that conflict and insecurity were the most significant
drivers of high levels of acute food insecurity for
approximately 117 million people in 19 countries and
territories. Armed conflicts generate food insecurity
by destroying farms, roads and ports, paralysing the
economy and disrupting humanitarian access. Food
insecurity, in turn, can become a trigger for violence
and migration-related instability and a factor in
recruitment by terrorist groups.
In recent years, the Security Council has focused
on the link between conflict and hunger. In 2018, the
Council adopted resolution 2417 (2018), which recalls
the link between armed conflict and conflict-induced
food insecurity. Resolution 2417 (2018) strongly
condemns the use of the starvation of civilians as
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

a method of warfare and the unlawful denial of
humanitarian access. And it urges all parties to protect
critical civilian infrastructure to ensure the proper
functioning of food systems.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights that, four
years after the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), armed
conflict continued to be a primary driver of hunger.
International humanitarian law prohibits using
the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare and
provides protection for objects necessary to provide
food and drinking water. Despite those provisions of
international humanitarian law, hunger is, with alarming
frequency, the consequence of armed conflicts, either
because the belligerents deliberately use it in violation
of their obligations or because it arises as an indirect
consequence of the destruction caused by war. What
is clear is that respect for the rules of international
humanitarian law can help to mitigate the impact of
armed conflicts on food security.
Argentina, as a global producer and supplier of
healthy, nutritious and quality food, is committed to
ending hunger and achieving global food security in
compliance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 2. We believe that the long food supply
chains inherent to open international trade play a key
role in guaranteeing and supporting global food security
and the achievement of the SDGs in humanitarian
emergency situations or armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Concepción Jaramillo (Panama) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate the United States on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August.
Constructive political will in accordance with
international law, frank dialogue without conditions to
achieve peace, sustainable development and respect for
human rights are key pillars of Panama’s foreign policy.
We call for revitalized multilateralism as a tool
to prevent aggression and violations of international
peace and security, prioritizing joint action and
commitments aimed at addressing the consequences of
conflicts, the adverse situations of climate change and
gender inequality.
Panama reiterates the importance of implementing
all viable measures to ensure the protection of all

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

civilians who are victims of the war in Ukraine,
meeting their basic needs and facilitating the rapid and
unimpeded passage of humanitarian aid to all people
living with the consequences of the armed conflict, with
a view to guaranteeing international humanitarian law.
We join Secretary-General António Guterres
in expressing our disappointment at the Russian
Federation’s unilateral withdrawal from the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. We urge it to reverse that decision
and to re-establish negotiations to keep open the
Black Sea humanitarian corridor, which guarantees
the functioning of the agricultural system. That will
have a positive impact on the most vulnerable people in
developing countries, who currently spend more than
50 per cent of their income to cover the high costs of
food and energy.
It is time to address the specific nutrition needs of
women and children to promote and protect the right
to food and accelerate the transformation to more
egalitarian, gender-sensitive and sustainable food
systems. Evidence shows that greater participation of
women at all levels of decision-making is essential to
assure and maintain peace.
In situations of conflict and food insecurity,
women and girls are more likely to experience genderbased violence. In addition, those situations may force
women and girls to engage in transactional sex, that is,
to exchange sex for food or money to buy food.
Five years ago, the Council adopted resolution 2417
(2018), which noted the link between armed conflict
and violence, on one hand, and conflict-related food
insecurity, on the other. The food insecurity situation
was already critical before the outbreak of the conflict
and had worsened as a result of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. War and all its impacts have deepened
a global cost-of-living crisis not seen in at least a
generation, compromising our aspirations for a better
world by 2030. Council members must pay particular
attention to ensuring compliance with international
law, especially in cases of maintaining international
peace and security.
Panama clearly and unequivocally reaffirms that
hunger can never be used as a weapon of war.
Panama supports the Secretary-General’s proposal
for a New Agenda for Peace. Better collaboration
among all the principal organs of the United Nations
is essential to address the structural causes of conflicts
and prevent them with a comprehensive vision.

23-2302427/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Panama believes in dialogue and negotiation as
indispensable ways to achieve peace, through respect
for international law and the principles that underpin it.
To that end, it is essential to reaffirm solidarity as one
of the essential values for the twenty-first century.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kpukumu (Sierra Leone): The delegation
of Sierra Leone congratulates the United States of
America on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for August and on its organization
of this high-level open debate on famine and conflictinduced global food insecurity.
On his recent re-election for a second term, His
Excellency President Julius Maada Bio has committed
his Government to five key priorities, with addressing
food insecurity as the flagship. With the election
of Sierra Leone as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council for 2024 to 2025, we look forward to
effectively working with other members of Council to
tackle food insecurity. We we all share a fundamental
responsibility to take action to create a world free from
hunger, because food insecurity is both a consequence
and a driver of global instability.
World hunger is an issue of global concern. A
combination of factors, namely famine, the effects of
armed conflicts, climate change and global inequalities
have become leading causes of food insecurity in
our world and have driven millions of people to the
brink of starvation. That scenario is characterized by
unprecedented numbers of people displaced by conflict,
catastrophic weather events and natural disasters.
Many people cannot afford enough food owing to
famine or conflict. It is estimated that about 70 per cent
of food insecure countries are also considered fragile.
According to the 2023 Global Report on Food Crises in
West Africa and the Sahel and parts of Central Africa,
the levels of acute food insecurity during the June to
August lean season are projected to be the highest on
record, driven by worsening conflict and insecurity,
particularly in the central Sahel and the Lake Chad
basin areas. Other instances have been characterized
by increased economic shocks, including widespread
inflation and currency depreciation. In view of
prioritizing its food security, the Government of Sierra
Leone has an eight-point plan, including increasing
food production, cash-crop production and livestock
production, investing in agriculture, improving
28/47

03/08/2023

governance, research in the agricultural sector and
water management, and establishing at least three agriprocessing zones.
Conflict remains a crucial driver of food insecurity
and malnutrition and represents one of the most
significant hindrances to fulfilling the right to food.
Conflicts negatively affect the entire food system,
exacerbate the ill-affordability of healthy diets
and seriously threaten global efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals, including eradicating
hunger and malnutrition by 2025. Although the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
has indicated that rapid reduction in need is possible,
it is clear that reaching those goals may be challenging
to achieve, especially when countries are affected by
conflicts and political instability.
The world must listen, find ways to prevent
and address hunger crises and advocate for greater
humanitarian access to needy communities. Ensuring
food security everywhere should be a central issue
for every Member State of the United Nations, most
especially the members of the Security Council.
Our actions must not lead to the disruption of food
systems and the aggravation of hunger, because food
insecurity produces instability, as both are intricately
connected. In that vein, we urge the continued
constructive engagement of all the relevant parties
to secure the continuation of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative — sustaining that deal is important to prevent
a further increase in food prices and a worsening of the
global food crisis.
In conclusion, it is important to note that climate
change, desertification and imbalances in global trade
are interconnected challenges that the world faces
today. Climate change is causing more extreme weather
events, with multiple impacts, including desertification.
Desertification, in turn, is making it difficult to grow
food, which is contributing to food insecurity and global
hunger. The imbalance in global trade and access to
development finance are also major challenges that, in
turn, deepen poverty and inequality in many countries.
Reforming the international financial institutions,
among other things, is essential to address those
challenges. The international financial institutions,
such as the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, have a major role to play in financing climate
mitigation and adaptation and in supporting the
Sustainable Development Goals.
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Finally, my delegation commends SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his sustained dedication
and commitment to achieving a food-secure world, and
the Government of Italy, for its leadership in hosting the
first United Nations Food Systems Stocktaking Moment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour of speaking on behalf of
the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations. I will deliver a shortened version of my
statement, the full version of which will be provided to
the Secretariat.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights recognize the right of
everyone to an adequate standard of living, including
adequate food. Consequently, and with respect for the
provisions of international human rights law, we consider
the right to food and the right of everyone to be free
from hunger an inalienable human right of every human
being. I therefore take this opportunity to reiterate, at
the outset of my statement, the firm commitment of the
States members of the Group of Friends to sparing no
effort to end hunger, achieve food security, improve
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture, in line
with our relevant international commitments, including
those derived from the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and our respective national programmes
in that field.
It is no secret that the world is currently experiencing
a multifaceted crisis, and that food insecurity is indeed
one of the facets of that global crisis. That reality has
now been exacerbated, not only by the worst pandemic
humankind has faced in the past century, but also by the
ongoing climate catastrophe, growing inequalities and
conflicts, including those of a protracted nature, among
other things. There is, however, yet another element that
has and continues to deliberately exacerbate famine,
hunger and food insecurity at the local, national, regional
and international levels, as even recognized recently by
the World Health Organization — that is, the continued,
systematic and relentless promulgation, application and
even expansion of unilateral coercive measures.
Such measures, which are cruel, inhumane and
have no legal basis within the scope of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

are an affront to the right to food and development,
among other things. They clearly seek, among others,
to deprive entire populations of their own means of
subsistence, in flagrant violation of the most basic
norms of international law. In addition, they are
included in the toolbox used by certain Governments
to advance their national interests and dubious agendas
abroad. Instrumentalizing the economy and the
international financial system to take action against
others, particularly through the application of unilateral
coercive measures — which, as facts demonstrate,
can be as lethal as weapons used in conventional
warfare — is one of the means used to induce, escalate
and prolong conflicts worldwide.
Let us be clear — given their wide scope,
extraterritorial implications and systemic nature,
unilateral coercive measures are deliberately
exacerbating the multifaceted crisis humankind is
facing today and will continue to not only negatively
affect the global economy as a whole, but also cause
and prolong human suffering around the world, unless
they are completely eliminated, which would enable
every nation, without discrimination or limitation
of any sort, to fully pursue its productive potential
and, in turn, to contribute to overcoming the current
challenges, including through the stabilization of certain
commodity prices, including of food and fertilizers.
Moreover, the continued application of unilateral
coercive measures makes it nearly impossible for
nations subjected to them to purchase equipment,
software, hardware and spare parts and to ensure the
proper technology transfers needed for the development
and production of the agricultural and agri-food
industry, among other things. As I mentioned before,
such measures also have extraterritorial implications
and an impact on other nations, some of which have
opted to reduce legal trade with nations subjected to
those measures for fear of being subjected to secondary
sanctions, as mentioned in the Global Report on Food
Crises 2023. It is a reality that has ultimately further
exacerbated the current global food insecurity crisis.
We agree with the assertion included in the concept
note prepared for today’s open debate (S/2023/560,
annex) that global food insecurity is a generational
challenge, and we must aim for an ambitious goal to rid
the world of famine.
An initial — and perhaps the simplest — step in
that direction would be putting an end once and for
all to unilateral coercive measures, which currently

23-2302429/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

affect over 30 countries around the world, many of
which are part of our Group of Friends, and which are
not only ready but have the potential to make a major
contribution to our common endeavour, including in the
production and export of grains and fertilizers, among
others. In that regard, we cannot overemphasize the
fact that all parties must commit equally to being part
of the solution, given that we are more than able and
willing to do our part and to be reliable and responsible
suppliers of commodities, goods and services, for the
well-being of our peoples and of all humankind.
The solution to that generational challenge hinges
on the urgent adoption of collective strategies and
decisive measures that must necessarily be rooted in
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We do not need humanitarian interventions,
as mentioned in the concept note for this meeting
(S/2023/560, annex). What we need instead is greater
cooperation, capacity-building and solidarity, as well
as an expansion and deepening of South-South, NorthSouth and triangular cooperation, with a view to
strengthening national capacities. We must emphasize,
however, that any kind of assistance in that area,
particularly if it is humanitarian in nature, must strictly
adhere to the guiding principles for the provision
of humanitarian assistance, as outlined in General
Assembly resolution 46/182, and must have the consent
of the concerned State.
We conclude by stressing that the way to successfully
address and overcome the current challenges that
humanity as a whole is facing — including with regard
to famine, hunger and food insecurity — is neither the
continued application or the expansion of unilateral
coercive measures, nor the imposition of unjustified
and arbitrary trade restrictions, including tariff and
non-tariff barriers. Rather, it is the adoption of joint,
effective, inclusive and innovative measures that,
in strict adherence to the tenets of the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law, allow
us, all together, to overcome the present multifaceted
crisis that — whether as a result of scarcity or of
inflation — threatens us all equally today, particularly
hundreds of millions of people in the developing world.
It is our moral responsibility to present and future
generations to correct our course and to do so now.
Lastly, as many have said today in this room, food
must indeed never be used as a weapon of war. Similarly,
we also emphasize that unilateral coercive measures,
including fourth-generation measures, must never be
30/47

03/08/2023

used as a tactic of warfare, for the purpose of inflicting
starvation, or to exterminate entire peoples, including
by depriving them of access to food as a direct result of
resorting to such illegal, cruel and inhumane measures.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I would like to thank
the United States for organizing this open debate and
the briefers for their statements. Latvia also commends
the United States for presenting the joint communiqué
condemning the use of food as a weapon of war. Latvia
has joined the signatories of that document.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the European Union.
The staggering number of people who are foodinsecure keeps increasing, reaching record levels.
The growing number of armed conflicts in different
geographic areas is alarming. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World
Food Programme are both warning us of acute food
insecurity being likely to deteriorate even further in
18 hunger hotspots around the world. Somalia, Yemen,
Afghanistan, Haiti, Burkina Faso, Mali, South Sudan,
the Sudan and Nigeria are at the highest concern level.
The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2417 (2018) five years ago, but we have
yet to succeed in breaking the vicious cycle of armed
conflict and food insecurity. Five years later, one of
the permanent members of the Council, namely, the
Russian Federation, is deliberately deepening food
insecurity and significantly adding to the suffering
of the most vulnerable people across the globe. By
invading Ukraine and weaponizing food, and through
destroying Ukraine’s agricultural lands, crippling its
agricultural economy and blocking its exports, Russia
has disrupted grain deliveries worldwide and fuelled a
surge in food prices globally.
Given the central role of Ukraine in the global
food supply chain, the Black Sea Grain Initiative has
been critical to addressing the heightened food crisis
caused by Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.
However, most regrettably, Russia has taken further
steps to push more people into poverty, hunger and
starvation. We condemn Russia’s decision to terminate
its participation in the Black Sea Grain Initiative and
the subsequent barrage of attacks on Ukrainian port
facilities and agricultural warehouses, which have
destroyed tens of thousands of tons of foodstuff. Russia
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

has gone so far as to declare that it will consider any
cargo ships traveling to Ukraine’s Black Sea ports to
be a military target. Such actions highlight Russia’s
willingness and intention to employ food as a weapon of
war, rather than an essential humanitarian commodity
to prevent starvation and hunger around the globe.
The Russian Federation must immediately cease its
unlawful military activities to ensure the resumption of
shipments of food and agricultural commodities to and
from Ukraine.
Disruptions in the agricultural market are easily
avoidable, and the international system based on
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, must not tolerate deliberate attacks on global
agricultural supply chains and global food markets. We
need quick and decisive action to ensure that the supply
of food is available when it is needed the most and
to minimize the effects of conflicts on food security.
That includes unhampered humanitarian access to
effectively address growing humanitarian needs and
the threat of famine in armed conflicts.
It is crucial that the international community
mobilize under the United Nations leadership to
respond to the food, energy and financial crisis
exacerbated by Russia’s war. We commend the efforts
of the Secretary-General, António Guterres, and the
United Nations agencies that are at the forefront of
fighting food insecurity and ensuring the continuous
flow of foodstuff. In the meantime, there is a great
need for continuous efforts to build up resilient and
sustainable agricultural and food systems and reliable
supply chains. That endeavour is ever more critical in a
post-pandemic world that needs to adapt to the adverse
impacts of climate change, which poses new risks and
can therefore further reinforce the vicious cycle of
conflict and food insecurity. Latvia will continue to
support multilateral efforts to address those challenges
and to share our know-how with developing countries,
including smart solutions for sustainable agriculture
and water management.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mnguni (South Africa): My delegation would
like to congratulate the United States of America on
presiding over the work of the Council for the month of
August and to convey our best wishes of success during
its presidency. We thank you, Sir, for convening this
high-level open debate on a critical topic. We also thank
the briefers for their insightful presentations.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

We witness with deep concern and dismay the
rising number of people who are acutely food-insecure
and who require urgent food assistance. That is a reality
faced by the African continent owing to various factors,
including protracted conflicts, climate vulnerability,
weather extremes, soaring food and energy prices, the
coronavirus disease and economic slowdowns.
South Africa is concerned by the destabilization of
global peace and security, in particular the emergence
of new conflicts and the lack of resolution of
protracted conflicts, which affect women and children
disproportionately and which contribute to worsening
the global humanitarian crisis. Addressing the root
causes of conflict and the drivers of food insecurity in
conflict settings remains at the centre of the solutions
we ought to pursue. We cannot overemphasize the
importance of coordinated global efforts to prevent
conflicts and the imperative need to pursue political
settlements to existing conflicts. Peaceful dialogue and
negotiations are the bedrock of international peace and
security. It is in that context that South Africa is part
of the initiative of African leaders to pursue a peaceful
resolution of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
South Africa is deeply concerned that, in some
conflict situations, starvation is used as a tactic of
warfare in contravention of international humanitarian
law. Parties to conflict should not use starvation or
the threat of starvation as a weapon of warfare. We
therefore urge States and parties to conflict to fulfil
their responsibilities on the protection of civilians and
ensure unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance
for those in need. This open debate offers Member
States the opportunity to renew our commitment to
uphold international law and act in accordance with the
principles of international humanitarian law.
This open debate is timely. It reminds us of our
core obligations to mitigate and alleviate hunger in
armed conflict situations. Hunger and starvation are
occurring in the context of a 13 per cent increase in
global military expenditure. That is immoral and
reminds us that the use of force is never wise. The
nexus between development and peace necessitates
that we adopt a comprehensive approach to issues
of international peace and security. In 2015, we all
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) and proclaimed
the eradication of poverty and ending of hunger as an
overarching goal. Unfortunately, current data indicates
that the world is falling off-track with regard to the

23-2302431/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
by 2030. If we do not redouble and better target our
efforts, our goal of ending hunger, food insecurity and
malnutrition in all its forms by 2030 will remain out
of reach.
If we are to achieve our goals, we need a multilateral
system that will be able to strengthen mechanisms of
prevention for a world that is peaceful. We also need to
invest resources and strengthen our confidence in the
Rome-based agencies, such as the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, which are centre-stage when it comes to
building capacity and resilient food systems.
In conclusion, there is an urgent need for
humanitarian intervention in countries in crisis to
provide effective social protection measures. This
will include improved food security and nutrition for
populations in need and protect livelihoods. It is also
vital that the Security Council and Member States make
concerted efforts to implement resolution 2417 (2018),
addressing food insecurity and the threat of famine as a
consequence of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lõuk (Estonia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate. I thank the
briefers for their valuable input.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the European Union earlier today.
Global food security has continued to worsen
in recent years. According to the United Nations,
258 million people in 58 countries faced acute food
insecurity in 2022 owing to climate change, armed
conflicts and the effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The World Food Programme estimates that
those numbers have continued to grow this year.
The implementation of resolution 2417 (2018)
remains highly relevant, as 70 per cent of the world’s
hungry people live in areas afflicted by war and
violence. The Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Horn of Africa, Afghanistan, Yemen and Syria are just
some of the places facing famine due to armed conflicts.
Hunger tends to create vicious cycles that lead to new
conflicts and hinder any possible progress.
In that context, it is shameful that a key United
Nations-facilitated initiative to improve global food
32/47

03/08/2023

security — the Black Sea Grain Initiative — was
unilaterally abandoned by a permanent member of
the Council. Russia’s selfish and cynical decision to
weaponize food by terminating the implementation
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative is a catastrophic loss
for people in need everywhere. The Initiative kept
global food prices stable and enabled 33 million tons of
Ukrainian wheat to reach 45 countries across the globe,
with 65 per cent of exports going to developing countries.
As the world is thinking of ways to continue
Ukrainian food exports, Russia has further escalated
its war against food by bombing Ukrainian granaries
and food export facilities. Just yesterday, it bombed the
Izmail port on the river Danube, destroying 40,000 tons
of grain destined for countries in Africa, China and
Israel and increasing global wheat prices by 4 per cent.
Furthermore, Russia has attacked Ukrainian energy
infrastructure, which powers the agricultural sector,
and is threatening all vessels heading to and from
Ukrainian ports. The recent decision by Russia to offer
a small amount of free grain to six African Member
States is yet another attempt by Russia to create a false
illusion of its capabilities to replace Ukrainian grain.
As the Secretary-General stated, it is not a handful
of donations to some countries that will correct the
dramatic impacts affecting everyone, everywhere.
Estonia supports the United Nations in trying to
salvage the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which had been
a functioning solution to a problem Russia itself created
by invading Ukraine. We call upon Russia to stop its
war against Ukraine.
Estonia is committed to helping those regions in
most desperate need. We have contributed additional
humanitarian aid to the Horn of Africa and Yemen
this year, and our regular contributions to the World
Food Programme, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Central Emergency Response
Fund, UNICEF and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees help to respond to
humanitarian crises globally. Let me also recall the
European Union’s solidarity lanes initiative, which has
helped to export 41 million tons of food from Ukraine.
In conclusion, the global community must do
better and hold to account those actors who are
using starvation as a method of warfare and violating
international humanitarian law. Estonia remains a
committed partner to the United Nations in tackling
global hunger and addressing its root causes.
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Miller (Israel): We wish to thank Secretary
Blinken and the United States delegation for initiating
this high-level debate, reinforcing the critical
importance of combating food insecurity.
As a nation in the Middle East, Israel experienced
food insecurity throughout the first decades of its
existence but managed to transform challenges into
opportunities. Harnessing resilience and innovation
led us to great advancements in agricultural and water
management technologies. Our goal is not only to make
a difference on a national level — we also seek to make
a global impact, and we do so through cooperation both
bilaterally and multilaterally. Just last year, the General
Assembly once again adopted the biannual Israeliinitiated resolution on agricultural technology (General
Assembly resolution 76/200). The resolution promotes
the use of technology and research and development to
increase agricultural productivity and food security.
We are firm believers in regional cooperation as a
means of combating the root causes of food insecurity.
Our commitment is evident from our collaboration with
Morocco on water security, our joint water desalination
and solar energy deal with Jordan, facilitated by the
United Arab Emirates, and many more projects with our
neighbours. The recent conference of the N7 Initiative
on agriculture, water and food security in Abu Dhabi
displayed the universality of the challenges we face.
However, we must acknowledge that food insecurity
is not solely a result of natural disasters and climate
change — it is also exacerbated by conflict and terrorism.
In regions affected by conflict, armed groups leverage
food insecurity to further their destructive agendas,
using it as both a recruitment tool and a weapon to sow
discord. In May, we witnessed a clear example of that,
when the Palestinian Islamic Jihad fired mortars at
the Erez and Kerem Shalom border crossings between
Israel and the Gaza Strip. The deliberate targeting of
humanitarian corridors put the transport of people and
crucial supplies in immediate danger. Nevertheless,
even in those cases, Israel worked to have the crossings
open again within hours.
Recent global challenges and geopolitical tensions
remind us that such far-reaching threats have global
repercussions, affecting food supply chains and prices,
especially among vulnerable communities. Ultimately,
the ripple effects of pandemics, terrorism and global

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

conflict have created a devastating cycle of scarcity,
hunger and vulnerability. We must remain vigilant to
the broader implications of food insecurity and work
collectively to ensure that food remains a source of
sustenance, not a tool of manipulation. In that regard,
Israel is concerned by the potential implications on
food security and global food prices if the Black Sea
Grain Initiative is not extended and encourages Russia
to agree to its renewal for the benefit of the peoples
in the Middle East, Africa and beyond. Israel remains
committed to sharing its experience, collaborating and
building capacity globally.
We align ourselves with your vision and decision,
Mr. President, to put this urgent issue high on our
global agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Group of
Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
We thank the delegation of the United States of
America for the opportunity to discuss global food
security. Belarus cannot support the joint communiqué.
The text of the document was not submitted for our
consideration in keeping with best democratic practices,
nor were there any consultations or opportunities
provided to propose changes or amendments. The
document does not say a word about one of the main
threats to food security, namely, illegal unilateral
sanctions. At various levels and in different forums, we
have repeatedly drawn the international community’s
attention to the fact that the sanctions illegally imposed
on Belarus by Western countries, including against its
potash fertilizer sector, have had extremely negative
consequences for global food security.
At the same time, we can say with conviction that
the infamous exemptions from such sanctions, which
are often publicly announced, including today in this
Chamber, are divorced from reality and do not work.
Sanctions are fully blocking the export of fertilizers
and foodstuff from Belarus. Potassium is crucial to
maximizing crop yields. Fertilizer determines future
harvests. Half of the food consumed by the world’s
population is produced owing to fertilizer. Removing
fertilizer from fields means a drop in crop yields of at
least 50 per cent. One out of two people in the world
depends on agricultural products that have been grown

23-2302433/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

with fertilizers. Belarus is one of the largest producers
of potash fertilizers in the world. Before the illegal
termination of the transport of Belarusian potassium
through Baltic Sea ports, which, incidentally, constitutes
a direct violation of the rights of a landlocked country,
Belarus’ share in the world potash fertilizer market
was approximately 20 per cent. Just think about it: one
out every five tons of potash fertilizer in the world had
come from Belarus.
The illegal unilateral actions of Lithuania and
other Western countries to block supplies of Belarusian
fertilizer have already jeopardized the food security
of not only individual countries, but entire regions
and continents. Our country’s market share of potash
fertilizer in Africa fell from 42 per cent to 3 per cent in
2022. According to our estimates, based on data from
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the virtual disappearance of Belarus from the
list of potash suppliers last year led to a 16 per cent drop
in Africa’s grain harvest. In 2023, Belarusian potash
supplies to Africa are completely paralysed, owing to
Lithuania’s actions. We should also keep in mind that
many countries on the continent had received all their
entire supply of fertilizer from Belarus, while a number
of other countries had met 50 per cent of their fertilizer
needs with potash from Belarus.
The effects of the fertilizer shortage throughout the
world have already spilled over from corn and wheat to
all major staple crops, including rice, which in the near
future will inevitably have a devastating impact on the
lives of billions of people in Asia and South America.
At future meetings, rather than the lack of access to
fertilizer, we will be forced to discuss horrifying
statistics concerning the victims of starvation, owing
to the lack of food. Reports and studies by authoritative
international organizations and agencies, such as the
United Nations, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization,
the World Bank and the International Fertilizer
Association corroborate Belarus’ own assessments
that the current shortage of potash fertilizer on world
markets will significantly reduce crop yields and will
inevitably cause a sharp rise in food prices.
Many farmers have already been forced to cut back
on production, as the fertilizers that they require have
become more expensive than the grain that they grow
and sell. Illegal sanctions are a weapon of war. They
have been unilaterally imposed against the Republic
of Belarus in violation of all norms of international
34/47

03/08/2023

law without the approval of the Security Council
under spurious pretexts. Those who have devised and
implemented the sanctions are violating the most basic
human right — the right to life — condemning millions
of people to starvation and death. Western States must
stop using illegal unilateral sanctions as their preferred
instrument of war. That would be their true contribution
to ensuring global food security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, my country aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Oman on behalf of the
States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and the United States of America, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
would like to thank the United States for convening this
timely debate on famine and conflict-induced global
food insecurity, as the entire international community
is facing increasing challenges. We, the members of
this Organization, must spare no effort to find practical
solutions to address the crisis of famine everywhere
and prevent its severe ramifications for States and
communities due to conflict-induced food insecurity.
My country, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, is
following with great interest developments at the
regional and international arenas concerning the many
crises and conflicts that have regrettably undermined
the international community’s ability to address their
impacts on food security and States’ stability, let
alone the humanitarian consequences on peoples. The
Council is well aware of my country’s efforts related
to the provision of humanitarian aid in response to
urgent and non-urgent humanitarian appeals. Those
efforts include ensuring food security in various
conflict areas throughout the world, beginning with
our brotherly and neighbouring countries in the region,
such as Yemen, Palestine, Syria, the Sudan, Lebanon,
Somalia and other friendly countries and peoples, such
as Pakistan, Ukraine, the Rohingya refugees and those
in need in many other countries. That is in addition
to the aid that we provide to many humanitarian
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
relief and humanitarian bodies and agencies worldwide.
The aid provided by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
surpassed $87.13 billion, making it the largest donor
of humanitarian and development aid at the Arab and
Islamic levels and one of the three major donors at
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

the international level. The Kingdom will continue its
humanitarian efforts to respond to the call for relief
throughout the world.
Addressing the drivers and root causes of conflict
has become urgent and imperative. If we fail to do
so, we will be unable to ensure food security around
the world, particularly as the nature of conflicts has
changed and become unpredictable in terms of the
forms they may take. That has been concurrent with
increased levels of famine and food insecurity in many
regions. The international community should therefore
make concerted efforts not only to provide relief to
people in need, but also to find political, economic
and development solutions that will contribute to
ending ongoing conflicts and reducing the likelihood
of their emergence in other regions. Undoubtedly,
challenges related to security and armed conflicts
pose the greatest challenges and threat to global food
security and development. The situation becomes even
worse when conflicts and wars intensify and spread, as
development and food security can never be achieved
without peace.
We also recall that, in addition to conflicts and
wars, climate change exacerbates the food security
crisis. Therefore, the Kingdom stresses the importance
of international efforts to strengthen climate action
and the resilience of Member States, in particular
developing countries. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has taken important steps to enhance food security.
We have developed strategies aimed at promoting food
growth and addressing the challenges of climate change
and the scarcity of water resources. Such efforts have
contributed to improving food security indicators in
the Kingdom.
In conclusion, my country attaches great
importance to development issues and humanitarian
efforts that help to support the countries most in need,
promote their sustainability, support them in addressing
common challenges and risks, improve food security
and eliminate hunger and poverty, in implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 2. The Kingdom’s foreign
policy attaches the utmost importance to consolidating
security and stability, supporting dialogue and political
and peaceful solutions, and providing conditions that
support development and fulfil the aspirations of
peoples for a better tomorrow, whether in the Middle
East or in the entire world. Our peace efforts testify
to that goal. We always emphasize the importance of
promoting the values of pluralism and international

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

cooperation, as stipulated in the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to overcome growing international
challenges, bring about a more inclusive and just world,
and promote prosperity and well-being for all peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to start by
thanking the United States presidency for convening
today’s important meeting on a topic to which my
country attaches particular importance.
Back in 2021, Azerbaijan contributed to the
Council’s open debate on conflict and hunger (see
S/2021/250) by submitting a written statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The Security Council’s relevant resolution,
resolution 2417 (2018), recognized that conflict can
affect food security, both directly and indirectly, among
other things by displacing people from land, livestock
grazing areas and fishing grounds or by the destruction
of agricultural assets and disruption to food systems.
Azerbaijan experienced first-hand conflict-driven
threats to its food security during nearly 30 years
of occupation of some 20 per cent of its territory
by Armenia. The aggression caused long-term and
severe damage to food production capacity, with
widespread land degradation, pillaged and destroyed
water infrastructure and polluted water resources.
In particular, the mismanagement by Armenia of the
Sarsang water reservoir, the centrepiece of the water
supply network in the Karabakh region of Azerbaijan,
provoked a humanitarian crisis, as 400,000 Azerbaijanis
living in the downstream regions were deprived of
water for both domestic and agricultural purposes.
It also caused severe environmental impacts, such as
soil erosion, dehydration and desertification. Those
negative impacts remain ongoing to date, along with
the continued severe pollution of transboundary rivers,
in particular the Okchuchay and Aras, flowing from
Armenia into Azerbaijan.
Substantial areas of Azerbaijan’s farmland were
spoiled and fragmented by the construction of trenches,
tunnels and other defensive fortifications by Armenia.
The decades-long military engineering activities of
Armenia have caused significant land disturbance,
affecting vegetation cover, water infiltration and
surface water flows. Most disturbingly, Armenia
planted more than 1.5 million landmines on our
territory, contaminating more than 3,000 square miles

23-2302435/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

of Azerbaijan’s land, half of which was previously
arable territory.
The refusal by Armenia to disclose the exact location
of landmines has already claimed 57 innocent lives and
severely injured 247 persons. In addition, it obstructs
the reconstruction, reintegration and rehabilitation of
those areas, delaying the safe reclamation of the highly
fertile agricultural lands that are vital for food security.
In her message to the second International
Conference on Mine Action, held this year in
Azerbaijan, the United Nations Mine Action Service
Director qualified Azerbaijan “as one of the countries
most densely contaminated by landmines and explosive
remnants of war”. As in its resolution 2417 (2018),
today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/4)
particularly expressed
“its deep concern over the serious humanitarian
threat posed to civilians by landmines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices
in affected countries, which has serious and lasting
social and economic consequences, including
regarding food security, for the populations of
such countries”.
Therefore, Armenia must provide, without any delay,
precise and complete information on the minefields.
With regard to the allegations made by the
representative of Armenia earlier today, Azerbaijan
condemns Armenia’s consistent efforts to abuse the
issue of humanitarian assistance for its malign purposes.
The establishment of the Lachin border checkpoint is an
undeniable sovereign right of Azerbaijan — the same
as the right of any other State to secure and protect
its borders and guarantee the security of persons,
vehicles and cargo movement along the road. In fact, on
6 July, the International Court of Justice unanimously
rejected Armenia’s request for provisional measures
with respect to the checkpoint, essentially ruling that
Armenia’s claims are groundless.
Since the checkpoint began operations, civilian
traffic between the Karabakh region of Azerbaijan and
Armenia, in both directions, increased significantly.
Armenia consistently resorted to provocations to
disrupt the functioning of the road and, on 15 June,
opened sniper fire, as a result of which an Azerbaijani
border officer was wounded.
Moreover, Armenia has recklessly exploited
vehicles hired by the International Committee of the
36/47

03/08/2023

Red Cross (ICRC)for the smuggling of goods, such
as electronic devices, microchips and other dual-use
technologies, to supply its illegally deployed armed
forces in the sovereign territory of Azerbaijan. That
is a blatant violation of international humanitarian
law and a serious blow to the humanitarian mandate
and reputation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Azerbaijan’s consistent calls on Armenia for
cooperation through border and customs entities
to ensure the smooth functioning of the road for
the movement of persons, cargo and services have
remained unanswered. Azerbaijan has also proposed
that the ICRC use the Aghdam-Khankendi route for its
humanitarian activities. That proposal was reiterated
by Azerbaijan at the recent meeting between the leaders
of Azerbaijan and Armenia in Brussels, organized by
the President of the European Council, who, in his
public remarks, encouraged the use of the AghdamKhankendi route as an important part of ensuring that
the needs of the Karabakh residents are met. The issue
was also discussed between the foreign ministers of
Azerbaijan and Armenia in Moscow at the end of July.
However, the road is currently closed, with
concrete blocks by the Armenian side not allowing
cargo and vehicles, including those belonging to the
ICRC, to pass. Such an arbitrary denial of humanitarian
assistance reveals Armenia’s sinister intention to create
a false narrative of a so-called “humanitarian crisis” in
the region.
Instead, Armenia has to abide by its international
obligations, completely withdraw its armed forces
from the territory of Azerbaijan, cease and desist from
territorial claims, illegal activities and disinformation,
put an end to mine terrorism, shed light on the fate
of some 4,000 Azerbaijanis who went missing during
the conflict, redress the harm caused to Azerbaijan,
including to its food security systems, and engage
faithfully in negotiations on a peace treaty and the
delimitation of borders between the two States.
Azerbaijan is firm in its determination to protect
its people, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and is
fully committed to the objectives of a peaceful, secure,
stable and prosperous region.
Mr. Ferreira Silva Aranda (Portugal): We would
like to congratulate the United States for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

of August and to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this timely debate.
Today’s discussion is a welcome follow-up to the
meeting on conflict-driven food insecurity held in
March 2021 (see S/2021/250) and to the ministerial-level
meeting on food security that took place in May last
year (see S/PV.9036).
Portugal aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. Allow me now to add
the following remarks in our national capacity.
The relation between conflicts and food insecurity
is unmistakable and reciprocal, as unanimously
recognized by the Security Council five years ago, in
resolution 2417 (2018). Conflicts impair food security,
and food insecurity leads to conflicts.
One of the most recent and clear examples of the
first phenomenon is the impact that Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine is having on global food security. The
Black Sea Grain Initiative was of paramount importance
to mitigate disruptions in the global trade of grains. It is
crucial to resume the Initiative as a matter of urgency,
and we join others in condemning attacks on civilian
infrastructure. In order to ensure the availability and
accessibility of food, fertilizers and energy, which are
essential for the realization of individuals’ right to food,
it is necessary that we all redouble efforts to achieve a
fair and lasting peace worldwide.
A new approach to peace and security, one more
focused on conflict prevention and fully embedded in
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law, would contribute to accelerated progress towards
zero hunger by precluding the effects conflicts have on
food security. In that context, we encourage the United
Nations to embrace the recommendations put forward
by the Secretary-General in Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) and, more recently, in the New Agenda for
Peace policy brief.
We also need to do more to scale up the emergency
response and, simultaneously, to improve the resilience
of countries’ food systems, in particular those of
developing countries, which face several challenges,
such as climate change. Steps such as the supply of
affordable agricultural inputs and products, investments
in small-scale infrastructure, short-term credit and
better access to markets and commercial information
may play an important role in that regard.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, let me reiterate that hunger can
never be used as a weapon or a tactic in a conflict.
Nor can humanitarian access be instrumentalized
or attacks against humanitarian workers tolerated.
The weaponization of food security targets, first and
foremost, the most vulnerable populations — precisely
those whom we should try the hardest to protect.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate the delegation of the United States of
America on the assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and express our
appreciation for convening this open debate on the use
of food security as a weapon of war in armed conflict.
At a time of intertwined multifaceted crises with
overlapping objectives, the world hardly closed one
chapter to be confronted by other chapters of affliction,
some as a result of the wrath of Mother Nature and
others caused by humans. In both cases, human beings
and unarmed civilians are the ones who pay the heaviest
price — reduced security in all its aspects, including
food security.
Until recently, the scarcity of natural resources,
water and land unsuitable for agriculture and production,
in addition to global warming, which are all interlinked,
have been the main causes of food insecurity, especially
in the countries of the South, despite their wealth in
natural resources. Today, there are many imminent
threats to global food security owing to the absence of
rules in war. Wars also have rules and ethics, notably to
spare unarmed civilians and to not use them as human
shields. Therefore, cutting off food — whether by
obstructing supply and export channels or by a system
of sanctions that undermines humanitarian assistance
during conflicts — is tantamount to using citizens as
human shields.
Lebanon, with worsening food difficulties, has
become one of 20 countries subject to hunger, following
a severe economic crisis that has been going on for
three years. We reiterate our position on the issue of
food security by supporting resolution 2417 (2018),
adopted by consensus, which stressed the link between
armed conflict, violence and the risk of famine in a
step that transcends politicization of the dossier, whose
main and ultimate focus is the human being, nature, the
future of people and their sustainability.
Any measure taken in this regard must inevitably
find a means to address the food security agenda and
secure the financial aid allocated to it. It must also be

23-2302437/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

03/08/2023

detached from political considerations. We must not
take sides or maintain strenuous international policies
against small countries, like Lebanon, which has been
torn apart by many economic crises.

and territories. The causes of conflict-induced food
insecurity in those and other conflict situations included
direct harm to food and water sources and impediments
to food and water production, delivery and access.

The starting point for concerted international
efforts, regardless of political differences, is the
commitment to the United Nations conventions on
ensuring food security at the global level and the need
to resume and extend the Black Sea Grain Initiative, in
its entirety, under the umbrella of the United Nations,
thus contributing to the arrival of food products to the
most vulnerable countries and the peoples in need of
those vital resources.

As pronounced by Philippine President Ferdinand
Marcos Jr. during the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly last year:

In conclusion, the world today needs an integrated
strategy to address the worsening situation with
regard to food insecurity and food in general with a
view to achieving Sustainable Development Goal 2,
namely, ending hunger and achieving food security.
We must adopt a memorandum of understanding or an
international protocol to be added to the rules of wars,
conflicts and sanctions, whether imposed unilaterally
or by the United Nations, that prohibits the use of food
security as a means of war or applying pressure because
ultimately the people are the only ones affected by that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the United States for convening
today’s open debate on famine and conflict-induced
global food insecurity.
Recent indicators show that our goal of ending
hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition in all its forms
by 2030 remains out of reach. The 2023 report The State
of Food Security and Nutrition in the World reveals
that global hunger remained relatively unchanged from
2021 to 2022 and is still far above pre-coronavirus
disease pandemic levels. It also reflects that hunger is
still on the rise throughout Africa, Western Asia and
the Caribbean, and that the modest progress in general
has been undermined by rising food and energy prices
magnified by the war in Ukraine.
Furthermore, according to this year’s annual report
of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
(S/2023/345), more than a quarter of a billion people
faced acute hunger in 58 countries and territories in
2022. Conflict and violence were the most significant
drivers of high levels of acute food insecurity for
approximately 117 million people in 19 countries
38/47

“Food is not just a trade commodity or a livelihood,
it is an existential imperative as well as a moral
one. It is the very basis of human security.”
(A/77/PV.5, p. 5)
The Philippines has faced head-on the two-pronged
problem of the food crisis: that which hits us in the
short term and that which hits us in the long term. The
agricultural sector is one of the main drivers of our
push for growth. The Philippine Development Plan, the
blueprint for its development transformation, puts in
place coherent strategic measures to hasten economic
and social recovery towards inclusive and resilient
development. It puts together measures to address the
current energy and food crises in the context of a new
system for energy, climate and nature.
On that point, I wish to highlight the following.
First, under the framework of the peacebuilding
efforts in Mindanao, the Enhanced Comprehensive
Local Integration Program reintegrates former rebels by
giving them training, education, housing and livelihood.
Since 2016, a total of 36,808 former rebels and 3,033
violent extremists have been reintegrated. That is
complemented by initiatives from other Government
agencies such as the Department of Agriculture and the
Department of Social Welfare and Development.
Secondly, the Barangay Development Program,
another Government initiative within the smallest
administrative divisions or barangays in the country,
continues to bring development to former conflictridden communities. It is directed towards the
sustainable rehabilitation of 822 barangays.
Thirdly, there is a need to align anticipatory
initiatives by all stakeholders to prevent acute
famine caused by conflict and climate change. That
can be through enhanced information-sharing and
coordination to identify early warning signs of
famine and food security; increased funding support
for humanitarian and development programmes in
vulnerable regions; and global solidarity and the
mobilization of international support.
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fourthly, there is a need to enhance collaboration
and accountability to increase access to civilians in
need of life-saving assistance during conflict, with a
focus on children, women and girls. The Philippines
is the first country in the region to launch a national
action plan on women and peace and security. The plan
integrates the women and peace and security pillars of
prevention, participation and protection with elements
such as addressing the proliferation of small arms.
Fifthly, there is a need for a whole-of-Government
approach engaging various stakeholders; long-term
investments focusing on sustainable solutions such as
agricultural development and economic empowerment;
and leveraging data and technology.
Finally, United Nations agencies and international
organizations should work together and with
Governments towards addressing the issue of food
insecurity — from raising awareness, generating
political will and building resilience to promoting
conflict resolution. The role of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme (WFP) and other United Nations agencies
and funds can augment the efforts of States in that
regard. In the Philippines, for instance, WFP has
helped the Government’s efforts in rebuilding lives and
responding to climate, conflict and disaster.
An impactful and transformative international
collaboration to address global food insecurity,
including in places where it is exacerbated owing to
conflicts, is needed more than ever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the presidency of
the Security Council for convening this debate. My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
Venezuela on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Global food insecurity is definitely the result
of conflicts, but it is not responsible to attribute that
problem to current geopolitical frictions alone. In this
frank discussion, we must not ignore the nefarious
processes of colonization in Africa, Asia and the
Americas and their legacy, which were the product of
old rivalries among Powers. Based on that, we can see
that the main cause of peoples’ vulnerability to hunger is
poverty, and the main factor that explains their poverty
is the history of colonial exploitation. Therefore, the

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

international community must prioritize investments in
equitable, sustainable and resilient agrifood systems to
end poverty and hunger, based on the recognition of
those historical responsibilities.
The current systemic crisis is an opportunity
to re-evaluate our priorities, since there can be no
sustainable development without peace and security,
and there can be no peace and security without
sustainable development.
According to estimates by specialized institutions,
we saw in 2021 a record in global military spending,
exceeding $2 trillion annually for the first time in
history. It also has been estimated that, in order to be
able to end to hunger in the next 10 years, it would
require $330 billion dollars. In other words, if only 2 per
cent of what is spent annually on war were invested
in food security with sovereignty, debates such as this
one would not be necessary and, in just 10 years, would
never be convened again.
The Security Council could contribute much more
to building a renewed multilateralism by working to
expand the regions that have been declared zones of peace
and abandoning short-sighted geopolitical ambitions.
Only by doing that will we be able to contribute to a
multipolar world that faithfully reflects the principles
of the Charter and in which there is no threat to the
right to food for society’s most vulnerable segments.
Finally, the Plurinational State of Bolivia believes
that in order to eradicate world food insecurity, we
must transform investments in death into investments
for life. It is urgent that we comply with our historical
commitments and establish new ones providing
financing for development and climate action,
without forgetting that our collective action should be
commensurate with the historical debts among peoples
and to Mother Earth.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate the United States of America on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and commend its initiative in convening
this important debate. Tunisia aligns itself with the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/4) issued on the
topic of today’s meeting. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their valuable insights.

23-2302439/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The choice of today’s topic, famine and conflictinduced global food insecurity, stresses the issue’s
importance and our growing collective awareness of
its gravity, as well as the need for the international
community to join forces in order to find good
solutions that can mitigate its consequences and
contain its ramifications, especially for developing and
least developed countries, which continue to witness
increasing rates of poverty and starvation. In that
context, it is important to focus on the factors that are
directly or indirectly affecting food security around the
world. In addition to climate change and the economic
and energy crises, armed conflicts are one of the main
causes of starvation, exposing millions of people around
the world to the dangers of famine and its effects on
global food security, and to disruptions of production
chains, distribution routes and price stability.
Recent wars and armed conflicts have revealed
the interconnected nature of global food systems, the
extent of their fragility and their grave implications for
global food security. The effects of conflicts are not
limited to the regions where they take place, especially
given the links between the trading system and the
reliance of many countries, particularly developing
countries, on food imports that are vulnerable to global
price increases. In that context, it is more than ever the
duty of the international community to address the root
causes of crises and take proactive measures to reduce
famine worldwide and contain the consequences of
conflicts. The maintenance of global food security
is a pillar of international peace and security and a
benchmark for a more balanced, united and equitable
world. In that regard, we reiterate the proposal made
by President Kaïs Saïed of Tunisia at the Food Systems
Summit held by the United Nations in Rome on 24 July,
in which he called for creating a strategic grain stock
that could be used in times of need in order to prevent
food from being turned into a weapon, especially
against developing countries.
We call for addressing food-related issues
according to a new vision based on genuine human
solidarity and effective synergies, and for refraining
from exploiting this vital good in any way to achieve
political and economic ends. There is also a need to
address all the factors that fuel and prolong conflicts,
especially considering that the consequences of such
crises have no borders and that no one in today’s world
is immune to them.
40/47

03/08/2023

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mrs. Eat (Cambodia): To begin with, Sir, I would
like to congratulate the United States on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank
your delegation for convening today’s debate on famine
and conflict-induced global food insecurity. I also thank
the briefers and the speakers before me for their insights
on this topic. Allow me to share the following thoughts.
First, my delegation deeply appreciates the
prevailing recognition that peace and security are
closely linked to food security, as reflected in the
Council’s unanimous adoption of its resolution 2417
(2018) and the views expressed today. With its own
first-hand experience of conflict-induced famine and
food insecurity, Cambodia would like to re-emphasize
the importance of prioritizing peacebuilding and
conflict prevention, particularly in the light of current
worrisome trends. We support the suggestion that
the Peacebuilding Commission should play a bigger
advisory role on appropriate actions in conflict areas.
Secondly, we support the calls for parties to
armed conflicts to respect international humanitarian
law. Weaponizing food supplies and depriving people
of access to food by any means is a violation of
human rights.
Thirdly, while many efforts have been made to
confront famine and acute malnutrition, the Global
Report on Food Crises 2023 still shows a bleak picture.
My delegation wholeheartedly supports the call for
enhanced public-private partnerships. We commend
the strategic and macro-level efforts, but perhaps more
can be done at the micro level to mobilize support from
the private sector and private individuals through more
campaigns at the grass-roots level and by creating a
simple system for allocating contributions, even very
small ones, that go to helping people in need of food in
specific parts of the world. The United Nations, national
Governments, the private sector and civil society could
work in partnership to that end.
Fourthly, to strengthen the resilience of food
systems in the face of climate change, we should make
coordinated efforts to mobilize more funding for
adaptation. We strongly welcome the commitment to
increasing investment for adaptation and support calls
for innovative approaches. We suggest that concerted
efforts should be made to match partners in carbon
trading as a way to generate funds for adaptation
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

activities such as the expansion of best practices on
climate-resilient food crop cultivation, the application
of modern technology and — because people need more
land to cultivate — investment in studies on whether
certain food crops or plantations can serve as carbon
sinks, as natural forests do.
Finally, Cambodia hopes that by redoubling
their efforts, Member States will be able to achieve
Sustainable Development Goal 2 by 2030, as we
aspire to.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): First of all, Myanmar thanks
the presidency of the United States for organizing
today’s high-level open debate. I would also like
to express our appreciation to the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
We all have a global target for ending hunger and
achieving food security by 2030, yet we are clearly off
track. The consequences of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, conflicts and climate change are making
the situation worse. According to United Nations
projections, 8 per cent of the world’s population, nearly
670 million people, will still be facing hunger by 2030.
That will constitute a failure of the global efforts to
achieve Sustainable Development Goal 2.
Along with other factors, conflicts remain a key
driver of food insecurity. The focus of today’s debate
could not be more timely, with a major war raging in
Europe and instability and conflicts emerging in many
parts of the world following unconstitutional changes
in Government. The international community must
therefore find ways to minimize the impact of armed
conflicts on the food security of millions of people,
particularly those living in conflict-affected areas. As a
diplomat from a country affected by conflict, I have to
emphasize that the reality of people suffering various
kinds of ills, including food insecurity, is indeed a
complete misery.
In Myanmar, a decade of democratic reforms and
hard-won momentum aimed at reducing poverty have
been eliminated by the illegitimate military junta
following the illegal coup of February 2021. The
military junta’s systematic destruction of the rule of
law, and its atrocities against the people of Myanmar,
have created a multifaceted crisis with regional
implications. Approximately 15.2 million people are
food-insecure. There are nearly 1.9 million internally

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

displaced people in Myanmar. Malnutrition is hitting
children in Myanmar particularly hard. According to
the World Food Programme, nearly 1 in 3 children in
Myanmar under the age of 5 suffer from stunting and 7
percent of all children nationally suffer from wasting.
While the rising poverty in Myanmar is pushing
more and more people into hunger, the deteriorating
food security is largely the result of the junta’s inhumane
“four cuts” military campaign. Since the illegal coup,
the junta forces have displaced 1.6 million people by
committing atrocities against the civilian population
and deploying indiscriminate artillery shelling and air
strikes on residential towns and villages. Moreover, a
key tactic that the military junta uses consistently is the
systematic and widespread burning of civilian homes.
So far they have burned down more than 70,000 civilian
properties. The junta forces subsequently destroy
their livelihoods by preventing them from farming or
harvesting their crops. The junta’s targeted destruction
of homes and livelihoods has significantly disrupted
food production in many parts of the country.
Another serious issue is the military junta’s
weaponization of humanitarian access. It is essential
that aid workers be able to deliver life-saving
humanitarian assistance to those in greatest need,
based on the fundamental humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
However, the denial or restriction of access by the junta
has been a constant challenge for humanitarian actors,
including the United Nations agencies in Myanmar.
Such denials and undue restrictions are violations of
international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, the Security Council can do more
to minimize the effects of conflict-induced food
insecurity in many situations. In the case of Myanmar,
the Council has made repeated calls and demands,
including through its resolution 2669 (2022), for an
immediate end to all forms of violence and for full,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access in Myanmar.
However, the Council has yet to hold the military
junta accountable for the war crimes it is repeatedly
committing against the civilian population, as well as
for its consistent international crimes and violations of
international humanitarian law, including the denial of
humanitarian access.
Decisive action on the part of the Security Council
will help the people of Myanmar in their steadfast
efforts to restore democracy, peace and stability in
their country. The vast majority of them are united in

23-2302441/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

opposition to the military dictatorship. The junta is not
capable of winning its war against them, governing
the country, managing the economy or delivering
durable peace and stability. Only an inclusive, federal,
democratic civilian Government in Myanmar can deliver
those goals — and that is exactly what the democratic
forces in the country are committed to establishing. I
therefore urge the Security Council to follow up with
action enforcing its repeated demands for an end to
violence and the granting of unhindered humanitarian
access in Myanmar. It is high time that the members of
the Security Council started a negotiation process to
adopt a timely and enforceable resolution on Myanmar.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Mohammad Aamir Khan (Pakistan):
Pakistan expresses its gratitude to the United States for
convening today’s high-level open debate on famine
and conflict-induced global food insecurity. We also
thank the briefers who spoke earlier today for their
valuable insights and enriching perspectives.
It is tragic that last year there were approximately
258 million food-insecure people living in 58 mostly
developing countries. The primary drivers of food
insecurity are underdevelopment, such recent economic
shocks as the impacts of the coronavirus disease and
climate change, and conflicts old and new. Notably,
117 million of the 258 million people who are foodinsecure live in 19 war and conflict zones. Pakistan is
concerned about the fact that according to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
the World Food Programme, 15.3 million Afghans are
projected to face a high level of food insecurity, and
we will continue to provide support to the 29 million
Afghans in need of humanitarian assistance and to help
revive Afghanistan’s economy.
While food insecurity accompanies most conflict
situations, it becomes particularly acute and endemic in
situations of prolonged foreign occupation. Attention in
this debate has been devoted to some of those situations
but not others. I would like to draw special attention
to the situation of the peoples of occupied Palestine
and Jammu and Kashmir. Both of those peoples have
suffered under foreign occupation for seven decades.
They have been subjected to blockades, lockdowns and
collective punishments, including deliberate economic
and food deprivation, and so far have been virtually
abandoned by an indifferent international community.
42/47

03/08/2023

The best solution to food insecurity in conflict
zones is to end the use of force and violence as quickly
as possible and to arrive at durable and just settlements
of those conflicts. In the case of Jammu and Kashmir,
the Security Council must ensure the implementation of
its resolutions calling for a United Nations-supervised
plebiscite to enable the people of Jammu and Kashmir
to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination.
Meanwhile, the world community must ensure that
economic deprivation and food insecurity are not
exploited by the Indian occupation in order to crush the
Kashmiri people’s legitimate struggle for freedom.
We support ending the war in Ukraine without
delay, in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international agreements.
Pakistan has commended the Secretary-General’s
Black Sea Grain Initiative, which aimed to ease the
impact of the Ukraine war and its attendant detriment
to food security. We hope the Initiative will be revived
as soon as possible with the concurrence of the parties
and implemented effectively and comprehensively.
We believe that food insecurity in conflict zones
should be addressed comprehensively. That entails
ensuring the universal and consistent application of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the
relevant Security Council resolutions and international
law in all conflict situations and in the settlement
of disputes. It is double standards and the selective
application of international norms that make their
violation possible, especially by powerful States.
In conclusion, the food insecurity afflicting so many
requires immediate solidarity and structural solutions.
In the immediate context, we must mobilize supplies
to those facing famine and food insecurity due to any
cause. We must expand food production and moderate
food prices. We must not cut off supplies through food
export bans in manifestations of selfish nationalism. We
must expand food production, especially in developing
countries facing shortages. We must mitigate the impact
of climate change on the most vulnerable countries. We
must reform unequal agricultural trade. In order to help
the millions of people in need and save thousands of
lives, we must act with urgency and solidarity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Ms. Dakwak (Nigeria): I thank the United States
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August for organizing this very important debate on a
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

subject that affects all of us globally. I thank the United
Nations Famine Prevention and Response Coordinator
and our other briefers for their insightful briefings.
Today the world is going through a food crisis
that is having a particular impact on the world’s most
vulnerable countries and economies. The disruptive
effects of climate change on livelihoods around the
world, as well as those of terrorism, violence and
conflict and the multifaceted impacts of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, have been the main
contributors to the sustained and deepening food
insecurity situation in many parts of the world.
Food insecurity has also been a source of many recent
conflicts and a major factor in outbreaks of unrest. The
destruction of rural and structural infrastructure, the
loss of livestock, deforestation, drought and conflict all
have long-term impacts on the food security of societies.
The Ukraine war has adversely affected the food supply
chain generally, further exacerbating pre-existing food
insecurities, while the sudden disruption of national
and international food supply chains has created
additional food shortages, particularly in countries
in greater need. My delegation notes with concern
the reports of the World Food Programme (WFP) and
the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) that point out that 70 per cent of the
populations experiencing acute hunger in the world are
in conflict-affected areas. Clearly, the production of
food is hampered during violent conflicts, and when
they last longer than one farming season, people are
forced to migrate elsewhere for sustenance.
My delegation has noted the report on the Hunger
Hotspots: FAO-WFP early warnings on acute food
insecurity outlook from June to November 2023,
which identifies Nigeria as one of the countries
potentially facing starvation and death. We want to
inform the Council that while north-eastern Nigeria,
which has been under attack by terrorists, has been
facing shortages and uncertainties regarding food
for more than a decade, death and starvation are not
a true depiction of the situation. The displacement of
farmers by the insurgencies in our north-east and the
challenges posed by climate change in the Lake Chad
basin and by banditry in the north-west have led to
people’s displacement and considerable food shortages.
However, both have subsided in the past three years.
The reduction or even stoppage of agricultural
activities due to insecurity and displacement has
social consequences in some communities, including

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

increased joblessness. We need to work harder to stop
violent conflicts — not least because their harmful
impact on the vulnerable is even more dire. As the
briefers indicated, women and children are the worst
affected. While we are deliberating on agriculture and
food security, it is equally important to address crosscutting issues, including the role of science, technology
and innovation, gaps in infrastructure and energy
and the importance of building human resource and
institutional capacities that can support productivity
and inclusion. Insufficient investment in agriculture
and social protection continues to be a bottleneck in our
efforts to increase food availability. We therefore need
to increase investment in agriculture by mobilizing
both public and private resources and to attract socially
responsible and environmentally sustainable foreign
investment in the field of agriculture that also benefits
local smallholders.
As we prepare for the Sustainable Development
Goals Summit in September and the Summit of the
Future next year, it is important that the international
community demonstrate greater commitment to the
repatriation of illicit financial flows and assets, debt
relief for developing countries and assistance in
modernizing agriculture in many distressed regions.
For its part, Nigeria has rolled out many initiatives
aimed at addressing food-related issues, including in the
areas of agricultural education, research and innovation,
quality control and access to improved seedlings, as
well as in standardizing agricultural practices around
the country. Much of that work has been done through
partnerships. The current Administration, which has
been in office only four months, has declared a state of
emergency in food security and put measures in place
to remedy the problems, including for the distribution
of fertilizers and palliatives for mechanized farming
and sustainable food production. The Government is
working to enhance the implementation of agricultural
policies, including through research applications,
reviving extension services, easing input access,
strengthening the regulatory framework, facilitating
affordable credit, increasing commodity outputs,
enhancing processing capacities, broadening access to
markets and expanding revenue earnings. The National
Food Reserve Agency is also redoubling its efforts
to ensure that national food security and incomes are
improved through marketing and storage services.
In conclusion, the multifaceted and still-unfolding
effects on economies of violent conflicts and wars,

23-2302443/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

climate change disasters and the COVID-19 pandemic
require concrete and robust transformative action if
we are to address the food security situation. It will
be important to adopt transformative solutions and
measures that guarantee the sustainability of our basic
natural resources and ecological services, as well as
building the resilience of farming communities to boost
food production. We urge the United Nations system
and development partners to renew their commitment
to the full implementation of the Decade of Action on
Nutrition 2016–2025 and Decade of Family Farming
2019–2028. Together we can turn the global food crisis
into an opportunity by effectively coordinating our
policy responses.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, we would like to congratulate
your friendly country on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We welcomed
the presence of Secretary of State Antony Blinken at
this morning’s meeting and thank the briefers for their
valuable contributions.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Oman on behalf of the Gulf
Cooperation Council.
The interrelated links between armed conflict,
violence, famine and food insecurity merit the
international community’s full attention, as they
constitute fundamental humanitarian challenges
for many countries and peoples all over the world,
particularly in developing and least developed countries.
At the same time, various factors in our world today
are worsening the threats to food security, particularly
the crises on the economic, energy and climate fronts.
We must therefore address the deep-rooted causes of
famine and food insecurity that pose a threat to the
three pillars of the United Nations — international
peace and security, development and human rights.
We want to stress in that respect the central role of the
United Nations and the need to commit to international
law with regard to the peaceful settlement of conflicts
and respect for the independence and sovereignty of
States and non-interference in their domestic affairs, as
well as to refraining from the use or threat of force and
committing to the principles of providing international
humanitarian assistance.
44/47

03/08/2023

International humanitarian law requires the parties
to a conflict to refrain from inflicting harm on civilians
and civilian property, particularly infrastructure
essential to water supplies and the production and
distribution of food. It also prohibits the use of food
as a weapon of war leading to starvation, a prohibition
that is reaffirmed by resolution 2417 (2018). In that
regard, we would like to add that the State of Qatar also
endorsed today’s joint communiqué.
In fulfilling its humanitarian responsibility to
respond to famine and food insecurity, particularly as a
result of conflict, Qatar dedicates a significant part of its
international assistance to addressing hunger and food
shortages. To that end, we earmarked nearly $43 million
this year in response to the Secretary-General’s appeal
for help for countries facing famine resulting from
various causes, including conflicts. We also contributed
$20 million to the Black Sea Grain Initiative to help
African countries receive food exports. In addition, my
country has contributed $90 million to the World Food
Programme to respond to urgent food needs in Yemen.
As is well known, when the need for emergency relief
arises the State of Qatar contributes hundreds of tons
in assistance through airlifts, including food relief, as
we did in the Sudan this year and in Afghanistan prior
to that. Qatar is committed to cooperating with the
United Nations system in guaranteeing food security
and finding relevant sustainable solutions. We launched
the Global Dryland Alliance initiative, a mechanism
designed to fill gaps in the areas of scientific research,
strategies and policy in order to enable dryland countries
to achieve food security and prevent food crises.
In conclusion, we reiterate how urgent it is
to prioritize efforts to address the humanitarian
consequences of crises during conflicts, particularly
those that threaten food security, and we emphasize that
there can be no alternative to international consensus
and cooperation if we are to resolve such humanitarian
issues and their root causes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): Let me
first of all welcome the United States presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August and wish it
every success.
I am also grateful for the convening of this highlevel debate on a very topical issue, and I commend the
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

presidency on the quality of the corresponding concept
note (see S/2023/560, annex).
The link between conflicts and food insecurity,
including their links to famine, can no longer be
questioned, as was well underscored in resolution 2417
(2018). Reports of international agencies are sounding
the alarm about the scale of this scourge, which is a
threat to international peace and security, although
the international community’s myriad bold efforts
to put an end to the problem have yet to yield results
commensurate with what is at stake. The Roadmap
for Global Food Security and its call to action of May
2022, and the declaration of the Leaders’ Summit on
Global Food Security, are commendable initiatives.
However, it is clear that they remain insufficient in
view of the alarming increase in acute food insecurity
worldwide. More than a quarter of a billion people now
face acute levels of hunger, and some are on the brink
of starvation. As Secretary-General António Guterres
writes in his foreword to the Global Report on Food
Crises 2023, “That’s unconscionable.”
Today’s debate is therefore especially meaningful,
and as the concept note so judiciously underscores, can
contribute to developing synergies between the main
State and non-State players in order to strengthen global
food systems and prevent future famines. We will also
have to address the issue of reducing the effects of
conflicts and even ending them altogether. My country,
Haiti, is unfortunately on the list of States that are
affected by food insecurity, in our case an acute food
insecurity that is affecting almost half the population.
The situation is the result of a serious multidimensional
crisis, marked by a deteriorating security environment
created by the indiscriminate violence of armed gangs
operating virtually unchecked in many areas of the
country, including the capital city of Port-au-Prince.
The latest reports on food insecurity in our country are
extremely alarming.
For example, the National Commission for Food
Security, the Government body responsible for food
security in Haiti, has reported that 4.9 million people
in the country are food insecure and require emergency
humanitarian aid for the period from March to June
2023. The recent report on food security risks in
conflict-affected countries, published by the Secretariat,
confirms that almost 5 million people in Haiti are
currently facing acute food insecurity, including
1.8 million who are facing emergency conditions. It has
been clearly established that food insecurity is linked

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

to the environment of indiscriminate violence created
by the armed gangs. In other words, the violence
perpetrated by armed groups is having a devastating
impact on our communities, hindering their access to
food, basic services and livelihoods.
The Haitian Government fully acknowledges
the scale of the food crisis and the seriousness of
the situation. In that regard, we are committed to
overcoming this major challenge with determination
and to implementing concrete measures to alleviate the
suffering of our citizens affected by food insecurity. Our
efforts to that end include the reinstatement of the canteen
programme in public schools and, in cooperation with
unions, the implementation of a subsidy programme for
workers to help them cope with the high cost of living.
There can be no question that the food crisis in Haiti
calls for a global response based on solidarity. In order
to tackle food insecurity more effectively, we need to
address its structural and cyclical causes. We therefore
call on international partners to ramp up support for
national production by continuing to provide farmers
with the aid they need such as agricultural equipment,
seeds and fertilizers, and assistance in strengthening
agricultural cooperatives. Similarly, the construction
of agricultural infrastructure and the restoration of
irrigation canals are crucial to boosting agricultural
production, which would go a long way to reducing
the levels of food insecurity and easing unemployment
in rural areas. In that regard, we once again call on
the international community to intensify its support
for the rapid and effective implementation of ongoing
humanitarian programmes.
We are also requesting additional technical and
financial assistance to strengthen our institutions
and crisis-management capacities and help build a
secure and stable environment that will be conducive
to economic recovery. Our Government is already
working closely with international partners and
humanitarian agencies to ensure the rapid and effective
implementation of those measures. The Cooperation
Framework for Sustainable Development 2023–2027,
signed last April between the Haitian Government and
the United Nations system, therefore represents both
a vision and a joint strategy for achieving sustainable
development in Haiti over the next five years and an
extremely significant step forward in the collaboration
between the United Nations and the Government
of Haiti.

23-2302445/47

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Along the same lines, we must also address the
issue of gangs within the country. If we are to make
progress in the area, the international community must
provide us with robust support to bolster the Haitian
National Police in its fight against armed groups.
In that regard, the Government of Haiti very much
welcomes Kenya’s offer to lead a multinational force to
provide effective support to Haitian law-enforcement
personnel in their fight against armed gangs, whose
violence has reached unprecedented levels in many
parts of the country, hindering the movement of people
and goods and access to food and water. The situation
has brought many humanitarian activities to a halt
as the population’s needs have worsened. We remain
confident that Council members will be able to quickly
authorize the deployment of such a multinational force,
which the Haitian Government has been requesting
since October 2022, to help re-establish the peace and
security that the country needs to ease the serious food
crisis in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Mrs. Fyneah (Liberia): At the outset, I would like
to convey warm greetings to the Security Council from
President George Manneh Weah of Liberia and his
best wishes to the United States for its presidency of
the Council for the month of August. I also join other
delegations in commending you, Mr. President, for
facilitating today’s high-level debate on famine and
conflict-induced global food insecurity.
We welcome today’s discussion, as Liberia is
deeply concerned about the alarming rise in global
food insecurity caused by armed conflict and climate
extremes. We note that food insecurity is also a threat
to national and international peace and security
and therefore hope that today’s debate will keep the
spotlight on famine and conflict-induced global food
insecurity, and especially that it will strengthen radical
collaboration to avert a looming humanitarian crisis. In
that connection, the Government of Liberia, under the
leadership of President Weah, strongly condemns the
use of food as a weapon of war and support in its entirety
the United States-led joint communiqué condemning
such weaponization. Liberia further recognizes the
significant role of the Black Sea Grain Initiative in
preventing a humanitarian disaster, laments Russia’s
termination of the agreement and calls on like-minded
countries to say no to the use of food as a weapon.
46/47

03/08/2023

As the United Nations, we must respect, promote
and defend the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence in the
provision of humanitarian assistance and adhere to
protocols that prohibit the starvation of civilians as a
method of warfare or combat. Liberia firmly believes
that through innovative partnerships and radical
collaboration, we can begin to confront the challenges
of famine and conflict-induced global food insecurity.
Today’s debate is therefore a defining moment for us to
take stock of where we are and what needs to be done to
have a positive impact on our world.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Caccia (Holy See): The delegation of
the Holy See thanks the United States of America for
convening today’s open debate on famine and food
insecurity, an issue that has tragically become more
prominent since the escalation of the war in Ukraine.
At the outset, it is important to recall that every human
person has the right to the means necessary for the
proper development of life, particularly food. Despite
that, more than a quarter of a billion people currently
face high levels of acute food insecurity and depend
on assistance in nearly a third of States around the
world. The current situation necessitates responsible
multilateral cooperation resulting in proactive solidarity
with our brothers and sisters who face hunger. That
demands that all States put efforts to meet basic human
needs above partisan interests and refrain from treating
foodstuffs as mere commodities to be awarded to the
highest bidder. In that regard, my delegation would like
to stress three points.
First, the Holy See urges all the parties concerned
to return to dialogue regarding the renewal of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative in the interests of all who rely on
food imports. We also call for an end to attacks on
the means of transportation essential to the supply of
agricultural products, food and other basic necessities
that are crucial to the survival of civilian populations.
Secondly, the Holy See stresses the need to ensure
that economic sanctions avoid any potential negative
effects on both local and global food security and the
distribution of humanitarian aid.
Thirdly, the Holy See calls on all States to protect
our common home, created and entrusted to us by
God, and to take urgent action to fight climate change,
whose ravages, such as extreme weather events, have
23-23024

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

an impact on local food systems and can increase the
risk of conflicts.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the need
for all States to adopt an integral approach to security
as a means to alleviate global food insecurity, which
constitutes a serious affront to human dignity.
The President: The representative of India has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
them the floor.
Mr. Ravindran (India): My delegation has asked
to make a further statement because yet again we have
unfortunately seen a delegation misuse this forum to
divert the Council’s attention from the important topic of
food security. That delegation has unfortunately shown
a consistent tendency to exploit various United Nations
platforms to further its own agenda. In that regard, I
would like to emphasize that India’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity is non-negotiable. That said, we
also consider it unnecessary to engage in arguments or
debates, particularly with those who resort to terrorism
to advance their unlawful goals. In order to make
the best use of the Council’s time, I suggest that the
delegation concerned concentrate on addressing its
internal matters and restoring order within its own
borders rather than indulging in frivolous allegations
about my country.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
them the floor.

S/PV.9392 (Resumption 1)

Mrs. Ijaz (Pakistan): I am taking the floor to
respond to the remarks made by the representative
of India.
The biggest falsehood that India keeps on repeating
is that Kashmir is a part of India. My delegation would
like to remind India that Kashmir is neither a so-called
integral part of India nor an internal matter. It is not
a territory of India. In all of its resolutions on the
subject, the Security Council has decided that the final
disposition of Kashmir will be determined by its people
through a United Nations-supervised plebiscite. India
has accepted that decision and is bound to comply with
it, in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The maps of the United Nations all show Kashmir
as a disputed territory. If India has nothing to hide,
it must accept a United Nations commission of
inquiry and agree to implement the Security Council
resolutions stipulating a plebiscite to enable the
people of Jammu and Kashmir to exercise their right
to self-determination. And if India has any respect for
international law and moral courage, it should also
end its reign of terror, withdraw its troops and let the
Kashmiris freely decide their future, in accordance
with the Security Council resolutions.
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

23-2302447/47
