S/2017/604

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 July 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2350
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for a final p eriod of six months, until
15 October 2017; established the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) for an initial period of six months, from 16 October 2017 until
15 April 2018; and requested a report on the implementation of the r esolution within
90 days. It covers major developments that have occurred since the issuance of my
previous report, of 16 March 2017 (S/2017/223), and progress made on the closingdown of MINUSTAH and the establishment of MINUJUSTH.

II. Developments on the ground
A.

Political
2.
Haiti has continued to make strides in the consolidation of its democracy and
stability. On 22 March, following Parliament’s endorsement, the Prime Minister of
Haiti, Jack Guy Lafontant, and his 18-member Cabinet of Ministers, which includes
five women, assumed their functions. On 29 March, the President of Haiti, Jovenel
Moïse, presented the new Cabinet with a road map for the Government focused on
the security, justice, energy, education, health and agriculture sectors and based on
decentralization as a strategy for transforming and modernizing the State to better
meet the needs of the people and key national sectors.
3.
On 29 March, the thirtieth anniversary of the 1987 Constitution, the Lower
Chamber of Parliament launched a special commission, tasked with delivering a
report on its assessment of the Constitution by January 2019. Shortly afterwards, on
10 April, the executive branch and the legislature adopted a joint legislative agenda
comprising 51 draft laws aimed at improving the business climate, reinforcing State
functions and ensuring better territorial planning, particularly with regard to the
rehabilitation of the environment. The agenda includes a draft bill on the
remobilization of the Haitian Armed Forces, which the executive branch and the
legislature consider to be a priority in the context of the closure of MINUSTAH.
4.
On 8 May, the final results of the 29 January 2017 local elections, announced
by the Provisional Electoral Council, were published in the official gazette, with 9

17-11468 (E)

130717

*1711468*

S/2017/604

of the 570 communal sections requiring reruns because of a lack of registered
candidates, violence or tied results. To complete the local governance structure
envisaged in the Constitution, indirect elections are now required for the
establishment of the municipal and departmental assemblies and the departmental
and interdepartmental councils. On 29 June, the provisional electoral co uncil
announced the calendar for the indirect elections that will be held between 1 July
and 26 September.
5.
On 17 May, President Moïse completed his first 100 days in office. Among
notable actions taken during that period was his flagship initiative, “C aravan of
Change”, consisting of monthly visits to the regions aimed at revitalizing the
agricultural, environmental and transport sectors as set out in the government
programme. On 15 May, as a first step to end government subsidies, fuel prices
were increased following negotiations with trade unions. On 5 June, in the wake of
protests by workers’ unions demanding an increase in the minimum wage, the
Government reconstituted the Superior Council of Salaries, which released for
consideration its recommendations on a new minimum wage scale on 7 July.
6.
On 6 June, at the request of President Moïse, Parliament convened an
extraordinary session to amend the national budget for the fiscal year from October
2016 to September 2017, which was approved by the Govern ment on 2 June. The
generally conservative budget as adopted by Parliament provides 75.91 billion
gourdes ($1.2 billion) for operations and 42.77 billion gourdes ($680 million) for
investments, and is aimed at tightening central government spending, mainta ining
macroeconomic stability and limiting the fiscal deficit, currently estimated at
5.8 billion gourdes ($93.7 million) for the fiscal year 2016/17, to a sustainable level.
Capital expenditures to boost growth remain limited, and subsidies to the State owned electricity authority continue. Despite increased allocations for agriculture,
the environment and education, investments in those growth -enhancing sectors
remain low. The fragile socioeconomic situation continues to contribute to the
increased vulnerability of Haitian households, particularly affecting girls and
women, whose voices have been largely absent from the political processes relating
to these issues. On 30 June, the executive branch submitted the draft budget for the
fiscal year 2017/18 before the Lower Chamber, for a total amount of
144.2 billion gourdes ($2.3 billion), representing an increase of 22.1 per cent
compared with the previous year.
7.
Prior to the closing of the first ordinary session of the 2017 legislative year on
8 May, Parliament adopted a law strengthening the national fire department and
ratified two international conventions on statelessness. Parliament also voted to
amend the draft organic law on the financial intelligence unit strengthening
measures against money-laundering and terrorism financing, thereby averting the
risk of financial isolation by the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force.

B.

Security
8.
Growing tensions linked to socioeconomic grievances notwithstanding, key
indicators, including crime and civil protests, remained within historically
established statistical parameters. The ongoing withdrawal of the MINUSTAH
military and police components, including the closure of military bases in the
northern departments and Cité Soleil and the gradual transfer of security tasks to the
Haitian National Police, has not affected the overall security situation.
9.
Crime statistics collected by the national police and MINUSTAH for the
period from 1 March to 30 June 2017 indicated a slight increase, with 356 reported
homicides, compared with 345 during the same period in the previous year. Nearly

2/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

78 per cent of the homicides (278) remained concentrated in the metropolitan area
of Port-au-Prince. Seven national police officers were killed, compared with
10 officers killed during the same period in 2016. Kidnappings dropped to 9 cases,
compared with 19 during the same period in 2016, as did instances of rape, with
188 cases, compared with 196. However, as highlighted in my previous report,
evidence of underreporting and a culture of impunity remain pervasive, particularly
in cases of sexual and gender-based violence.
10. A total of 288 public protests were recorded, of which 75 (26 per cent)
registered some violence, ranging from erected barricades and stone -throwing to
assaults against police officers and shootings. This represents a decrease compared
with the 382 incidents, of which 117 (31 per cent) were violent, reported during the
same period in 2016. The metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince registered 44 per cent
of those incidents, followed by the remaining areas of the West Department (20 per
cent). Of the 288 incidents, approximately 93 per cent involved fewer than 1,000
people, with no protests involving more than 3,000. The vast majority of these
protests were triggered by socioeconomic grievances, related to education, health,
labour and the cost of living, and damage caused by heavy rains.
11. On 7 April, an attack against the presidential motorcade was reported in
Arcahaie (West Department). Although no casualties resulted from the attack, its
precise circumstances have yet to be clarified by an ongoing national police
investigation. The incident fuelled perceptions of increasing insecurity. On 13 May,
the Secretary of State for Public Security, Jeantel Joseph, who is also the head of
Senator-elect Guy Philippe’s Consortium party, was replaced by Léon Ronsard
Saint-Cyr, former Minister of the Interior and Local Governance. Guy Phillipe is
currently facing a nine-year jail term in the United States of America for drugsmuggling and money-laundering.
12. The Mission’s police component continued to provide operational support to
the national police, conducting 2,624 joint temporary checkpoints, 2,825 foot
patrols, 19,864 vehicle patrols and 296 joint operations, inclu ding 163 in the
metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince. Military troops carried out 4,046 operations,
163 of which were joint patrols with Haitian and MINUSTAH police officers.

C.

Haitian National Police
13. The Haitian National Police continued to strengthen its capacities in providing
security and ensuring law and order throughout the country. The twenty -seventh
promotion, comprising 946 new police officers, including 80 women, graduated on
27 March, bringing the size of the force to approximately 14, 000 police officers, of
whom 1,301, or 9 per cent, are women. The police-to-population ratio reached
1.3 police officers per 1,000 inhabitants. The graduates were assigned primarily to
reinforce specialized units and the Directorate of Prison Administratio n and were
deployed to various departments to ensure prompt responses in crime -prone areas.
On 21 May, the twenty-eighth promotion of 1,042 cadets, including 129 women,
began training; the promotion is expected to graduate by December, which will
bring the total strength of the Haitian National Police above the targeted number of
15,000 personnel. National police infrastructure remained a priority, with the
completion of 13 new projects, funded by MINUSTAH quick-impact projects and
bilateral contributors.
14. The draft Haitian National Police strategic development plan for the period
2017-2021 was completed with MINUSTAH support, following consultations with
national and international stakeholders. The plan, which identifies long -term
institution-building objectives, was presented to the President and the Prime

17-11468

3/20

S/2017/604

Minister on 28 June and was subsequently adopted by the Prime Minister in his
capacity as President of the Superior Council of the National Police, on 5 July.

D.

Rule of law and human rights
15. Limited progress was made during the reporting period in the performance of
the judicial institutions and in the administration of justice, with key appointments
to the Supreme Court pending action by Parliament and the executive branch. A
strike called in April by the civil servants’ union of the Superior Court of Auditors
and Administrative Disputes paralysed its operations.
16. On a positive note, on 25 April the draft criminal code and the draft criminal
procedure code were submitted to Parliament by the executive branch, while a
committee submitted a draft law on legal aid to the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security on 11 May. Some progress was noted in curbing prolonged pretrial
detention through the establishment of a real-time case file management process in
the court of first instance in Port-au-Prince, resulting in the closing of 126 cases.
Through the penal chain committee, MINUSTAH helped to develop monthly case tracking tools and performance indicators for investigating judges, which
accelerated the completion of 257 pretrial investigations in Port -au-Prince and 139
in Cap-Haïtien, compared with 400 and 250, respectively, for all of 2016.
17. Prolonged pretrial detention and prison overcrowding remain serious human
rights concerns. On 19 May, Haitian prisons counted 10,512 detainees, including
349 women and 240 male and 15 female juveniles; 71 per cent were awaiting trial,
reflecting no decrease since the issuance of my previous report. The publication of
the first report of the special presidential commission on prison conditions,
established in February, was awaited, while deaths in detention had further
increased to 115 as at 30 May, compared with the 113 reported for the full year
2016.
18. Under the joint interim rule of law programme of M INUSTAH and the United
Nations Development Programme, a team of international experts reviewed a draft
penitentiary law aimed at modernizing the management of the Directorate of Prison
Administration. The Superior Court of Auditors and Administrative Dispu tes was
also supported in its review of the organization and functioning of the Court, with a
view to helping strengthen efforts to fight impunity and the misappropriation of
public funds. As part of the transition to local actors, a forum was organized wi th
the Haitian Chamber of Commerce and Industry to discuss the development of
public-private partnerships with businesses to support the reinsertion of released
detainees.
19. Community violence reduction activities, reaching 87,711 beneficiaries
through 31 projects totalling $5 million, were ongoing, while 37 projects totalling
$6.5 million that reached 53,766 beneficiaries were closing. Projects were focused
on vocational training, labour-intensive infrastructure, sexual and gender-based
violence, legal aid and related issues.
20. MINUSTAH continued to advocate more systematic investigations into the use
of force and firearms by national police officers. Civil society organizations,
including the International Federation for Human Rights, called upon the
Government to prioritize the fight against impunity for serious crimes committed in
the past, insisting that the trial for crimes committed under the late President Jean Claude Duvalier take place, after years of judicial inaction following the decision
handed down by an appellate court in February 2014. If enacted, a draft law against
defamation, voted on by the Senate in March and awaiting adoption by the Lower

4/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

Chamber, could jeopardize freedom of expression, in contravention of the
international obligations of Haiti.
21. The mandate of the Independent Expert of the Human Rights Council on the
situation of human rights in Haiti expired in March 2017 and was not renewed by
the Council. Despite repeated calls from my Special Representative, the
Independent Expert and civil society organizations, the Government has yet to
assign the human rights portfolio to a specific ministry. The term of the
Ombudsperson, the State’s independent human rights defender, ended in September
2016, with no replacement appointed to date, despite some progress in the
recruitment process since its launch in February 2017. MINUSTAH released its
annual report on the human rights situation in Haiti on 3 July 2017, covering the
period from 1 July 2015 to 31 December 2016. The report high lighted a high
number of arbitrary arrests, cruel and inhumane treatment in detention facilities and
a lack of accountability that emboldens impunity.

E.

Humanitarian and development
22. In March, a mission of the Senior Transformative Agenda Implementation
Team of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Emergency Director Group reviewed
the effectiveness of the humanitarian response in Haiti. The mission made
recommendations to the humanitarian country team and the Government on how to
improve the effectiveness of the humanitarian architecture in place, enhance
coordination between humanitarian and development actors and develop a more
strategic approach to protection. As at 19 May, 2.35 million people in Haiti were
severely food-insecure and in need of immediate assistance, while more than
143,110 were estimated to be suffering from acute malnutrition. Since Hurricane
Matthew struck in October 2016, 1,273 households, or 4,200 people, have remained
housed in temporary shelters. The humanitarian community is engaging the
Government to develop a strategy for assisting the affected people in leaving those
shelters in a safe and voluntary manner. In the most affected departments, Grand’
Anse, Nippes and South, low funding levels have impeded the scaling -up of the
humanitarian response to food, shelter, health and protection needs. With crop
losses reaching 80 to 100 per cent in rural areas, food insecurity stands to increase
in the coming months if urgent measures are not taken to resume farming by
mid-November.
23. As at 31 May 2017, the International Organization for Migration had
registered 192,685 people who had returned from the Dominican Republic since
June 2015. Those arriving in Haiti continue to find themselves in a situation of
vulnerability owing to the insufficient reception capacity of the Haitian authorities
and a lack of reintegration opportunities. This group will likely continue to need
assistance in the foreseeable future, including with regard to the determination of
their legal status. Coordination between the United Nations country teams in Haiti
and the Dominican Republic has allowed for effective responses to the needs of
affected people as well as for preparedness and contingency planning. Since the
2010 earthquake, 46,691 persons have remained internally displaced in 31 camps
without access to durable solutions.
24. As at 10 June 2017, 7,113 suspected cases of cholera and 83 related deaths had
been reported, in comparison with the 18,486 suspected cases and 173 deaths
reported for the same period in 2016. As indicated in my second report on the new
approach to cholera in Haiti (A/71/895), the intensified cholera response carried out
by rapid-deployment mobile teams, including a vaccination ca mpaign benefiting
more than 800,000 persons, mostly in hurricane-affected areas, has resulted in a
significant decline in the number of suspected cholera cases. Securing the necessary

17-11468

5/20

S/2017/604

funding for the ongoing efforts of the Government and its international partners to
contain and eradicate cholera will be critical to sustaining the positive progress
made so far in 2017.
25. During the reporting period, more than 86,000 individuals living with HIV,
62 per cent of them women, received antiretroviral medication. With United Nations
support, the Ministry of Health conducted a nationwide poll in support of
eliminating stigma and discrimination relating to HIV and continued its efforts to
eliminate mother-to-child transmission of the virus by 2020.
26. Low international oil prices constrained concessional financing through the
Petrocaribe agreement, while public investment contracted by 20 per cent and
private investment remained slow. As a result of recent interventions in the foreign
exchange market by the central bank of Haiti and an increase in remittances, the
Haitian gourde appreciated, rising in value from 70 to 63.7 against 1 United States
dollar, during the first quarter of 2017. Measures announced at the beginning of the
fiscal year, aimed at bolstering the capacity of the State institutions to apply its tax
policy and boost revenue, were not fully implemented. The poor financial
performance of the State-owned electricity authority and the delayed decision to
implement the automatic fuel price adjustment mechanism continued to constrain
the narrow public resource envelope. The fiscal deficit, however, is expected to be
approximately 2.5 per cent of gross domestic product by the end of the current fiscal
year, down from the 5 per cent initially projected, owing to lower spending related
to post-hurricane recovery and reconstruction efforts.
27. In May, the annual visit of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the
Economic and Social Council examined ways to strengthen the partnership between
the Government and the international community in support of the country’s
economic recovery and development. The United Nations country team met with the
Government and civil society representatives to validate the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for the period 2017-2021 before its signature
on 30 June 2017. Discussions with the Prime Minister on United Nations support for
the Government’s development priorities are ongoing, following a meeting held on
2 May with the country team.
28. As at 22 May, MINUSTAH had disbursed $2,994,873.54 of the $3 million
quick-impact project budget for the fiscal year 2016/17, implementing 57 of 60
planned projects, which benefited 2,000,569 people, including 1,040,296 women.
Projects were focused primarily on the rule of law, good governance, public
infrastructure and the provision of potable water to prevent water -borne diseases,
including cholera.

III. Transition of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
A.

Mission drawdown planning
29. Pursuant to resolution 2350 (2017), MINUSTAH began the implementation of
a comprehensive withdrawal plan encompassing its military, police and civilian
components, with the objective of fully withdrawing 2,370 troops and reducing the
police component to the levels authorized for MINUJUSTH, while significantly
reducing its geographical and staffing footprint, before its closure on 15 October.
Throughout the drawdown process, my Special Representative and ot her members
of the MINUSTAH leadership team have consulted with the Government at all
levels, including the President and the Prime Minister, to ensure the progressive
transfer of tasks to the Haitian authorities, where appropriate.

6/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

1.

Military component
30. Following the adoption of resolution 2350 (2017), MINUSTAH began to
implement the first phase of a staggered military drawdown. Accordingly, on
15 April the Chilean aviation unit and the Chilean and joint Uruguayan-Peruvian
battalions ceased operations in the northern part of Haiti, with Brazilian troops
providing security for the vacated camps. Certain key tasks, including security
analysis and patrols in sensitive areas, were gradually transferred to the national
police with the support of MINUSTAH police. On 15 June, the military component
completed the handover to the national police of security tasks in the fragile
commune of Cité Soleil in Port-au-Prince, in close coordination with the
MINUSTAH police component. Before the handover, the three forces had doubled
their joint patrols in the area.
31. The next phase saw the ceasing of operations of the Guatemalan company on
10 June, while the Philippine company will cease operations on 15 July. The full
repatriation of the two companies is planned for July and August, respectively.
Between 15 April and 30 June, the military component’s engineering units prepared
9 of the 65 MINUSTAH camps for closure and handover to the Government and
private property owners.
32. By 10 July, MINUSTAH had withdrawn a total of 956 military personnel,
reducing the strength of the component to 1,413 personnel, who are concentrated in
Port-au-Prince. The remaining troops, comprising one infantry battalion, two
engineering companies, medical and aviation units and a force headquarters, will
focus primarily on camp closures while continuing long -range patrols and quickreaction force exercises throughout the country, if needed. The final withdrawal of
the military component will start on 15 August with the ceasing of operations of the
Argentinian military hospital, followed by the ceasing of operations, on
1 September, of the Brazilian contingents, the Paraguayan engineering company and
the Bangladeshi aviation unit. The force headquarters will remain operational after
the repatriation of the last troops, which is planned for 1 to 5 October, until the last
day of the MINUSTAH mandate.

2.

Police component
33. MINUSTAH leadership consulted closely with the Government and hi gh-level
commanding officers of the national police to ensure that adequate security
arrangements were being put in place, in particular in those geographical and
functional areas from which the Mission’s troops and police are withdrawing. New
arrangements include strategic planning for the deployment of newly graduated
officers of the twenty-seventh promotion of the Haitian National Police and its
crowd control units in crime-prone and volatile regions of the country.
34. Taking into account the key objectives of the Haitian National Police strategic
development plan for the period 2017-2021, MINUSTAH undertook a mapping
exercise, identifying areas from which the United Nations police will disengage,
which will require an active role on the part of the national police and continued
support from international partners, including the United Nations country team. One
such role is currently being piloted in the North region, namely, a co -location model
in which individual MINUSTAH police officers work together with their national
police counterparts at a senior level, providing hands -on operational support and
mentoring guidance, directly transferring skills and capacities aimed at ensuring
longer-term sustainability. A lessons-learned exercise to be undertaken jointly with
the national police to further calibrate the approach on the basis of early results will
permit the model to be applied at 17 regional offices and in Port -au-Prince under
MINUJUSTH.

17-11468

7/20

S/2017/604

35. As the reduction from 11 to 7 formed police units and from 951 to
295 individual police officers began, MINUSTAH repatriated 1 Bangladeshi formed
police unit comprising 125 elements and 116 individual police officers during the
reporting period, reducing the strength of the component to 1,527 formed police unit
personnel and 635 individual police officers. In addition, 19 of the 43 police
co-location sites were closed. The remaining 474 formed police unit personnel,
belonging to the three Pakistani, one Jordanian and three Indian units, will be
repatriated in mid-August, while the remaining 340 individual police officers will
be separated between July and October.
3.

Civilian component
36. On the basis of the identified critical functions and minimum capacity required
for focused mandate delivery during the drawdown of MINUSTAH, a monthly
civilian drawdown plan was developed. The plan safeguards core mandated areas
that will be retained as part of the focus of MINUJUSTH on good offices, the rule
of law, human rights and support for police development, and adequate mission
support capacities to facilitate the closure and liquidati on of MINUSTAH. On
30 June, 317 of 1,346 posts were separated from MINUSTAH. Further reductions in
civilian staff will be effected on a monthly basis from July through September, at
which point 614 staff will remain before being separated by 15 October.
37. The Mission’s geographical footprint was significantly reduced with the
ceasing of operations of the regional offices in Cap-Haïtien and Les Cayes on
30 June and the related ceasing of civilian functions at the departmental level.
Furthermore, 26 of the Mission’s 65 sites scheduled for closure, including 4 military
and police camps and 19 police co-locations, were closed. All sites are being closed
in compliance with United Nations environmental management guidance. In
keeping with internal rules and regulations, an asset disposal plan has been
developed, classifying MINUSTAH assets into five disposal categories, including
redeployment to other missions, sale to the United Nations cou ntry team or donation
in support of the rehabilitation of the country.
38. MINUSTAH is supporting national staff in their search for employment
following their separation from the Mission, including through the organization of a
job fair on 28 June, engaging private and public sector actors, diplomatic missions
and international organizations, and the holding of targeted capacity -building
workshops, for example, on entrepreneurship.

B.

Joint transition plan of the United Nations Mission Stabilization
Mission in Haiti and the United Nations country team
39. In parallel to the Mission’s drawdown, MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team finalized and adopted a joint transition plan. Guided by resolution
2350 (2017), and on the basis of an institutional capacity assessment, a risk analysis
and the work carried out under the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework, the transition plan is the result of a comprehensive planning process
that began in 2014/15 through the establishment of joint thematic groups in which
MINUSTAH and the country team identified common objectives in the areas of the
rule of law, police development, human rights, gender and go vernance. The plan
identifies stabilization needs and priority objectives for Haiti and, accordingly, areas
for continued United Nations engagement as well as areas from which MINUSTAH
is disengaging. It describes critical peacebuilding gaps that will resu lt from the
withdrawal of MINUSTAH and that will require continued support from
MINUJUSTH as well as the country team and the donor community.

8/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

40. Activities from which peacekeeping in Haiti has initiated its progressive
disengagement include: subnational governance, including support for decentralized
bodies and local government; operational electoral support; border management;
legislative drafting and capacity-building; the training of national authorities on
child protection issues; juvenile justice; and policing areas, such as traffic control,
maritime patrolling, anti-kidnapping efforts, vetting activities, civil protection and
close protection. Strong government leadership and increased support from
international partners, including the United Nations country team, will be vital to
preserving the progress made thus far in these areas.
41. The plan also includes a public communications strategy that was continuously
implemented throughout the reporting period, with strategic media engagement and
outreach undertaken by my Special Representative and the senior leadership of the
Mission and the United Nations country team. Raising awareness regarding the
closure of MINUSTAH and the transition to a new configuration of the United
Nations presence in Haiti, namely, MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country
team, will remain critical in the next reporting period.

IV. Planning for the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti
A.

Overview and strategic objectives
42. Planning for the establishment of MINUJUSTH, in line with the mandate
parameters set out in resolution 2350 (2017), is well under way, under the auspices
of a Haiti planning team based in New York. The planning team will continue to
fulfil its role of MINUJUSTH advance team, envisaged in the resolution, until the
first appointments of MINUJUSTH leadership have been made. Among the several
assessment visits to Haiti that have been carried out since the adop tion of the
resolution, which have targeted various aspects of planning, the United Nations
Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in
Post-Conflict and Other Crisis Situations team visited Haiti from 8 to 22 May to
help develop the priorities and objectives of MINUJUSTH and the country team in
the area of the rule of law and to contribute to the development of a strategy for
supporting the transition to development actors. The Global Focal Point assessment
took place in close cooperation with the Government of Haiti, which designated
three senior officials to co-lead, from the Haitian National Police, the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security and the Directorate of Prison Administration.
43. The link between chronic stability challenges, on the one hand, and challenges
in the rule of law and human rights, on the other, as identified by the strategic
assessment mission in February and the Global Focal Point visit in May, has
provided the main premise for MINUJUSTH planning in the three key areas of its
mandate: justice and corrections, police development and human rights. Building on
the achievements of MINUSTAH, MINUJUSTH will seek to address residual
deficiencies in the judicial and corrections systems, which continu e to suffer from
chronic politicization, lack of accountability, limited access to justice for citizens
and high rates of prolonged pretrial detention, and which feed into the public
perception that violence and corruption are more effective means of addre ssing
grievances than the law. MINUJUSTH will focus on further strengthening the
operational and administrative capacity of the Haitian National Police and its
compliance with international human rights standards, particularly with respect to
the use of force and arrest and detention, so that it can gradually, and autonomously,
assume responsibility for the provision of security and the effective protection of
the population throughout the country, including from sexual and gender -based

17-11468

9/20

S/2017/604

violence. MINUJUSTH will also seek to strengthen the capacity of civil society and
national institutions mandated to independently monitor human rights violations,
and will further advocate against impunity so that those oversight institutions will
play a more effective role of watchdog with respect to the Constitution.
44. Mindful of a two-year mandate horizon, MINUJUSTH will target and
prioritize its interventions within two broad strategic objectives: improving the
accountability and human rights compliance of relevant institutions and improving
their professionalism and efficiency. In that regard, appropriate benchmarks, based
on a realistic assessment of MINUJUSTH achievements expected by the end of
2019, will be presented in my initial report to the Security Council foll owing the
entry into force of the Mission’s mandate. Another key strategic objective of
MINUJUSTH will be to support the maintenance of a safe and secure environment
through continued operational support for the Haitian National Police following the
withdrawal of the MINUSTAH military component. Furthermore, a strategy for
gradually transferring MINUJUSTH functions to local institutions, where
appropriate, and building the capacities and resources of the United Nations country
team for supporting residual rule of law and human rights needs in the country will
form an integral part of all MINUJUSTH areas of intervention, supporting the
Mission’s exit strategy. The development of a new, joint programme between
MINUJUSTH and the country team, anchored in nation al plans, will offer a longerterm vision and a vehicle for closer cooperation and transition, as well as a means
for resource mobilization in areas of increasing engagement by non -peacekeeping
partners.
45. As an overall outcome, by the end of its mandate MINUJUSTH will seek to
significantly improve the trust of all sectors of society in the rule of law and in the
institutional checks and balances of democracy so that they can be broadly
supported by all Haitians as important factors for longer -term stability and
economic development. It is also expected that, by the end of 2019, MINUJUSTH
will have ensured the seamless transition of residual peacebuilding tasks in the areas
of the rule of law and human rights to the country team and other bilateral partner s,
as part of a longer-term United Nations commitment to sustaining peace and
promoting development in the country.

B.

Operations
46. In accordance with its mandate, MINUJUSTH will support and strengthen the
accountability and oversight mechanisms in the justice sector, the Superior Council
of the Judiciary and the Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security, so that those bodies can more effectively carry out their primary functions,
namely, providing recommendations for the appointment and extension of judges
and prosecutors, as well as holding such officials to account for poor performance,
misconduct or human rights violations. MINUJUSTH will also advocate the
completion of key legislative reform processes, especially those unde rpinning the
functioning of the criminal justice system (the penal and criminal procedure codes,
the law on legal aid and the prison law), strengthening institutional functioning (the
review of the electoral legal framework) and promoting gender equality a nd action
against sexual and gender-based violence (the gender equality bill and the law on
the prevention, punishment and eradication of violence against women). In
improving the concept of model jurisdictions implemented by MINUSTAH,
MINUJUSTH will provide dedicated capacity-building and advisory support for the
effective functioning of the police, criminal defence and justice and corrections
institutions in one selected jurisdiction, with particular emphasis placed on
improving Haitian ownership. It is hoped that successful results in that jurisdiction

10/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

will serve as a catalyst for improvement in other jurisdictions throughout Haiti,
targeting a significant decrease in the percentage of criminal suspects held in
pretrial detention for more than two years, as well as in the number of suspects held
in police holding cells for more than 48 hours, contrary to Haitian law.
47. Corrections experts of MINUJUSTH, including government -provided
personnel, will mentor and transfer expertise to senior -level officers of the
Directorate of Prison Administration by supporting the certification by the latter of
9 of the 19 prisons in Haiti as capable of operating without full -time MINUJUSTH
or other international support. MINUJUSTH will provide targeted support for the
implementation of the Directorate’s strategic development plan for the period 2017 2021 in terms of organizational development; the security and improvement of
detention conditions; gender-responsive administration and management; and the
rehabilitation and reintegration of inmates, including the strengthening of its
autonomy in the management of its budget. MINUJUSTH will also support the
Directorate, in coordination with Haitian National Police leadership, in developing
and implementing a targeted recruitment and training road map aimed at increasing
the number of its personnel from the current 1,649 to 2,349, including 33 per cent
women, by 2021.
48. The human rights component of MINUJUSTH, in addition to cooperating with
other components in strengthening the national accountability structures in the rule
of law sector, will focus on strengthening the capacity of the national human rights
institution, the Ombudsperson’s office (the Office of Citizen Protection), in
operating as a reliable human rights accountability mechanism vis-a-vis all State
institutions. It will support the Ombudsperson in effectively and independently
investigating systematic human rights violations and carrying out public reporting
functions, in order to promote and protect the rights of all Haitian citizens,
including women’s rights, non-discrimination and equality. MINUJUSTH will
provide technical assistance and support for the capacity of civil society with regard
to advocacy and reporting to human rights mechanisms, while also suppo rting the
adoption of a plan of action for the Government’s implementation of the
recommendations of such mechanisms, including those relating to impunity of past
administrations.
49. MINUJUSTH will maintain a focus on the institutional and professional
development of the Haitian National Police, within the framework of the Haitian
National Police strategic development plan for the period 2017 -2021. Focusing on a
number of key priorities, the Mission will provide professional expertise to senior
and midlevel management of the national police, through supervisory mentoring and
strategic advice on leadership, investigation skills, gender mainstreaming and
efforts to address sexual and gender-based violence. Mentoring and assistance will
also be provided by civilian experts with specialized profiles to build capacities in
police administration, in particular in the areas of reform and restructuring,
planning, human resources, information and facilities management, transport,
logistics, engineering, telecommunications, and budget and finance. Additional
activities will target the development and implementation of community -oriented
policing strategies to enable the national police to build greater trust with local
communities, and training programmes to help prevent illegal or arbitrary arrest and
detention and excessive use of force. Furthermore, MINUJUSTH will promote the
effectiveness of the accountability mechanism of the Haitian National Police, its
General Inspectorate, with a view to extending its authority beyond Port-au-Prince,
as well as swift action to address human rights violations and misconduct cases
when disciplinary or other judicial measures need to be applied.
50. The seven formed police units remaining in MINUJUSTH will provide
continued operational support to the Haitian National Police in the maintenance of
17-11468

11/20

S/2017/604

law and order throughout the country, including for the protection of civilians,
within the limits of their capabilities. Such support will be essential in areas outside
the capital, where the presence of the national police remains weak, and
MINUJUSTH will maintain the capacity to provide it rapidly. The formed police
units will conduct joint field patrols with the Haitian National Police to help
increase its visibility, both as a deterrent to crime and to build greater confidence in
it on the part of the population. Joint patrols and operations are also expected to
serve as a means to increase the “on-the-job” skills of national police officers in
protecting civilians against threats of physical violence. The provision of
operational support to the national police will be aimed at a gradual transition of full
responsibility for security tasks to them, harmonized with their gradual build -up,
and at ensuring the sustainability of security gains in the country.
51. MINUJUSTH will implement tailored community violence reduction projects
to foster local engagement in the rule of law and the work of the Haitian National
Police. Such projects will be focused on rule of law issues, ranging from correct ions
to policing and judicial matters, and supporting community outreach and dialogue
through sensitization campaigns, including town halls, debates and workshops, in
fragile areas throughout Haiti These community-based projects will to help raise
awareness of key reform initiatives and ensure that local needs and concerns
relating to security and socioeconomic issues are at the forefront of political
discussions.
52. A United Nations electoral needs assessment mission, deployed to Haiti from
29 May to 2 June, provided recommendations on the holding of elections and
proposed possible future United Nations support in that regard. The needs
assessment mission observed that it was essential that United Nations electoral
assistance be continued, in a manner aligned with the current transition context, in
order to sustain and build on the results of the more than 13 years of such support
provided in Haiti by MINUSTAH. The mission recommended that MINUJUSTH
continue to support electoral institutional reform within its rule of law and good
offices mandate, aimed at the establishment of the Permanent Electoral Council and
the completion of the electoral legal framework. The next two years, during which
no electoral events are expected to be held, represent a unique wi ndow of
opportunity for addressing these key matters. Under current transition planning,
future technical support for electoral processes is to be provided by the United
Nations country team.

C.

Political strategy
53. Lessons learned from the work carried out by MINUSTAH on the rule of law
over the past 13 years have highlighted the need for close links between the political
strategies of the United Nations and its support for rule of law reform, in order to
promote results. In that context, and in the light of the recommendation of the High level Independent Panel on Peace Operations regarding the primacy of politics in
peacekeeping, the political and operational strategies of the Mission form a close
nexus with its political and good offices mandate and efforts, in direct support of its
rule of law and human rights mandate. To that end, the substantive structure of the
Mission will also be centred on a joint political and rule of law pillar, working
closely with both the police and human rights pillars, thus ensuring an adequate
level of synergy and common strategic intent and maximizing the impact of a
relatively light footprint.
54. In pursuing those and other strategic objectives, MINUJUSTH, through its
political leadership, will employ its good offices role vis-à-vis the executive and
legislative branches. In order to extend its political leverage beyond the capital, the

12/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

Mission will play an early warning and monitoring role, together with a political
outreach and advocacy role, vis-à-vis key sectors of the society and local decision
makers at the regional level. This will be achieved through the mobile deployment
of joint political, justice, corrections and human rights experts to the nine regions
outside Port-au-Prince on a weekly basis and will make use of the coordinated
community violence reduction outreach and sensitization programme.
55. The success of MINUJUSTH will depend in large part on its ability to quickly
develop a relationship of partnership, mutual understanding and cooperation with
the Government on priority challenges that need to be addressed in the country. The
planning for MINUJUSTH so far reflects a shared vision with key government
stakeholders in the areas of its mandate. However, continuous engagement will be
sought by the leadership of both MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH in order to ensure
further refinement of those priorities in the coming months and a continuous
commitment on the part of the Government to supporting the implementation of
such priorities in the future. In that regard, it will be for my Special Representative
for MINUJUSTH, once appointed, to pursue discussions with the Government on a
possible cooperation framework, based on mutual priorities and mutual
accountability, which should also be closely linked to the identification of
benchmarks for the fulfilment of the Mission’s mandate.

D.

Footprint and support issues
56. MINUJUSTH will have a considerably lighter footprint than MINUSTAH,
with a reduction of more than 75 per cent in civilian staffing levels. All civilian
components, including substantive, support and security, will be based in
Port-au-Prince and equipped with the mobility necessary to address needs in the
regions. In accordance with the human resources strategy for international civilian
staff to be selected from rosters and a similar competitive process for national
civilian staff, recruitment for MINUJUSTH is being carried out in three stages, with
the first already in progress, targeting leadership posts.
57. The police component of MINUJUSTH will be ready and operational on
16 October 2017, through the drawdown and reconfiguration of the MINUSTAH
police component, which are already under way. The 295 individual police officers
and an additional number of contracted civilian police experts will be co-located at
17 Haitian National Police facilities in the capital and at all 10 of the regional
administrative headquarters of the national police. Of the seven formed police units,
including one with an embedded special weapons and tactics (SWAT) capacity, three
will be based in Port-au-Prince (the West region) and the other four in the Nord,
Artibonite, Nippes and Grand’ Anse regions.
58. The concept of operations for MINUJUSTH police implies the need for air and
ground mobility so that formed police units and SWAT personnel can rapidly deploy
from their five locations to support Haitian National Police operations and protect
civilians throughout Haiti, including United Nations personnel and assets. A
procurement process initiated in May for the deployment of two commercial
helicopters will prevent a gap in air capacity following the departure of
MINUSTAH military air assets in mid-August. While the option of retaining these
commercial helicopters in MINUJUSTH remains, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is also approaching Member States with a request for police helicopters,
which are not limited in the transportation of certain types of crowd control
equipment for use in emergency situations.
59. The Department of Safety and Security is working with the designated official
and the United Nations country team to reconfigure the United Nations security

17-11468

13/20

S/2017/604

management system structure in Haiti. Given the reduced number of locations and
uniformed elements countrywide, a more centralized approach is being designed. In
that regard, enhanced host country security support is being sought to facilitate
United Nations activity across Haiti, particularly in areas and regions where the
rapid deployment of MINUJUSTH formed police units to provide protection for
United Nations staff may face logistical challenges.

V. Conduct and discipline
60. MINUSTAH strengthened the task force on protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse through the development of a communications strategy with
the United Nations country team and non-governmental organizations to advise the
public on United Nations standards of conduct. It has also increased coordination
with partners to identify available resources for the provision of assistance to
victims of misconduct, and has been meeting with the local population to inform
them of complaint reporting procedures and measures to protect victims, witnesses
and family members.

VI. Financial aspects
61. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/302, authorized the SecretaryGeneral to enter into commitments for the maintenance of the Mission in a total
amount not exceeding $90 million for the period from 1 July 2017 to 31 December
2017.
62. As at 6 July 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
MINUSTAH amounted to $56.7 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $1,462.6 million.
63. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 30 April 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 March 2017, in accordance with
the quarterly payment schedule.

VII. Observations
64. With the installation of the Government and of nearly all directly elected
officials at all levels of the governance system of Haiti, and the completion of the
first 100 days of the new administration, the country appears to be on a ste ady path
towards institutional and political stability. I am encouraged by the adoption of a
government road map that places emphasis on accountability and transparency
while at the same time fighting against corruption. I also welcome the adoption of a
joint legislative agenda by the executive branch and the legislature. This sets the
stage for strengthened and constructive collaboration between those two branches of
power, which is necessary for the implementation of an ambitious reform agenda, as
outlined by President Moïse.
65. The launch of a special parliamentary commission to assess the Constitution
could provide the framework for efforts to promote further progress in the country. I
reiterate my encouragement to President Moïse to move forward with the broadbased national dialogue, which he announced earlier this year with the objective of
forging a common vision based on reform priorities that address the most pressing
socioeconomic and political challenges. I also encourage the inclusion of electo ral
reform in this agenda, with a view to further strengthening the national capacity to
14/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

administer and manage elections in Haiti without resorting to international
assistance.
66. For the further consolidation of the democracy and continued development of
Haiti, it is now essential that the independence of the judiciary, the third branch of
government, be fully restored and assured. I therefore call on the relevant national
authorities to take swift steps to fill key positions in the judiciary through a
transparent and merit-based selection process. I also call attention to the continued
need for measures to reduce women’s vulnerability and guarantee their meaningful
participation in decision-making. In addition, I welcome the Government’s
continued prioritization of the institutional development of the national police,
which should be accompanied by the provision of adequate financial resources and
the implementation of the newly articulated Haitian National Police strategic
development plan for the period 2017-2021.
67. Tangible progress in the area of the rule of law is critical for the creation of
conditions conducive to private investments, which can help to reverse the
downward economic trends. It is important that all actors, including the State,
political parties, the private sector and civil society, help to address social tensions
and work together to deliver socioeconomic progress that responds to the
expectations of the Haitian people.
68. While I note that the mandate of the Independent Expert o n the situation of
human rights in Haiti was not extended, I welcome the continued engagement by
Haiti with other international mechanisms, such as treaty bodies and thematic
special procedures. I encourage the Government, the national human rights
institution and civil society to continue to engage with the human rights component
of MINUJUSTH to strengthen the promotion and protection of human rights in
Haiti.
69. I am encouraged by the reduction in the number of cholera cases and deaths
reported, despite the impact of Hurricane Matthew in 2016, which could have had
devastating consequences. It is essential that our joint efforts with the Government
of Haiti to curb and contain the epidemic be sustained and that adequate funding be
secured. To that end, I have appointed Josette Sheeran of the United States as my
Special Envoy for Haiti to guide the full implementation of the new United Nations
approach to cholera in Haiti and support national efforts to implement the 2030
sustainable development goals of Haiti.
70. MINUSTAH, while implementing a gradual drawdown, has remained equally
focused on implementing critical aspects of its mandate during its last months. I
commend all staff of the Mission, international and national, who are working in a
committed manner for the successful implementation of its priorities, including
through a responsible transition, until the last days of the mandate. I am also pleased
that the security transition, through a gradual drawdown of the police component
and the departure of MINUSTAH military units, has so far proceeded in a smooth
manner, reinforcing indications that Haiti is ready to address challenges to its stable,
yet fragile, security environment without a military presence. Such progress
notwithstanding, the seven formed police units that will remain in MINUJUSTH
will be prepared to provide operational support to the Haitian National Police until
it reaches a number of key additional milestones in its institutional development.
71. Planning for MINUJUSTH reflects the two-year horizon for the completion of
the peacekeeping phase of the United Nations engagement in Haiti, envisaged in
resolution 2350 (2017). Accordingly, it sets targeted but realistic objectives for
MINUJUSTH in its role in strengthening the rule of law, the police and human
rights in Haiti, given the link between weaknesses in those areas and the recurrence
of instability in the country throughout the years. At the same time, it reflects a
17-11468

15/20

S/2017/604

strategy of incremental transition, so that the country team gradually takes up
residual peacebuilding tasks and local actors gradually assume full responsibility in
areas from which peacekeeping will disengage, in continuation of the MINUSTAH United Nations country team transition strategy. This will require that the bilateral
partners of Haiti also step up and optimize their support, in order to ensure that no
resource or capacity gaps are left unaddressed in the process of implementing that
transition.
72. MINUJUSTH will seek to maximize its political leverage and good offices
role, in order to increase the effectiveness of its targeted interventions in the areas
of justice, police, corrections and human rights. It is hoped that this new approach,
of closely linking technical expertise with political engagement, will create the
political space necessary for reforms in areas where political interests have delayed
progress throughout the MINUSTAH mandate. MINUJUSTH operations are also
being designed to ensure maximum synergies between different substantive areas,
cutting across different mission components, aimed at the implementation of a
holistic strategic vision.
73. In the light of the advanced level of planning already undertaken to establish
the new mission, I am confident that MINUJUSTH will be operational on
16 October 2017, the first day of its mandate. In the meantime, the United Nations
will continue to engage with Haitian stakeholders and other partners in further
developing and refining the concept of the Mission and ensuring appropriate
synergies and alignment of efforts. I therefore invite the Haitian stakeholders to
strengthen their engagement with the MINUSTAH leadership and the MINUJUSTH
advance team in order to consolidate a joint vision on the prioritie s and objectives
of the Mission and the wider United Nations presence, especially on rule of law
reform, as well as a joint road map for their implementation. The reform agenda of
Haiti can be achieved only when committed Haitian counterparts own it and ta ke the
necessary steps to effect change.
74. In the same vein, I welcome the support provided by the Security Council
during its recent visit to Haiti, from 22 to 24 June, which underscored the high level
of international commitment to Haiti, its Governme nt and its people, and also
demonstrated the continued United Nations engagement in the country’s stability,
development and institutional strengthening in the areas of the rule of law and
human rights. The visit also provided an opportunity for government counterparts
and civil society and private sector interlocutors to express their concerns and
expectations with respect to the reconfiguration of the United Nations presence and
the transition to MINUJUSTH.
75. In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude to my Special
Representative for Haiti, Sandra Honoré, for her invaluable contributions to the
stability of Haiti, as well as to all remaining and departing MINUSTAH civilian
staff and uniformed personnel, for their unwavering commitment to achievi ng the
Mission’s mandate. I am equally grateful to the United Nations country team and
other partners, who are continuing their close cooperation with MINUSTAH as it
draws down and are preparing to step up their role in the next phase of United
Nations engagement in the country.

16/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

Annex I
Composition and strength of the police of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti as at 16 June 2017
United Nations police officers
Country

Women

Men

1

18

Argentina
Bangladesh

81

218

2

Burkina Faso

1

Cameroon

9

5

Canada

8

50

Chad

25

2

Chile

2
7

Djibouti

30
5

2

Ethiopia

25
8

France

1

Germany

1

2

Ghana

1

9

Guinea

4

India

12

Indonesia

Men

32

Brazil

El Salvador

Women

9

Benin

Colombia

Formed police units

5

Jordan

440

8
33

Madagascar

5

31

Mali

2

36

Nepal

17

Niger

9

69

Nigeria

1

2

Norway

3

3

318

13

Pakistan
Philippines

140
1

Portugal

11
1

Romania

1

13

Russian Federation

1

8

Rwanda

1

9

21

139

14

14

143

Senegal
Slovakia

1

5

Sweden

5

5

Serbia
Togo
Tunisia

17-11468

127

4
21

9
11

17/20

S/2017/604
United Nations police officers
Country

Women

Turkey
United States of America

Men

Women

Men

129

1 525

17
2

13

Uruguay

4

Yemen

2
88

Total

Formed police units

566
654

1 654
2 308

18/20

17-11468

S/2017/604

Annex II
Countries providing military staff and contingents to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti as at
28 June 2017
Staff officers
Country

Men

Women

Men

Total

Argentina

6

25

41

72

Bangladesh

2

2

108

112

9

19

951

979

Brazil

Women

Troops

a

Canada

1

5

Chile

3

Ecuador

1

6
4

57
1

El Salvador

1

1

4

6

Guatemala

2

Jordan

3

3

Mexico

1

1

Nepal

3

Paraguay

1

Peru

3

Philippines

2

Sri Lanka

3

3

United States of America

3

3

Uruguay

6

6

Total
a

17-11468

50

1

53

3
5

77

83
3

14

69

121

1 353

137

1 476

The Force Commander is employed on a United Nations contract and hence is not reflected
in the troop strength.

19/20

S/2017/604

20/20

17-11468
