S/PV.8163

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8163rd meeting

Tuesday, 23 January 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2017/1105)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-01862 (E)
*1801862*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8163

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2017/1105)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/1105, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
introduce the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1105) on the situation in Mali to the members
of the Security Council, and update them on the most
recent developments concerning the political and
security situation in the country.
I would also like to welcome the presence today of
the new Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, whom I warmly
congratulate on his appointment. I should like to convey
through the Minister to the new Government our every
wish for its success, and to reiterate to him our readiness
and that of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to support him in his work, especially with regard to the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The adoption of a timeline for implementing urgent
measures within the framework of the Peace Agreement
2/22

23/01/2018

at the last meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee on 15 and 16 January was an important
step. That timeline includes an entire series of measures
that should allow progress with regard to institutional
measures, including, in particular ensuring that the
Territorial Communities Code conforms with the Peace
Agreement, and the operationalization of the interim
authorities and the transitional electoral colleges,
as well as the local Governments in the Ménaka and
Taoudénni regions, by March. The timeline could also
help advance security arrangements, including the
operationalization of the Operational Coordination
Mechanisms of Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu, the
finalization of the criteria for the integration of former
combatants into the armed and security forces, the
further development of security sector reform strategy
and the establishment of security conditions for the
upcoming elections. The timetable could finally revive
development for the northern regions.
However, with the holding of presidential elections,
scheduled for mid-July, less than six months away, it is
now important that the Government and the signatory
movements make every effort to respect that new
timetable. Almost a year ago, on 10 February 2017,
the then Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, His
Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, as chief mediator,
presided over a high-level ministerial meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, which resulted in
a road map for installing the interim authorities and
initiating joint patrols, as well as the establishment
of a permanent consultation framework comprised of
the signatory parties, international mediators and key
partners. Unfortunately, it is clear today that those
measures have not been followed up.
I welcome the fact that the first trip by
Mr. Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, the new Prime
Minister of Mali, appointed on 30 December, was
slated for Algeria, the lead mediator. We hope that
consultations with the Algerian authorities will give
awaited impetus to talks with the other signatory parties
with a view to overcoming the differences observed
over the past several months. In particular, I highlight
the controversy related to the Territorial Communities
Code, as well as persistent divergences concerning
the issue of quota requirements for the integration of
former combatants into the armed and security forces,
which are essential for the launch of the cantonment
and security sector reform.
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

It is also hoped that constructive consultations
among the parties, following the meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee of January 15 and
16, will enable them, in the days to come, to adhere to
the timetable agreed at that meeting. That is essential
to ensuring coherence between the Peace Agreement
and the legal framework concerning decentralization
and to laying the groundwork for the holding of local
and regional elections in April 2018 in an optimal
security conditions.
In the same vein, I would like to encourage the
signatory parties to dedicate the coming months to
developing a road map articulating their vision for
new Malian defence and security institutions and the
various stages of the reform. A consensus on the next
steps would enable the launching of the cantonment
and demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
processes and thereby help reduce insecurity in the
northern regions.
Time is short, and we are facing a constant race
against time in Mali. We are facing increasing insecurity
that has unfortunately cost the lives of hundreds of
civilians in the northern and central parts of the country,
as well as dozens of members of the Malian defence
and security forces, Blue Helmets and contingents of
Operation Barkhane over the past year. We are also
facing a worsening human rights and humanitarian
situations in the country. The fact that, after more than
two years following the signing of the peace agreement,
the northern development strategy project has not
been adopted means that a large percentage of those
living in the north has been deprived of long-awaited
peace dividends. Humanitarian actors estimate that
by 2018, 4.1 million Malians — or 22 per cent of the
population — will be food insecure. The estimated
percentage is even higher for the northern and central
regions where 30 to 40 per cent of the population would
be affected.
As members of the Security Council saw for
themselves during their visit in October 2017, the
challenges remain considerable, and, as I have said, our
goal must be to establish conditions conducive to the
holding of elections and, beyond them, pursuing the
peace process. To that end, I encourage the Government
to launch the implementation of the agreement’s key
measures — decentralization and security sector
reform — in a concerted and inclusive manner. In that
regard, I would like to assure the Government of the
continued support of MINUSMA, under the leadership

S/PV. 8163

of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, who is sparing no effort in
exercising his good offices.
(spoke in English)
As was previously mentioned, the report under
consideration highlights the continued worsening of the
situation in the centre of the country with the highest
number of terrorist attacks documented in the Mopti
region. The Government is making efforts in that regard.
Prime Minister Maïga convened a Cabinet meeting
devoted to addressing insecurity in the central region
and the national coordination body’s integrated plan for
securing the centre of the country is now operational.
For its part, MINUSMA has enhanced its support
for the Malian defence and security forces in central
Mali following the signature of the memorandum of
understanding with the Government on 8 November.
The Mission is helping upgrade the security of six
Malian armed forces bases for an estimated cost of
$1 million, as well as continuing to assist with casualty
and medical evacuations.
I would also like to welcome the progress made in
the operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which has launched
its second operation, as well as the establishment by
the G-5 Sahel secretariat of a coordination cell to
provide political oversight to the operations of the Joint
Force. As recommended by the Secretary-General in
his October report (S/2017/811), we would also advise
that the groupe de soutien be activated to ensure
unity of vision and purpose among all stakeholders.
Meanwhile, consultations for the conclusion of the
technical agreement among the G-5 Sahel, the United
Nations and the European Union are progressing, and
we intend to work closely with the European Union
and the African Union on a joint resource mobilization
strategy before the donors conference of 23 February in
Brussels in accordance with the provisions of resolution
2391 (2017).
Development partners are also stepping up their
efforts. Since October 2017, the Peace Building Fund
launched four projects focused on the Mopti and Ségou
regions for a total of $8 million. Those projects are aimed
at enhancing the participation of women and youth in
reconciliation efforts and preventing intercommunity
conflicts, including by restoring traditional conflict
mediation mechanisms. However, most of those
initiatives remain in the inception phase, and have yet

18-018623/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

to produce significant changes on the ground. For the
future, central Mali is likely to command sustained
attention and become an increasingly prominent feature
in peace and reconciliation efforts.
The upcoming presidential elections will mark
the beginning of a new chapter in the stabilization
of Mali. The modest achievements made to date in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement that
forms the cornerstone of the Mission’s mandate,
the entry into function of the independent observer,
the operationalization of the sanctions regime, the
establishment of the international commission of inquiry,
the upcoming presidential elections, the continued
security risks facing our personnel on the ground, the
growth of insecurity spanning towards the centre of the
country and the deployment of a new regional force by
the G-5 Sahel make the independent review requested
by the Secretary-General particularly timely.
Allow me here to welcome the participation of
the Carter Center, for the first time, in the Agreement
Monitoring Committee meeting held last week, the
recent nomination of the Panel of Experts mandated
by resolution 2374 (2017) and the Secretary-General’s
decision to establish the international commission of
inquiry, of which he informed the Security Council
by letter yesterday. The independent observer will
identify blockages, apportion responsibility and make
recommendations for the way forward. The Panel of
Experts will support the Committee in identifying and
imposing sanctions against individuals hampering the
implementation of the agreement. It will also help to
shed light on the links between international organized
crime, terrorist groups and signatory armed groups. The
International Commission of Inquiry will investigate
serious violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law committed in Mali since
January 2012. Its establishment represents an important
step forward in the implementation of the justice and
reconciliation measures outlined in the Agreement, and
in efforts to fight impunity.
Five years after the Mission’s establishment and
two and a half years after the signature of the peace
agreement, we believe the time has come to re-assess
the assumptions about MINUSMA’s presence, review
its key mandated tasks against its achievements on
the ground and re-examine the Mission’s layout for
a comprehensive strategic review. I must note that
resolution 2364 (2017) had requested that MINUSMA
develop within six months a mission-wide prioritization
4/22

23/01/2018

plan articulating a phased approach to mandate
implementation and a transition plan. However, we felt
that to ensure maximum impact, it would be important
that the two plans be informed by the findings of
the strategic review to be conducted in the coming
weeks. We therefore believe that the two plans will
remain living documents until the conclusion of the
strategic review can be incorporated. In the meantime,
MINUSMA continues to focus on core-mandated tasks,
with notable achievement in its good offices and the
protection of civilian efforts.
In spite of persisting capability gaps, including
for crucial assets, such as helicopters, MINUSMA
is pursuing its effort to project the robust posture
mandated by the Security Council. Since the beginning
of the year, peacekeepers repelled three attacks against
one position in Kidal region and one ambush in
Mopti region, and three improvised explosive devices
exploded against Mission vehicles. I am pleased to
report that such attacks resulted in only minor injuries
to two peacekeepers. We also note that the mitigation
measures implemented by the Mission are having a
positive impact. However, such endeavours are longterm. The review on peacekeeping fatalities recently
conducted by Lieutenant General Cruz and our plan of
action highlight the importance of enhancing our efforts
and ensuring that all peacekeepers receive the training
and equipment necessary to operate in such hostile
conditions. We are currently working with MINUSMA
to take all necessary measures to implement the
recommendations outlined in that report.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his briefing, which, as usual, was very clear, and
again highlighted that the situation in Mali is at a
determining juncture.
I would also like to warmly welcome the Malian
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, His Excellency Mr. Tiéman Hubert
Coulibaly, and thank him for traveling to New
York to participate in our work. It is an important
gesture that France and, I believe, all members of the
Council appreciate.
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

More than two and a half years after the signature
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
it must be acknowledged that much remains to be
done to ensure its full implementation. Indeed, it has
an impact on the ground. Now, more than ever, it is
time for all parties to make headway in honouring their
respective commitments. It is all the more important
now that there is a small window of opportunity ahead
of the 2018 elections in Mali. The security situation in
the north and centre of the country remains a source
of genuine concern for all. Without progress, all of the
gains made thus far, as well as the very relevance of the
agreement, will be called into question.
Sustainable development in the Sahel will be
impossible without the full implementation of the Malian
peace agreement. In that regard, France welcomes the
renewed commitment on the part of Malian Government
and signatory movements to implement all provisions
of the peace agreement, through the adoption a few
days ago of an emergency plan with a specific calendar
to ensure that, by March, each party will have honoured
its commitments. It is an encouraging step forward
that has been eagerly waited for some time. It should
allow for considerable short-term progress to be made
in implementing the agreement. We must move from
words to deeds and ensure that commitments are upheld
with specific measures on the ground. It is particularly
important for progress to be made in the area of
decentralization, by conducting a consensus-based
review of legislation with regard to decentralization,
adopting a law to establish a regional police force and
providing interim authorities with the human, technical
and financial resources required to fulfil their mission.
The launching of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process is also a priority, given the
eligibility criteria and quotas for combatants. In the
coming weeks we will continue to monitor the various
points closely, in conjunction with Malian stakeholders.
France also encourages the Malian authorities to make
headway in the fight against impunity. It calls upon all
parties to end human rights violations.
In accordance with the terms of the peace agreement,
the Council must take the necessary measures that will
encourage the parties to uphold their commitments. The
adoption in September 2017 of resolution 2374 (2017),
establishing a sanctions regime for Mali, was the first
step in that direction. Additional measures should
be envisaged if the recent commitments made by the
parties are not honoured, including imposing sanctions

S/PV. 8163

on individuals who hamper the implementation of the
agreement. France is ready to shoulder its responsibility
in that area. The future reports of the Panel of Experts
and the independent observer, whose appointments
we welcome, will lay the foundation to move in that
direction if need be. All Malian parties must shoulder
their responsibilities.
The countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) continue to work together to combat the
existential threat that terrorism poses to their peoples
and States. Last week, another step was made to make
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force operational by launching a
specific road map for troop deployment, command
transfers and future operations. Now more than ever,
the goal is to send swift and positive signals about
the path to stability in the G-5 Sahel countries by
confirming, in particular, the return of Government
and public services throughout the country.
In New York, our priority must be to do our utmost
to ensure that the technical agreement outlined in
resolution 2391 (2017) can be signed at the international
donors’ conference to be held on 23 February in Brussels,
in order to gather the necessary resources to finance
the support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to the Joint Force. It will be achieved by a mechanism
hosted by the European Union and should be fed by
international contributions, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 2391 (2017).
Finally, a solid framework that promotes respect for
human rights remains an important prerequisite for the
success of the joint force. We therefore encourage the
G-5 Sahel countries to establish, as soon as possible,
the compliance framework outlined in resolution 2391
(2017) so as to build on progress made in that area in
the coming weeks. It is the best way to ensure that
MINUSMA can support the joint force, in accordance
the United Nations human rights criteria.
In spite of all its challenges, MINUSMA, along
with other security forces on the ground, remains a
crucial element for ensuring Mali’s stability, In the
short term, our responsibility is to mobilize to provide
MINUSMA with all the means it needs to fulfil the
robust mandate it has received from the Council. The
priority in that regard lies in the immediate deployment
on the ground of adapted capacities in order to endow
the force with its full operational strength in the coming
months. Lasting solutions must be found quickly so as

18-018625/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

to adequately equip contingents with armored vehicles,
medium-term aerial capacities and armored convoys.
Finally, the strategic review of MINUSMA to
take place in the coming weeks will provide us with
an opportunity for more long-term consideration of the
future of the Mission and its coordination with other
security forces in place, first and foremost among which
is the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Mali and the Sahel are optimal theatres for building the
future of peacekeeping. They offer us the opportunity
to work to establish a virtuous coordination between
a United Nations and an African operation. That will
be possible, however, only if both enjoy the necessary
tools and support from the international community.
As I have already had the opportunity to underscore
this morning, it is now urgent to make progress towards
the full implementation of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. It is the Council’s responsibility
to send a strong message of encouragement to the
Malian parties in that regard. France will today submit
a proposal to the other members of the Council on a
draft presidential statement to that end.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing.
We join our colleagues from France in welcoming
His Excellency Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali.
At the outset, I wish to highlight the political
progress made in Mali. We note with some hope that
the consolidation of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali is moving ahead with essential
steps that will without doubt also encourage the
Security Council, the international community and, of
course, the Malian people and Government to pursue
their efforts in favour of peace and lasting stability in
that brotherly country.
In that regard, we note the definitive cessation
of hostilities between the armed groups through the
signature of the document of commitments, which
provides for a resumption of dialogue towards the
full implementation of the peace and reconciliation
agreement and an increase in confidence-building
measures for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the fighters. Furthermore, we note the
6/22

23/01/2018

latest meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee
in Bamako, which took place early last week and at
which the parties agreed a revised, prioritized schedule
for the implementation of the pending provisions of the
peace and reconciliation agreement, to be undertaken
by the end of March. We consider these commitments
to be an important initiative that must be secured in a
decisive way. We welcome the efforts of the Government
and the President of the Republic of Mali to achieve
the definitive cessation of hostilities through national
plans and the taking of fundamental policy measures to
achieve peace and stability in their country.
It is important to reiterate and recognize that the
impact of the Libyan conflict on the security situation
in the region is a direct consequence of interventionist
practices and policies of regime change that have had a
collateral effect in the Sahel, engendering a rise in chaos
and terrorism, with regrettable results that continue to
reverberate to this day.
We view with concern that asymmetric terrorist
attacks perpetrated with small arms and improvised
explosive devices continue to threaten the integrity
and life of the civilian population, the Malian security
forces, State authorities and the members of MINUSMA,
not to mention the fact that they have propagated
and entrenched the presence and consequences of
transnational crime in the subregion.
We therefore consider it necessary to highlight
and recognize the tasks undertaken by the personnel
of the MINUSMA, which has stepped up its work in
for the final implementation of the peace agreement
by monitoring and facilitating the political dialogue
through mediation and good offices, in coordination
with the Malian Government. We commend the
activities of the Mission in the provision of technical,
logistical and security advice for the preparation of
future electoral processes in Mali. Furthermore, we
attach importance to the signing of the memorandum
of understanding with the Malian Government,
which will offer support to the armed forces in the
areas of operations, intelligence, medical evacuation,
the elimination and handling of explosive artifacts,
demining and the protection of civilians.
However, despite all the efforts carried out by the
Mission, we are concerned about the ongoing lack of
material, logistical and technological capabilities that
would allow it to efficiently and effectively fulfil its
mandate in a volatile and asymmetric environment.
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

On the other hand, the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate due to violent terrorist attacks,
with their collateral and very grave effects, which
have increased the number of internally displaced and
refugees in border countries. Another collateral effect
we would note is food insecurity, which keeps hundreds
of thousands of people at risk, among them more
than 10,000 children suffering severe malnutrition.
Vulnerability remains highest among minors, who are
marginalized and deprived of their fundamental rights,
including to education, due to the closure of hundreds
of schools as a result of terrorist threats.
In that respect, it is clear that the security situation
in Mali and the Sahel still presents great challenges.
Bolivia highlights the essential efforts carried out by
the regional and subregional organizations, led by the
African Union, in cooperation and coordination with the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which we
consider to be critical to the fight against transnational
criminal groups and to providing broader and better
security conditions to the civilian population.
To conclude, we urge the international community
in general to pursue its efforts to achieve lasting
peace and stability in Mali. We believe that support
for the Malian Government is the fundamental pillar
that should motivate us to achieve definitive peace,
in strict respect for and dedication to its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/1105)
on progress made in the political process in Mali and
the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Before I go on, I wish to hail the presence among
us of His Excellency Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Republic of Mali. I ask him to accept the Ivorian
delegation’s welcome and its congratulations on his
new assigment to lead the Malian diplomatic corps.
Mr. Lacroix’s briefing described a situation of
contrasts that calls for the Council’s ongoing vigilance
and strengthened support for MINUSMA in the
implementation of its mandate. My country attaches the
highest importance to developments in the situation in
Mali, in particular the political process, and welcomes
the efforts and resolve of the Government to promote

S/PV. 8163

the comprehensive and inclusive implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
which is the sole framework for resolving the crisis in
that country. My delegation shares the conclusions of the
Secretary-General on the need for the Malian parties to
step up their implementation of the Agreement, which
has been delayed significantly. This could threaten the
holding of upcoming local and presidential elections.
Time is running out and the implementation of the
peace agreement by the next elections will be key to
ensuring a peaceful and credible electoral process.
With MINUSMA’s support, focus should be
placed on the redeployment of the Administration;
decentralization; security sector reform; and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. In
that regard, we encourage the Agreement Monitoring
Committee to fully play its role and to lead the Malian
parties to resolutely assume ownership of the Algiers
road map. The presence of Algeria, the leader of the
international mediation efforts, and the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General as
observers in the Agreement Monitoring Committee is
an important step forward and a sign of openness that
will strengthen the Committee’s effectiveness.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the Malian Government’s
determination to involve neighbouring countries, in
particular Algeria, in implementing the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In this connection,
the Council should encourage the region and the
neighbouring countries of Mali to work closely with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif to reach a definitive
solution to the crisis in Mali.
My delegation welcomes the cessation of hostilities
agreement signed on 20 September 2017 by the various
signatory movements of the peace agreement and
encourages the stakeholders to ensure its effective
implementation in order to contribute to improving
the security situation in the country. However, Côte
d’Ivoire is worried about the serious deterioration
of the security situation in the centre of the country
and the real risks of the terrorist attacks spreading to
the south. In this regard, my delegation calls for the
operationalization of MINUSMA’s rapid reaction
force as soon as possible and for the fulfilment of the
Mission’s need for helicopters.
Côte d’Ivoire also calls on Member States to
make available to MINUSMA appropriate means

18-018627/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

to secure the camps and convoys against attacks by
terrorists groups, which have cost the lives of too
many peacekeepers deployed in Mali. Furthermore, my
country urges MINUSMA and the partners of Mali to
support the efforts of the Government in the context of
the deployment of Malian defence and security forces,
in particular to the north and centre of the country.
We must ensure that the Government of Mali has the
necessary support its army needs in order to protect
the people and territory of Mali. The presence of these
forces will prevent a the armed groups from becoming
permanently entrenched and, as a result, it will prevent
to the perpetration human rights violations. It will also
facilitate the redeployment of the Administration and
essential social services.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the signing on 8 November
2017 of the agreement memorandum with the Malian
Government in order to ensure MINUSMA’s support
for the Malian armed forces, in particular in the area
of strengthening logistical and operational capabilities,
exchanges of information and intelligence, medical
evacuations and the deactivation of explosives and
munitions. Peace and security and in Mali will be
lasting only if terrorist groups and criminals are
neutralized. For this to happen, it will depend on the
effectiveness of the force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in its war against the terrorist groups.
Côte d’Ivoire is delighted about the convergence
of views and the unity of action of Council members
regarding the support of MINUSMA to the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and calls on the Council to go even further
in ensuring its support so that we can make sure that
MINUSMA does not continue to be the target of
terrorist attacks. Côte d’Ivoire hopes that, in accordance
with resolution 2391 (2017), the technical agreement
between the United Nations, the European Union and
the G-5 Sahel countries will be signed.
The Ivorian delegation welcomes the progress
achieved in the implementation of MINUSMA’S
mandate in an increasingly complex environment.
However, we would like to express our serious concerns
about the ongoing serious human rights violations, in
particular in the north and centre of Mali, as well as
the increasing asymmetric attacks against MINUSMA
personnel.
Looking beyond the security situation, my country
commends the commitment of MINUSMA and the
Government of Mali to the implementation of the road
8/22

23/01/2018

map in order to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals, in particular by reducing inequalities and
eliminating poverty in order to improve the living
conditions of the people of Mali. Côte d’Ivoire agrees
with the Secretary-General that it is necessary to address
the root causes of the conflict to build a foundation for
peace and security.
In conclusion, my country would like to reiterate
that there can be no military solution to the crisis in
Mali and that the parties should commit themselves
resolutely to implementing in good faith the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation, which is the solution that
was chosen by the people of Mali themselves. Côte
d’Ivoire believes in the capacity of all the parties to
overcome their differences in the interest of the people
and nation of Mali.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to begin by thank
Under-Secretary-General Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his comprehensive briefing to the Council today and
express our thanks to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2017/1105) and to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mr. Annadif and his team
for their excellent work on the ground. I also want to
welcome and express my appreciation for the presence
today in the Council of Minister Coulibaly.
It has now been over two and a half years since the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was
signed. Progress on its implementation has been mixed,
yet tangible progress in the peace process is the only
way to achieve lasting stability in Mali and indeed in
the region. This is all the more urgent in light of the
grave security situation, characterized by increased
and intense fire attacks by terrorists groups. It is clear
that only a comprehensive approach, anchored in the
peace process and which addresses is the root causes
of violence and instability, will resolve the security
situation in Mali in a lasting way.
We welcome the adoption of the revised timetable
for the implementation of the peace agreement. The
agreement represents a closing window of opportunity
which, if not grasped, would undermine the progress
already made and put into question the potential for
peace and reconciliation. It is therefore essential that
the parties honour their commitments under the peace
agreement in good faith, in a concrete and substantive
way and without further delay.
As part of this, they should engage in
confidence-building measures. This is critical not
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

least to prepare the ground for credible and inclusive
elections due to take place in 2018. Greater national
ownership of the key institutional reforms envisaged in
the peace agreement is essential. We call on all parties
to play their part, in particular to ensure progress in the
decentralization and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and the security sector reform
processes. We hope that the newly appointed Prime
Minister Maïga will fully assume his responsibilities
and lead the way in an inclusive manner.
With the recent appointment of the Carter Center in
the role of independent observer and the establishment
of the sanctions regime last year, all the tools needed
to support the implementation process of the peace
agreement are now in place. Albeit different in nature,
those tools all serve to assist and to help the parties in
their endeavours. We encourage them to support them
and to use them as they go about their work.
The full representation of women in the
decision-making structures related to the peace process
has been lacking. Yet women have an important role
to play in the implementation of the peace agreement.
We welcome the recent steps by the mediation group of
the Agreement’s follow-up mechanism, the Agreement
Monitoring Committee, to consult more with women.
It is important that that dialogue be continued and that
the inclusion of women in the peace process be further
institutionalized.
The human rights situation in Mali continues to be
of serious concern, not least due to the expansion of
violent extremist groups. The Malian Government has
the responsibility to ensure accountability for human
rights abuses and access to justice for all, including
by prioritizing the reconciliation and justice measures
of the peace agreement. We welcome the decision of
the Secretary-General to establish the International
Commission of Inquiry to investigate the allegations
of abuse and serious violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including the allegations of conflict-related sexual
violence committed on the territory of Mali since
1 January 2012.
We welcome the continued support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to the operationalization
of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
and the high number of additional statements submitted
to the Commission, although we are concerned that

S/PV. 8163

progress remains slow. The severe human rights
situation also highlights the significance of a robust
compliance framework for the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which should be
operationalized promptly.
We look forward to receiving further information
on the transition plan for MINUSMA and on the
recommendations for the upcoming strategic review.
That is an important exercise, coming five years after the
inception of the Mission, and provides an opportunity
to reflect, including by revisiting its configuration and
geographical distribution.
We join the Secretary-General in commending the
commitment of the States members of the G-5 Sahel
to addressing threats to peace and security in the
region through the establishment of the joint force.
We see the potential of the force to contribute to an
enabling environment that increases security. Given
the complementarity roles of the G-5 Sahel force and
MINUSMA, it is important that United Nations support
to the joint force through MINUSMA not affect the
Mission’s capacity to implement its mandate and
strategic priorities.
By redoubling their efforts to implement the peace
agreement, the parties in Mali can help to ensure
successful elections later this year. That, in turn, has
the potential to reinvigorate the peace process and to
create the conditions for State authority to be extended
across the whole of the country. It is very important
that all parties to the Agreement remain committed and
intensify their efforts for successful implementation.
MINUSMA continues to have an important role
to play in support of national efforts inside Mali. We
are proud to support its work with our largest current
military troop contribution to any international mission,
as well as with police and civilian staff. Sweden
remains committed to supporting a peaceful, resilient
and inclusive Mali for all its citizens.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
very useful briefing. I would also like to welcome the
presence of Mr. Тiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
(spoke in Spanish)
Peru notes with concern the situation in Mali. As
a non-permanent member of the Council, we hope

18-018629/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

to contrbute to strengthening the commitment of the
international community to national actors with a
view to supporting their efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in that country. We believe that the humanitarian
situation facing the civilian population is serious, as is
the recurrence of heinous violations of human rights in
Mali, in particular in the central and northern regions
owing to the actions of terrorist groups, clashes between
the various armed groups and a lack of State presence.
Peru recognizes and supports the work carried out
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) amid
an adverse environment and in complex operational
situations. I would now like to briefly mention the
political and security aspects, in which it is urgent to
make progress with greater speed.
First, on the political front, almost three years
since the signing of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, it is necessary to make it a
reality. The establishment of a timetable for that is a
step in the right direction. However, it is necessary to
accelerate the pace. The holding of free and transparent
elections is a central objective, which must have strong
regional and international support. An increased
participation of women and young people should help to
build and strengthen the inclusive institutions required
to sustain peace. We also believe it important to move
forward as soon as possible with the constitutional
review process in order to establish the necessary order
for national institutions to provide security and justice
in the country, in line with the peace and reconciliation
agreement.
Along those lines, we welcome the recent decision
of the Secretary-General to establish the International
Commission of Inquiry and to request the Malian
authorities to look into abuses and violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law, including
conflict-related sexual violence. We support the fight
against impunity and implementation of the rule of law
in Mali.
Secondly, in the area of security, Peru highlights
the importance of adopting a regional perspective
that addresses in an integrated and multidimensional
way the root causes of the conflict, including the link
between terrorism and drug trafficking, organized
crime, human trafficking and other criminal activities.
We also emphasize the need to move forward with
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
10/22

23/01/2018

programmes for former combatants and to create decent
employment to prevent the resurgence of violence.
Peru considers the mandate given to MINUSMA to
provide operational and logistical support to the Joint
Force of the Group of Five of the Sahel to be positive.
At the same time, we believe that the operational
capabilities of the Mission should be strengthened. We
note with concern that the entire authorized force has
not yet been deployed and that there is a significant
deficit in its equipment. In that regard, we highlight the
need to guarantee the safety of the Blue Helmets on
the ground. Mali represents one of the most dangerous
environments. That is why we support the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to address that cross-cutting issue of
many peacekeeping operations.
To conclude, we believe that sustainable
development is inseparable from peace and security. In
that regard, it could be of interest to include in future
reports figures for economic growth, which have been
good, with social indicators that give a clearer idea of
the challenges facing Mali in the area of sustainable
development, which we all support.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Lacroix for his very useful briefing on recent
events in Mali. I would also like to join my colleagues in
welcoming Mr. Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali. It goes without
saying that the presence among us of Mr. Coulibaly
demonstrates the Malian Government’s commitment to
finding an appropriate solution to the current situation.
We warmly welcome the positive measures taken
by the Government in the areas of defence, justice,
security and economic development. We encourage
it to continue with such measures and to step up its
efforts to implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We call on all the parties to
cooperate and participate in the process in order to
ensure the implementation of the agreement and to
address the common terrorist threat.
In that context, we support the amended timeline
for the implementation of the agreement agreed to by
the signatory parties at the most recent meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee in the capital of
Mali, Bamako, on 16 January. We urge all the parties
to implement the outstanding parts of the Agreement in
accordance with the established timetable.
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

We deplore the extremely worrying deterioration of
the situation in Mali. We commend the efforts of the
peacekeepers, who risk their lives every day in their
efforts to maintain peace and security in a dangerous
environment, and 42 of whom died in 2017. It will be
crucial to identify and address the underlying causes
of the conflict if it is to be contained. Kuwait supports
the commitment of the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad and the coalition of armed groups to the
ceasefire since the signing of the latest agreement on
20 September. We call on all the parties to work to
improve the security situation as quickly as possible.
We have been attentively and worriedly following
the increases in terrorist attacks, the spread of extremist
ideas and the targeting of peacekeepers and Malian
security forces. We firmly condemn the terrorist
activity in the region and emphasize the importance of
the efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of Five (G5) for the Sahel in fighting terrorism, ensuring border
security and combating transborder crime. With regard
to the Joint Force, we support resolution 2391 (2017) and
call on the G-5 countries and the United Nations to put
the finishing touches on the technical agreement aimed
at facilitating the Joint Force’s efforts, an initiative that
is a successful, positive model of regional ownership in
combating the various transborder threats. We welcome
the active efforts in that regard of the Niger, Chad,
Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Mali and commend their
valuable contributions to the Joint Force.
Despite the current political situation and the
deteroriating security conditions, Mali is seeing
promising improvements in its economic development,
according to the most recent briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel, on 11 January (see S/PV.8156).
We support the Government of Mali’s efforts to
cooperate with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in implementing projects aimed at creating job
opportunities for the people of Mali and improving
its economic situation. We also support the efforts to
finalize a formula for the Government’s plan for the
Sustainable Development Goals. We wish the friendly
people of Mali a prosperous future and reiterate our
commitment to working with the other members of the
Council to help them reach their goals. The country’s
economic development has created an opportunity for
resolving various outstanding social and economic
issues, and we call on the Government of Mali, with the

S/PV. 8163

support of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel and MINUSMA, to pursue and promote
that development by implementing the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, newly revitalized
under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed.
We support the Secretary-General’s decision to
establish an International Commission of Inquiry
in Mali, as expressed in a letter sent yesterday to the
members of the Council, which says that the Commission
of Inquiry will address flagrant violations and abuses
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law, including sexual violence related to
the conflict, in accordance with the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation and with resolution 2364 (2017). We
are committed to supporting the Secretary-General in
his efforts to combat human rights violations.
Lastly, we commend the efforts of Special
Representative Annadif and MINUSMA and affirm
the importance of their role in stabilizing the situation
and ensuring security for civilians. We emphasize the
importance of their efforts to give technical, logistical
and advisory support to the Government of Mali. We
wish the Government every success in holding local
and presidential elections this year and encourage it to
ensure that elections are regular, transparent and open
to the participation of every sector of Malian society.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would first like to thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his valuable briefing
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as well as
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSMA,
for his work in extremely difficult circumstances. We
commend MINUSMA’s mediation efforts and call on it
to further strengthen its exercise of its good offices, in
accordance with its mandate.
(spoke in French)
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the presence here today of His Excellency Mr. Tiéman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
(spoke in English)
Poland has been following the political situation
in Mali and the Sahel closely. It is currently one of
the world’s most critical regions in the fight against

18-0186211/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

international terrorism. We share the concerns about
the deteriorating security situation in the North and
in central Mali in particular, with its spillover effects
on Mali’s neighbours. Stabilizing Mali politically
and ensuring its territorial integrity will be crucial to
maintaining peace and stability in the Sahel region. In
the more than two and a half years since the signing
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
many of its provisions are still relevant. Building trust
and overcoming barriers between the Government
and other national stakeholders are essential to
facilitating the electoral process. In that regard, we
welcome the President of Mali’s assurances that all
the elections scheduled for 2018 — presidential,
legislative and local — will be held in accordance with
the constitutionally mandated deadlines. We should all
realize that organizing elections in such an unstable
security environment is challenging. Women should be
included in every decision-making body related to the
peace process, and I therefore welcome the compliance
of all the political parties with the 30 per cent quota
requirement for women in elective functions, as well
as the representation of young people on the lists
submitted for local and regional elections.
We encourage the Government of Mali to finalize a
strategy for developing northern Mali and formulating
a national emergency plan, as well as to adopt a timeline
for implementing the Agreement, as part of the trustbuilding efforts among the stakeholders in the peace
process. Constitutional revisions, security and justice
reforms and a process of centralization are only some
of the issues that must be addressed soon. We hope that
the relevant African political actors and institutions,
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the African Development Bank
and Mali’s neighbours will continue their mediation
efforts and support action aimed at effectively
implementing the Malian peace process.
As a member of the European Union (EU), Poland
welcomes the possibility of further cooperation with
MINUSMA in the context of the operationalization of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five (G-5) for the Sahel,
based on resolution 2391 (2017). Progress is being made
on efforts to conclude a technical agreement as soon as
possible between the United Nations, the EU and the
G-5 Sahel States.
In conclusion, Poland encourages all the parties in
Mali to continue further political dialogue. We would also
like to offer our full support to Special Representative
12/22

23/01/2018

Annadif and look forward to the conclusions of the
upcoming MINUSMA strategic review.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mr. Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali, to today’s
meeting, and congratulates him on his assumption of his
new role. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his briefing.
China appreciates and supports the people of Mali
and express its support to them in their determined
efforts to actively advance their peace process and
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali. Since the signing of the Peace Agreement,
the Government of Mali, signatory armed groups and
the relevant parties have made tremendous efforts to
implement it, which has produced ongoing progress.
China welcomes those developments.
Last October, a Security Council mission visited
Mali and held fruitful talks with the relevant parties.
At the same time, the current security situation in
Mali continues to worsen. Terrorist activity in Mali
and neighbouring areas is rampant, thereby seriously
affecting the peace process. The international
community should strengthen its efforts to support
Mali’s peace and reconciliation process and help the
country achieve security, stability and economic and
social development.
First, the international community should support
the Malian parties to implement the Peace Agreement.
China hopes that all parties to the Agreement will
continue to demonstrate political will, fully implement
the Agreement’s provisions and jointly commit
themselves to national development and reconstruction.
The interim administration in northern Mali should
provide basic services as soon as possible so that people
in the region can lead better lives and enjoy a peace
dividend. That will help to win the hearts of the people
for the peace process. The international community
should continue to help Mali to enhance its capacity
for self-development and governance, on the basis
of respecting Mali’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Secondly, the international community should
help the Government of Mali to enhance its capacity
in the areas of security and counter-terrorism efforts.
It should also provide assistance to the Government, at
its request, in order to enable it to respond to security
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

challenges throughout its territory and gradually
assume its responsibility for national security.
With regard to the rampant terrorist activity,
measures must be taken to adopt integrated steps to
respond through regional cooperation. China welcomes
the efforts of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) and other regional mechanisms and supports
the establishment of a Joint Force to independently
deal with regional security challenges. China urges the
international community to respect the leading role of
Africa in dealing with its own problems. China actively
supports countries of the region in their effort to
respond to the cross-border threats posed by terrorism
and organized crime.
Thirdly, the international community should
support the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
China thanks MINUSMA and Special Representative
Annadif for their tireless efforts to help to advance
peace and reconciliation in Mali. China hopes that
MINUSMA will continue to coordinate and cooperate
with the Government of Mali, respect Mali’s suggestions
and help the country strengthen its security capacity
and assist with disarmament and reintegration efforts.
MINUSMA is deployed in a complex and dangerous
environment. Its peacekeepers are being attacked
regularly, which is a severe safety and security issue.
There has recently been some improvement with
regard to MINUSMA’s equipment, but resources and
capacity are still lagging. We hope that MINUSMA
will continue to strengthen safety and security for its
personnel and enhance communication with troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and other parties
providing assistance in order to ensure that MINUSMA
has the necessary equipment and resources to
implement its mandate and defend itself. China thanks
the Secretariat for its timely briefings on MINUSMA
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We hope that it
will continue to advance relevant work in that regard.
China firmly supports Mali in its efforts towards
peace and development. China is an important
TCC in MINUSMA, with nearly 400 peacekeepers
deployed. We would like to work with the international
community to continue to support Mali’s peace and
reconciliation process and to make our contribution to
Mali’s achievement of peace, stability and development.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I wish to start by expressing
our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jean-

S/PV. 8163

Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Mali and on the activities of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We continue to
appreciate all of the efforts and sacrifices being made
by MINUSMA peacekeepers, who, as we all know,
operate under extremely difficult circumstances and
continuously face asymetrial attacks by terrorists. They
certainly deserve our support and solidarity. We are
also pleased to see the new Foreign Minister of Mali,
His Excellency Mr. Coulibaly. We look forward to
hearing his maiden statement to the Security Council.
We note with satisfaction that no ceasefire
violations by signatories to the greement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali have been reported since the
previous briefing (see S/PV.8062). It is also encouraging
that Malian political actors have been able to achive key
stabilization objectives for the succesful establishment
of interim authorities in all northern regions of the
country and the launching of mixed patrols in Gao.
Their discussions on finding a political settlement to the
ongoing intercommunal conflict is also worth noting.
On the other hand, the challenges that Mali faces in
relation to the deteriorating security situation remain a
source of serious concern. In northern and central Mali,
the repeated targeting of Malian civilian authorities by
terrorists clearly serves to indicate their destructive
intention to undermine State authority. We note from
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1105)
that the number of State officials redeployed to those
regions showed a decreasing trend because of the
prevailing insecurity. Reversing that situation is a
major challenge, as observed during the Council’s visit
in October. There is no doubt that there is need for
additional enhanced efforts to extend State authority in
all territories of Mali.
With regard to the expansion of social services,
the rehabilitation of health centres and schools and
the digging of bore holes in the regions of Timbuktu,
Ménaka, Gao and Taoudénni through domestic
financing is encouraging. We call on international
partners to help bridge funding gaps for the
rehabilitation of infrastructure and equipment, which
is a serious challenge that continues to affect the speed
of the recovery process in the country.
We appreciate that the Peacebuilding Fund
allocated a significant amount of resources to address
the deteriorating security situation in the Ségou

18-0186213/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

and Mopti regions, including for reconciliation and
conflict prevention.
Improving the logistics nightmare by opening the
Cotonou-Niamey-Gao supply route in order to service
camps in eastern and northern Mali, as well as the
new centralized warehouse facility in Gao, has been
a landmark achievement, as the whole process will
significantly improve the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and goods to the regions.
Strengthening of cooperation between the
Malian armed forces and MINUSMA in the
conduct of coordinated operations, logistics and
operational support, including information- and
intelligence-sharing, as well as planning and training,
remain critical. It is only through such cooperation
by MINUSMA and support by the United Nations
country team that the Sustainable Development Goals
in terms of a structural transformation of the economy
and consolidating governance and security capacity
can be achieved. In that spirit, we strongly support
efforts in addressing the root causes of conflict through
investment and job creation in the country.
The peace and security of Mali is closely linked
with that of the region. The Security Council’s
continued support to the Group of Five for the Sahel
Joint Force remains vital. We are pleased to note that
the Joint Force achieved initial operational capability
in October and has conducted its first operation — in
the tri-border area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the
Niger, from 27 October to 11 November 2017.
Finally, we welcome the renewed commitment
by the Malian parties to the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement and the understanding they have reached
on the revised timeline for the implementation of
the outstanding provisions by the end of March. It is
absolutely essential that the parties abide by their
commitment to respect the timelines. As agreed by
the Council, action must be taken with regard to those
who are found to be obstructing the timely, full and
effectively implementation of the Agreement. We
hope that the Council will send a unified message
to the Malian parties calling on them to fulfil their
obligations under the Peace Agreement and accelerate
its implementation.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to welcome to New York and
to the Security Council His Excellency Mr. Tiéman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
14/22

23/01/2018

International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali. His
presence among us today attests to the importance that
His Excellency President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and
his Government accord to the support of the Security
Council and the international community to achieve the
goals of stabilizing and normalizing the situation in the
country. We ask Minister Coulibaly that he accept our
sincerest congratulations on his recent appointment at
the healm of Malian diplomacy.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for presenting to us the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1105) on the current
situation in the Republic of Mali in a detailed and clear
manner — as is his custom. Today’s briefing is taking
place 12 days following the briefing (see S/PV.8156) by
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel. Both that
briefing, in which Mali was referenced as part of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and today’s
on Mali specifically, are cause for serious concern.
We therefore call on all political stakeholders in Mali
to continue to capitalize on efforts by the members of
the Security Council, including the visit to the region
in late 2017, as well as the facilitation roles of Algeria
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The Agreement Monitoring Committee designated
the Carter Center as an independent observer
responsible for overseeing the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In
resolution 2391 (2017), adopted on 8 December 2017,
the Security Council renewed its urgent call on the
parties to take concrete actions in connection with the
operationalization of interim authorities in northern
Mali, the establishment of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu, and to carry
out the launching of the cantonment, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, while also ensuring
women’s participation.
Meanwhile, as we observe the lack of significant
progress with great concern in implementing the
Agreement, terrorist groups continue their ferocious
attacks against MINUSMA and the French and Malian
forces in the central, southern and northern parts of
Mali. As a consequence of those attacks, almost 100
members of MINUSMA have lost their lives since
2013. Given the situation, our delegation believes that
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

all measures needed to strengthen MINUSMA must be
taken so that it can fulfil its mandate effectively, while
also improving safety and security for its personnel.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on all
the parties concerned and those signatory to the
Agreement, which was established two and a half years
ago, to make the effort necessary for its implementation
in a spirit of trust and with a shared vision of restoring
peace and security in Mali, as a prerequisite for facing
the challenges that the country will encounter in 2018,
namely, ensuring that progress is made in a critical
presidential election cycle scheduled for July and in
legislative elections scheduled for November, for which
a common political strategy will be needed, during
which the international community will have to provide
the necessary support for the Government of Mali to
achieve that goal.
In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends the work of the International Organization
of La Francophonie, which identified needs concerning
the elections with a view towards providing all the
necessary support, for which it dispatched the former
Prime Minister of Djibouti, Mr. Dileita Mohamed
Dileita, to Mali in November 2017 so that he could
define those areas for which La Francophonie could
provide support. We encourage La Francophonie to
pursue its work and raise awareness of other partners
so that they will join those efforts to ensure the support
needed for the holding of planned elections throughout
this year.
Notwithstanding the efforts aimed at supporting
our Malian partners, I reiterate how important it is that
the political will of all political actors prevail in putting
Mali first and implementing the Peace Agreement, as
well as taking advantage of all the support extended
to the country, including in combating terrorist groups,
establishing security throughout the country and
holding successful elections, which will begin a new
political chapter in the political life of Mali. MINUSMA
will play a key role during that new decisive phase in
order to ensure its successful completion.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for his briefing. I also join colleagues in warmly
welcoming the new Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Coulibaly. The leadership of Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and of Special Representative of

S/PV. 8163

the Secretary-General Annadif are truly worthy of
admiration, as are the dedication and perseverance of
the Mission personnel, in the complex environment
of Mali. I also pay tribute to all those who have paid
the ultimate price in their efforts to establish peace in
Mali, including the brave soldiers from the Kingdom of
the Netherlands.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been involved
in Mali for a long time. We are, and will remain,
committed to Mali. As needed, we will contribute
development assistance, diplomacy and our contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
According to a Malian proverb, all those who paddle
in the same boat have the same goal. More than ever
before, for the international community, it is essential
that all stakeholders be motivated by a common goal:
peace in Mali. The year 2018 will be pivotal for Mali.
Elections will be an important test in renewing the
legitimacy of Mali’s leaders. I would like to make three
points: on the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and on good governance.
First, concerning the peace process, swift progress
in the inclusive implementation of the Peace Agreement
is urgently needed. The timeline adopted last week was
welcome progress, and we must adhere to it during
the next two months. The Netherlands welcomes the
support and mediation provided by the international
community, the European Union and, especially,
MINUSMA, thanks to which we have been able to move
forward. Such international support remains crucial.
Furthermore, the appointment of the independent
observer and the Security Council’s sanctions regime
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) are vital components
for achieving tangible results in 2018. We must not
hesitate to use the tools provided by the sanctions
regime when they are needed to promote progress.
Secondly, concerning the G-5 Joint Force and the
capacity of MINUSMA, in a short time, the central part
of Mali has become a hotbed of terrorism, intercommunal
violence, illegal migration and organized crime, which
seriously threaten the stability of Mali, the broader
Sahel region and even Europe. The link between
terrorism and transnational organized crime is toxic in
its effect. It is for that reason that resolution 2364 (2017)
quite rightly calls upon Member States to combat illicit
activities, such as drug trafficking, trafficking in

18-0186215/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

migrants and trafficking in persons. Such challenges
deserve the Council’s full attention. The Netherlands
therefore welcomes the establishment of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. However,
it is important to ensure the rapid and sustainable
implementation of a sound regulatory framework in
order to prevent the occurrence of all human rights
violations. If we fail to guarantee respect for human
rights and human dignity, including with regard to
detention and judicial proceedings, we will raise a new
generation of terrorists, instead of eliminating them.
The crisis in central Mali exerts greater pressure on
the capabilities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
To date, it remains the peacekeeping mission with the
highest number of victims among Blue Helmets, which
only serves to underscore the crucial importance of
high-quality equipment and well-trained troops.
Based on our experience in Mali, the Netherlands
has learned the importance of a well-trained troop
contingent, quality equipment and operations that are
conducted with reliable information. We would like
to underscore in particular the importance of using
innovative force-generation methods, such as rotation
plans. We call upon the Secretariat to continue efforts to
ensure the availability and sustainability of equipment,
which is vital for the Mission’s effectiveness. We call
upon Member States to provide capacity to MINUSMA.
During our presidency of the Security Council in two
months’ time, the modernization of peacekeeping
operations will be the subject of our open debate on
28 March.
Thirdly, the coming year will be crucial as it pertains
to good governance. In that regard, Bamako will play
the most important role in providing sound leadership
that will allow for inclusive and transparent dialogue
ahead of elections. It is also important that women and
young people be fully involved in the implementation
of the Agreement. We commend the support provided
by MINUSMA for the holding of legitimate elections.
In order to enhance accountability and reconciliation,
it is essential that the Malian Government commit to
addressing human rights abuses and that it be supported
in that endeavour. The Malian parties must commit to
implementing urgent reforms, such as decentralization
and security sector reform, that address the root causes
of the crisis. We must prove to the Malian people that
there are peace dividends to be reaped.
16/22

23/01/2018

In conclusion, Mali and its people are faced with
myriad challenges. MINUSMA must therefore work
simultaneously at various levels. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is fully committed to Mali, peace, justice
and development. Nonetheless, it is only with the full
commitment of parties in Mali and of the international
community that we will be able to build sustainable
peace in Mali. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
remain the Council’s partner in that endeavour.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Coulibaly and,
on behalf of the United States, congratulate him on his
re-appointment. We look forward to working closely
with him.
As Ambassador Haley has said, it is our priority
to see enduring peace and security for all of Mali’s
citizens, as well as stability in the region. The
upcoming local and presidential elections should not
prevent or delay the Government and signatory parties
from pursuing the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We believe the Peace
Agreement remains Mali’s best hope of building a future
stable enough to support peaceful political transition.
The United States takes positive yet cautious note of the
September commitments reached by signatory parties
to not return to the battlefield. We are encouraged by
the absence of ceasefire violations and call upon all
signatory parties to take advantage of the momentum.
However, we are disappointed by the lack of
substantive progress on major elements of the Peace
Agreement. Interim authorities may be operational but
we have yet to see the fruits of effective governance in
the regions. Mixed patrols took place in Gao but do not
provide regular security back-up there. The continuing
standoff with regard to the criteria and numbers
of combatants to be submitted for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration reflect a serious lack
of trust among parties and suggest a need for additional
confidence-building measures.
In a country fraught with a growing regional threat
of violent extremism and transnational organized
crime, parties must adopt a renewed sense of urgency
to make progress together on key security provisions
of the Agreement. Mali’s collective security must be
arrived at collectively, with input and collaboration
among all parties. The Peace Agreement is the
signed road map for the parties to get there and the
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

Agreement’s deliberative bodies provide the forums
for debate on issues related to security and much more.
Unilateral endeavours outside those forums can lead to
misunderstanding and mistrust.
The parties’ most recent timeline for progress
agreed to earlier this month, in particular on the
security provisions of the Agreement over the next
few weeks and months, is a positive sign. However, if
there is still no progress by the Council’s next quarterly
meeting, we should be prepared to consider action
through the sanctions regime we unanimously adopted
last September.
Unfortunately, we must also take note of the
increased frequency, magnitude and lethality of attacks
on both United Nations and Malian targets, which rose
by one third as compared to the previous reporting
period. That unacceptable number of troop deaths
demands that we take a long, hard look at the current
configuration of the United Nations in Mali.
We hope the Secretary-General’s strategic review,
in tandem with the Council’s requests and resolution
2364 (2017) for a strategic prioritization plan for
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), will deliver
recommendations ahead of the Mission’s renewal that
will bolster mission security, elevate its most crucial
tasks and increase its operational effectiveness.
The Mission’s ongoing efforts to implement recent
recommendations to improve security, which are crucial
in the light of MINUSMA’s unacceptably high casualty
rate, will help in that effort. However, MINUSMA’s
chronic shortage of forces and resources remains a
matter of concern.
We must find an enduring solution for the most
critical capability gaps, such as those related to combat
convoy battalions, helicopters and armoured personnel
carriers. In the most dangerous of peacekeeping missions,
the United Nations, troop- and police-contributing
countries and all Member States must work together to
find a sustainable solution that will save peacekeepers’
lives and bring peace closer in Mali. The United States
applauds the efforts of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) in establishing its Joint Force. We are also
pleased to hear of the progress of the United Nations
in the development of the technical agreement. Pledges
already made and those to be made at the upcoming
23 February donors’ conference in Brussels will be
critical to reimbursing MINUSMA’s support through

S/PV. 8163

the Agreement. We would like to reiterate the Council’s
appeal in resolution 2391 (2017) that the technical
agreement be a temporary measure to bring about the
G-5 Sahel’s self-sufficiency and not adversely impact
MINUSMA’s operations and personnel.
The United States pledge of $60 million specifically
for the operationalization of the Joint Force will continue
through its robust bilateral security assistance for the
G-5 Sahel States, which totalled $1 billion in the past
five years. We also applaud the efforts of the United
Nations and the G-5 Sahel towards the development
of a human rights compliance framework as a key
component in respecting human rights and avoiding
alienating local communities in the battle against the
violence and recruitment of violent extremists.
The United States believes that even in a challenging
electoral year, with the continued regional threat of
terrorism, the parties to Mali’s Peace Agreement, along
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and its partners, can work
together to achieve concrete progress in the coming
weeks and months. That progress, or the lack thereof,
will be of paramount interest to the United States and
the Security Council. For the people of Mali, and for
Mali’s friends in the region and beyond, the stakes are
too high to delay progress any longer.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I too would like
to thank the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Mali (S/2017/1105), and
Mr. Lacroix, for so clearly setting out the report’s
findings during his briefing. I would also like to welcome
Foreign Minister Coulibaly to the Council today.
Let me start by echoing the words of my Ethiopian
colleague and welcoming the absence of violence
between the signatory parties in Mali during this
reporting period. Such conditions represent the best
chance for the successful implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
commend all the parties for their continued commitment
to a definitive cessation of hostilities and urge them to
remain committed.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the
Agreement and the ongoing dialogue between the
parties. We welcome the adoption of a revised timetable
at the meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee
last week. We strongly encourage all parties to reaffirm
their commitment to the Agreement and to work together
to implement the outstanding actions, as outlined by

18-0186217/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

them in the latest timetable, as soon as possible. It
has now been more than two and a half years since
the Agreement was signed. Like many other Council
members, we are frustrated by the lack of meaningful
substantive progress made in implementing it, and we
urge all parties to speed that up. The Malian people’s
patience is not infinite and it is incumbent on all parties
to deliver in good faith on the commitments they made
in the Agreement. We welcome the appointment and
participation of the Carter Center as an independent
observer on the Agreement Monitoring Committee and
hope it will lead to greater accountability for the delays
in implementation. We will work with the international
community to identify those who seek to block or
prevent full implementation of the Peace Agreement,
which now constitutes a basis for sanctions designations.
Elections are crucial to delivering on the promise
of decentralization in Mali and are central to the Peace
Agreement. It is disappointing that the local elections
have been delayed, and it will be crucial to ensure that
credible and fair local, presidential and parliamentary
elections are delivered in 2018.

23/01/2018

tackling terrorism, organized crime, people-smuggling
and human trafficking in the region. We welcome the
support of the international community in pledging
funding for that initiative. We recognize the importance
of MINUSMA’s technical and logistical support to the
G-5 Joint Force in helping it get up to full capacity, and
we encourage the swift implementation of a technical
agreement to enable this. We also reiterate the calls of
the Security Council for the implementation of a robust
human rights compliance framework by the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. We recall, however, that the Joint Force was
not created solely as a military force and that there is
no exclusive military solution to insecurity in the crossborder regions. G-5 cooperation with MINUSMA on
development and humanitarian efforts will be crucial.
In conclusion, we welcome the positive steps made
since the last Council meeting on this subject (see
S/PV.8062), including the reduction in violence, but
now is the time to see meaningful progress and action
to implement the Peace Agreement. That is the only
way to achieve lasting peace and security in Mali and
the region.

While we recognize that the best route to longterm stability in Mali is through implementation of the
Peace Agreement, the security situation today remains
poor and stabilizing the region is urgent. The United
Kingdom is taking action in three ways to contribute to
that. First, as our Prime Minister announced last week,
we will be deploying three British Chinook helicopters
to the Sahel and we will continue the support we offer
through our heavy-lift transport aircraft, increasing
the ability of French troops to manoeuvre efficiently
in their battle against extremists. Secondly, the United
Kingdom will provide an additional $17 million in
aid to the region, including lifesaving humanitarian
support for the hundreds of thousands of people
affected by epidemics, natural disasters and conflict.
Thirdly, we will continue to support the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and its mandate to support the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, including
the redeployment of reformed and reconstituted
Malian defence and security forces and the protection
of civilians.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his detailed
briefing, and we welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Tiéman Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali.

We look forward to the upcoming strategic review
of MINUSMA, which will be crucial to establishing the
future direction of peacekeeping support to Mali. We
also reiterate our support for the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and its objectives of

Despite those positives, we are concerned about
the delays in implementing the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, including the processes of
cantonment and security-sector reform. We welcome
the agreements reached by the Malian parties just last

18/22

We noted the signing on 20 September by the parties
in Mali of a memorandum on a cessation of hostilities
and the subsequent halt to the fighting between the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and the
Platform coalition of armed groups. We also took
positive note of the meeting held in Anéfis in October
on intercommunal reconciliation among the Malian
parties. Nor should we omit to mention the completed
establishment of all the interim administrations for all
five of the country’s northern regions. We hope that
Mali’s decision to postpone the municipal and regional
elections until April, taken with the active mediation
of Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, will enable a more inclusive
political process.

18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8163

week on renewing the timetable for implementing the
Algiers Agreement. Now they must be implemented.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.

Unfortunately, the security situation is now
deteriorating, not because of the Malian parties but
rather as a result of an increase in terrorist activity. We
are worried about the geographical expansion of their
activity, as well as the growing losses among Malian
security forces and Blue Helmets. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment of the countries of the region
to establishing the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel, and we participated in coming up with a
balanced Security Council resolution to support them
(S/2017/2391). However, we share the Secretariat’s view
that it will be impossible to stabilize the region without
full implementation of the Agreement by Mali’s
stakeholders. We should never forget that the collapse
of the security situation in the Sahel followed the 2011
foreign intervention in Libya that led to the de facto
dismantling of the Libyan State.

We join others in expressing appreciation to UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing and we welcome the presence of Mr. Тiéman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali,
in the Chamber. We endorse the Secretary-General’s
quarterly report (S/2017/1105), and wish to follow up
with some observations.

We welcome the strengthening of the military
and police components of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). We call on the Secretariat to take
additional measures to provide peacekeepers with
armoured personnel carriers and attack and transport
helicopters, as well as to improve the Blue Helmets’
security. We expect the Mission to finally reach full
operational readiness in 2018. Taking into account the
Malian Government’s position, we helped to adopt
resolution 2364 (2017), which defined the specific
tasks of MINUSMA in assisting the country’s security
forces. It is important to note that a memorandum on
this specific issue was signed in November.
Taking the wishes of Bamako into consideration,
Russia also supported the adoption of resolution 2374
(2017), which imposed a sanctions regime on individuals
who sabotage the implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We share the
desire of the Malians to speed up the stabilization of
the northern regions. At the same time, we would like
to warn once again that using the threat of sanctions
has its own collateral effects. We hope that that step of
the Security Council does not lead to the hostility from
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and
the Platform coalition of armed groups and increased
mistrust among the Malian parties. We also hope that
the established sanctions mechanisms will be used
only as intended, namely, to contribute to the political
process and the stabilization of the country.

The key step is to prioritize the full and inclusive
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We encourage all parties
to comply with the recently revised timeline
for implementing the remaining provisions of
the Agreement.
We believe that the assistance of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and of the international community
is crucial to ensure the transparent, fair and peaceful
conduct of the 2018 elections, as they, in turn, will
facilitate realizing the Agreement.
Likewise, it is necessary to establish, through
reform, the foundations for a stable rule of law,
reinforced by independent and accountable judicial
and security institutions. We also appreciate the
United Nations efforts to ensure accountability and
to fight impunity by the creation of the International
Commission of Inquiry. The genuine inclusion of
women in the peace process and in decision-making is
another important measure for enduring stability.
Kazakhstan is alarmed by the security and
humanitarian situations, which have significantly
deteriorated, and calls on international partners and
donors to provide the pledged humanitarian aid.
We believe that the upcoming strategic review of
MINUSMA will contribute to enhancing the Mission’s
capabilities and to improving the security situation.
We are pleased to note the strengthened
cooperation among MINUSMA, the African Union, the
European Union and the Sahel countries in combating
terrorism and other cross-border threats, and commend
international partners for mobilizing financial support
for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Finally, to address the root causes of conflict in
Mali, military operations must go hand in hand with
well-integrated and coordinated development efforts,
reinforced by sustainable funding. In that regard, we

18-0186219/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

fully support the projects of the Peacebuilding Fund,
as well as the Government’s multidimensional strategy
for the central regions, and call for the finalizing of the
development agenda for the northern regions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali.
Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to express the satisfaction of
the delegation of Mali in seeing, your country,
Mr. President — Kazkahstan — preside over the
Security Council for this month of January. At the
same time, I would like to congratulate Japan on its
outstanding conduct of the Council’s work during the
past month.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his tireless efforts to
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali and for the operationalization of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel — two guarantees for
lasting stability throughout the region.
I would like to express our warm congratulations to
the newly elected members of the Council, namely, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland,
and assure them of our full and complete cooperation
for the success of their work in the service of peace.
I would also like to express our deep gratitude to the
delegations of Egypt, Japan, Senegal, Ukraine and
Uruguay for their excellent contribution in the pursuit
of solutions to the emerging challenges related to, inter
alia, environmental degradation, irregular migration,
trafficking of all kinds, and the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism, as well as the repeated asymmetric
attacks targeting United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the fulfilment of their mandates.
In the same vein, I would like to congratulate
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his excellent presentation
of the report under consideration (S/2017/1105).
The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General and is pleased with the
quality of the cooperation between the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and the Government of the
Republic of Mali. That is demonstrated by the existence
20/22

23/01/2018

of mechanisms between the two parties to evaluate
the criteria for monitoring the implementation of the
Agreement, as well as in the area of human rights.
The Government of Mali fully supports the
Secretary-General’s assessment that undeniable
progress has been made at the political and institutional
levels and with regard to defence, security, justice and
economic development issues, as well as the provision
of basic social services.
We see that progress as a source of encouragement
for the Malian parties and for all our partners, whose
assistance and multifaceted support are particularly
appreciated. Without needing to recall the long list
of those developments, which reflect the will and
commitment of the Government of Mali, under the
authority of the Head of State, I would simply like to
underscore that such progress contributes to the gradual
restoration of peace and security in our country.
However, time is in short supply. I would like
to reaffirm the determination of the President of the
Republic of Mali to make every effort to accelerate
the implementation of the Agreement, for we remain
deeply convinced that there is no alternative to that
peaceful way for the lasting settlement of the complex
crisis in Mali. With regard to the prospects for 2018 in
connection with the implementation of the Agreement,
the Government of Mali will continue its efforts to
maintain the climate of increasing trust between the
signatory parties and to initiate a draft law on national
agreement in order to take up the proposals of the
national conference of understanding.
Anxious to meet the deep aspirations of all
our people, the Head of State has assigned the new
Government team the following four priorities:
completion of the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation; containment of the increasing
insecurity in the centre of the country; meeting social
demands by accelerating the implementation of the
presidential programme on urgent social needs; and
the organization of transparent, credible and peaceful
elections. As the Security Council can see, the
implementation of the Agreement is at the top of the
President’s priorities.
The initiative of the Head of State to launch the
adoption process for the law on national understanding,
in line with implementing the charter for peace, unity
and national reconciliation issued as the outcome of the
national conference of understanding, is also part of that
18-01862

23/01/2018

The situation in Mali

dynamic. That law seeks to rebuild the social fabric and
national unity and to strengthen reconciliation among
Malians by means of the exemption from prosecution
of all those involved in armed rebellion but who have
no blood on their hands; measures to restore calm
after accelerating the trials under way and granting
reparations to recognized victims; and a reintegration
programme for all those who lay down their arms and
publically and frankly commit to renouncing violence.
In that way, the Government will rapidly initiate a
draft law on national understanding that will reflect
those proposals.
It is because time is in short supply that, in addition
to that bold initiative of the President, the Government
will also seek to expedite the implementation of
political and institutional reforms, of the cantonment
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, security sector reform, as well as the return of
refugees and displaced persons.
I also mention the holding, on 15 and 16 January, of
the twenty-third session of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee in Mali, which welcomed and validated
the timeline of priority actions selected by the
Malian parties. The timeline provides a road map for
implementing key provisions of the Agreement that
are conducive to stabilizing the country and holding
forthcoming elections. The Committee urged the
Malian parties to respect the commitments made and
encouraged the international community to provide
support in that regard.
In order to ensure greater efficiency in the dialogue
among the parties to the Agreement, the Malian parties
have agreed to the future participation of MINUSMA
and the lead partner of the international mediation at
the meetings of the inter-Malian discussion mechanism
as observers. All the details of this timeline are annexed
to the updated memorandum on the actions undertaken
by the Government and were distributed as Security
Council documents.
One of the major challenges to the stabilization of our
country lies in meeting the political deadlines to come.
The sovereign decision of the Government of Mali to
postpone the elections, initially scheduled for December
2017, to 2018 is due to the concern for inclusiveness
and openness of the top Malian authorities with a view
to creating an environment that is most conducive
to holding those elections. I take this opportunity to
reiterate the commitment of the Government of Mali

S/PV. 8163

to organizing free, credible and transparent elections
within the constitutional deadlines and throughout the
national territory — taking into account the law on
gender so as to ensure the representativeness of women
in elected positions.
In addition, the Government is making every
effort to implement the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants.
In that connection, it should be recalled that, out of
the $50 million earmarked for the implementation of
the programme, the Government of Mali, despite its
limited resources, financed $10 million of its own funds
to supplement the $15 million dollars provided by the
World Bank, which I commend. I hope that, with the
support of other partners, the gap will soon be bridged.
In the same vein, I am pleased to report that the
National Security Sector Reform Council has already
prepared a road map for the finalization of the national
security sector reform strategy. In that connection, at the
latest meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee
both signatory parties undertook to finalize, before
2 February, the consensual criteria and quotas for the
integration of ex-combatants within the national army.
In addition to improving security conditions in
the northern regions of the country, the Government
attaches particular importance to the situation in
the central regions of Mali, particularly the regions
of Mopti and Ségou. Repeated attacks on civilians
and State officials undermine efforts to restore State
authority over the territory and hinder the provision by
the State of basic social services to our fellow citizens
in those regions.
This is a major challenge that the Government
intends to address through the rapid acceleration of the
effective operationalization of the integrated security
plan for the central regions, in order to guarantee the
peace of mind that would enable the effective return of
the administration to that part of the country, thereby
enabling children to go to school in peace and the
people to go about their business normally. Likewise,
the Government will immediately organize an inclusive
political dialogue on the security situation in the centre
of the country.
With regard to the human rights situation referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General under
consideration, I note that the establishment of a
ministry fully dedicated to human rights in successive
Governments illustrates the unwavering political will

18-0186221/22

S/PV.8163

The situation in Mali

of Malian authorities for the promotion and protection
of human rights. Despite the difficult situation in Mali,
the Government has committed itself to that task. I can
report to the Council that the Minister of Justice has
already given instructions to the judicial authorities
in affected jurisdictions to open investigations and
inquiries into allegations of human rights violations
set out in the report, including cases of forced
disappearances, arrests and arbitrary detentions. Those
efforts are possible thanks to the dynamic cooperation
of the Ministries of Justice and Human Rights with the
Human Rights Division of MINUSMA.
As for the humanitarian situation, it should be noted
that the Government of Mali is resolutely committed to
meeting the challenges related to the return of displaced
persons and refugees in optimal conditions; providing
access for people affected by the crisis to basic social
services, including education, health, nutrition, water,
hygiene and sanitation; and improving the livelihoods
and resilience of the people. Moreover, the Lycée de
Kidal was reopened for the school year 2017-2018 and
the State effectively returned in all the regional capitals
of the North and the main towns in the region.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations and to all other humanitarian actors
operating in Mali, which continue to provide assistance
to refugees, displaced persons and those left behind in
crisis-affected areas.
With regard to MINUSMA-related security, the
Government of Mali renews its request to strengthen the
operational capabilities of the United Nations Mission
in Mali so as to allow it to fully discharge its mandate.
For my part, I welcome the signing, on 8 November
2017, of the memorandum of understanding between
MINUSMA and the Government of Mali on the
Mission’s support for the Malian armed forces. We call
for the diligent implementation of the memorandum,

22/22

23/01/2018

with a view to creating the conditions for the restoration
of State authority throughout the national territory, in
particular by allowing the return of the Administration
and the defence and security forces to all northern
regions, including Kidal.
At the regional level, Mali welcomes the progress
made in the process of operationalizing the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel. I welcome the support
of the Council and of all bilateral and multilateral
partners for the Force.
While the Malian presidency will end in the
coming weeks, Mali remains fully committed to the
security and development goals of the Organization.
We must hasten the signing of the technical agreement
that we discussed here this morning and pursue the
mobilization efforts of all bilateral and multilateral
partners for this security project that is critical for the
Group of Five for the Sahel countries and, above all,
enhances all efforts made since the beginning of the
Malian crisis — especially in the context of the spread
of the terrorist threat.
In conclusion, I reiterate the thanks and gratitude
of Mali and its President to the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative in Mali and all MINUSMA
personnel, as well as to the troop-contributing countries,
the French force Barkhane, the European training
mission and the members of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, led by Algeria, for their tireless support for
the peace and stabilization process in our country.
The Government of Mali strongly condemns
all cowardly and barbaric attacks on national and
international forces and on civilians. I reiterate our
condolences to the families of all victims — civilian
and military, foreign and Malian — who have fallen
in the fight against terrorism on the field of honour in
Mali and elsewhere.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-01862
