S/PV.8801

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8801st meeting

Monday, 21 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Auväärt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2021/566)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16120 (E)
*2116120*

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First, on 10 May, the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity established a taskforce
to oversee and coordinate transitional justice and other
judicial reforms

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2021/566)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan; and Mr. Rajab Mohandis,
Executive Director and co-founder of the Organization
for Responsive Governance.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

21/06/2021

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/566, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council today on the
situation in South Sudan.

Secondly, on 11 May, President Salva Kiir Mayardit
reconstituted the national legislature and appointed
550 new members to that legislature. That, too, was a
distinct step forward.
Thirdly, on 25 May, President Kiir Mayardit,
with the Sudan’s Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok,
in attendance, officially launched the permanent
constitution-making process in Juba. Drafting a national
constitution is the quintessential act of sovereignty. It
expresses the highest aspirations of a nation and its most
cherished values. An inclusive national conversation
will lay a foundation for a social contract among the
citizens of the country and engagement in an inclusive
process will increase the probability of a durable peace.
In addition to those achievements, I would like
to inform the Security Council that on 17 March, the
Bentiu protection of civilians site was redesignated
as an internally displaced persons (IDPs) camp. The
freed-up peacekeepers are now deploying to more
remote locations, such as Koch and Mayom, enhancing
confidence and stability in areas of IDP returns.
Concurrently, the efforts of United Nations Mission in
South Sudan are ongoing to support the Government of
South Sudan in protecting displaced populations. The
last protection of civilians site in Malakal retains its
protective status owing to protracted insecurity in and
around the area. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) will continue to dedicate provide
physical protection, as required.

On 9 July, the Republic of South Sudan will mark
its tenth anniversary as an independent State. Council
members will recollect the jubilation 10 years ago when
we welcomed South Sudan to the family of independent
nations. The international community pledged its
support to South Sudan at that time. That commitment
remains as important and as urgent today as the world’s
youngest nation strives to deliver peace and security to
its citizens.

I am also pleased to report that, as commissioned
by the Security Council, a needs assessment mission
for the conduct of free and fair elections was conducted
from 6 to 26 May. A detailed report will shortly be
submitted to the Council. UNMISS is firmly committed
to supporting such elections. However, our work must
be aligned with that of South Sudanese stakeholders and
institutions and in partnership with the international
community, especially the African Union (AU) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).

I am pleased to report some progress in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan since our last report in March (S/2021/172).
Allow me to highlight three notable advancements.

Notwithstanding those markers of progress, the
overall implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
is progressing slowly. The formation of the legislature
remains incomplete. The constitution of the Council of
States and the nomination of the Legislative Assembly

2/19

21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Speaker is pending. UNMISS continues to encourage
the Government to continue with those processes,
while ensuring the adequate representation of women
and young people at all levels.
Similarly, the transitional security arrangements
remain behind schedule. The formation and graduation
of the unified forces is a critical element of South
Sudan’s transition, intended to prevent the intractable
relapse into conflict. Troops continue to suffer in
cantonment and training sites without adequate shelter,
health care and food. It is therefore important that
the precondition of a coherent command and control
structure be finalized, followed by the graduation of
the forces. The recent announcement by the Presidency,
that is, both the President and the Vice-President, in
support of the rapid implementation of chapter II of
the Agreement, including expedited graduation of
the new unified forces, is encouraging. It is our hope
that the commitments so publicly made will be duly
delivered on.
I would like to highlight the pervasive insecurity,
in particular intercommunal violence, which continues
to obstruct the realization of a durable and sustainable
peace in South Sudan. This year, more than 80 per cent
of civilian casualties were attributed to intercommunal
violence and community-based militias.
The UNMISS force continues to interrogate the
impact of its own response to those threats and its
commitment to being a highly mobile force in a highly
mobile posture. Deploying, often pre-emptively to in
conflict hotspots, the UNMISS force has maintained
a presence in strategic areas during the rainy season,
enduring extreme weather conditions. Those initiatives,
among others, have contributed to some reduction in
violence as compared to the previous year.
Nevertheless, weak or absent State governance
institutions throughout South Sudan have enabled
spoilers to exploit perennial communal and ethnic
cleavages. Entrenched insecurity has hindered the
cultivation of crops and has contributed to a vicious
cycle of livestock raiding. Many communities are
dangerously short of food supplies in places such
as Warrap, Lakes and Jonglei, to name but a few.
Meanwhile, in the Equatorias, the National Salvation
Front and the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces
remain engaged in intermittent armed conflict.
I recently led a delegation of representatives from
the AU, IGAD, the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and

S/PV. 8801

Evaluation Commission and the African diplomatic
community based in Juba on a visit to Pibor. We all share
a deep concern over the resumption of violence between
communities in the Greater Pibor Administrative Area.
While recognizing the importance for the Government
to take concrete steps to address the root causes of the
conflict, UNMISS is collaborating with local authorities
and communities in Jonglei to promote reconciliation,
secure the release of abducted women and children, and
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Worryingly, weakened rule-of-law institutions
and economic deterioration have led to increased
criminality and the targeting of humanitarian workers.
This year alone, four humanitarian workers have been
killed and millions of dollars of humanitarian supplies
looted or destroyed. The callous and indiscriminate
killing of humanitarian workers is deplorable. UNMISS
recognizes its own important contribution to creating
a safe environment for humanitarian partners, and the
Mission will continues to take the lead in promoting
and advocating for safe conditions that for the delivery
of life-saving services.
At the international level, UNMISS continues to
support the efforts of the Community of Sant’Egidio
to facilitate dialogue and calls on the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance to build
on the declaration of principles reached in Naivasha,
Kenya, earlier this year.
Upon my arrival in Juba, I had the opportunity to
meet with the President and senior Government officials.
I also travelled to all 10 states to hear directly from the
South Sudanese people. What has emerged from those
engagements is that local authorities want assistance
in tackling subnational conflicts and the widespread
presence of firearms. They require support and
infrastructure. The lack of infrastructure and extreme
flooding make access to many parts of the country
challenging. In other parts of South Sudan, long spells
of drought have compounded existing vulnerabilities.
In that regard, the Mission is committed, with the
United Nations Development Programme, to addressing
climate-related security concerns in South Sudan.
In the current mandate, the Security Council
recognized the imperative of peacebuilding and
directed UNMISS to advance a three-year strategic
vision around that imperative. In that regard, please

21-161203/19

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

allow me to share some thoughts on five key tracks of
that vision.
First, South Sudan is fortunate in having concluded
a multi-stakeholder peace agreement to guide its
transitional path. Making irreversible progress towards
peace requires tangible gains on implementing the
agreed transitional benchmarks. Those benchmarks
include significant markers regarding an enduring
national accommodation and lasting peace in the form
of elections, a new constitution and the establishment
of democratic institutions.
Secondly, we commit to making optimal use of one
of our distinctive assets — our uniformed personnel.
Through their assistance, the Mission intends to
enhance general security, contributing to a safe and
secure environment for political progress that would
also allow for the urgent and necessary delivery of
humanitarian assistance along with the conditions
necessary for refugees and IDPs to return and earn a
livelihood.
Thirdly, as critical as is the contribution of
uniformed personnel are civil and political engagements
at the grassroots level. They enable conditions and
arrangements under which neighbouring communities
can live together. Our widespread engagement
throughout the country has increased in scale and
importance in that area.
That also highlights the significance of the fourth
component — existing rule-of-law institutions. A
strong and well-developed justice chain is integral
to breaking the cycle of violence and holding peace
spoilers accountable.
Finally, UNMISS is keenly aware that all those
endeavours cannot be accomplished alone. Therefore,
the Mission intends to enhance collaboration and
promote greater coherence among the international
partners, including IGAD, AU, the European Union,
the Troika, neighbouring States and the diplomatic
community in general.
Enhanced engagements with the transitional
Government will also be key going forward. In
that regard, the recent establishment of a high-level
coordination forum with the Government to deal with
movement restrictions and operational challenges is an
important step.
In conclusion, I would like to share that we are
well placed to execute our mandate more effectively.
4/19

21/06/2021

I take this opportunity to recognize the efforts of our
uniformed and civilian personnel. As is the case for
all peacekeeping missions, working in the midst of
the coronavirus disease pandemic has been seriously
challenging. I am proud of our personnel, who have risen
to the challenge and continue to work away from their
family and often in austere and uncertain conditions.
On that note, I thank Council members for the
support we have received and will continue to receive.
The President: I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mohandis.
Mr. Mohandis: It is my distinct honour to brief the
Security Council on the eve of the tenth anniversary of
the independence of my country, the Republic of South
Sudan. I brief the Security Council with great humility
on behalf of my colleagues in civil society and millions
of South Sudanese citizens.
This briefing is looking at what has worked well,
why things did not work so well and what it means;
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan; what we may
expect moving forward and finally the way forward.
The declaration of the independence of South
Sudan was a great historic moment that gave hope to
South Sudanese on 9 July 2011. It brought a sense of
satisfaction, indicating the achievement of a lifetime
dream for which millions of our people across
generations had paid the ultimate price.
South Sudanese who were internally displaced
and those in refuge in neighbouring countries returned
to the country, settled and started rebuilding their
lives. Many built houses, produced their own food
and engaged in business. Local Governments were
operational throughout the country. In most parts of the
country, the movement of people, goods and services
was safe, day and night. The country had the resources
and international good will to support development in
all sectors.
The country had the legal frameworks necessary to
govern itself. The laws attempted to address historical
gender injustices and imbalances by providing for 25 per
cent affirmative action for women at independence,
which has now been raised to 35 per cent.
In summary, South Sudan at independence
had resources, institutions, professionals and legal
21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

frameworks to govern itself, deliver basic services and set
the country on the path to development. Unfortunately,
all that potential was quickly squandered, leading to
increased State fragility and failure.
I will mention and explain only two main reasons
that I believe hampered progress in South Sudan. The
first was ineffective political leadership and the second
was a neglect of principles that guided the struggle for
our liberation and independence. Those two sources of
our predicament as a country caused a meltdown in all
sectors, including politics and governance, security and
the economy.
Leadership is almost everything a country needs in
order to make progress. It defines a unifying national
vision to set a direction for a country, and provides the
means and creates the environment necessary for the
realization of the vision. That has been grossly lacking
in South Sudan since the country became independent
and, as it stands now, there is no clarity as to where the
country is heading.
South Sudan is a product of decades of liberation
struggles with clearly defined purpose and principles.
The text of the declaration of our independence recalls
that our people led a “long and heroic struggle for
justice, freedom, equality, human dignity and political
and economic emancipation”. The declaration further
states that we, the people of South Sudan, “resolved to
establish a system of governance that upholds the rule
of law, justice, democracy, human rights and respect
for diversity”. However, barely 30 months into our
independence, our country descended into multiple
civil wars and made it even more difficult to realize
these principles.
The net effects of the leadership failure and neglect
of the principles that guided our struggle for liberation
and independence are severe. The main effect is State
failure. The South Sudanese State is unable to perform
its basic functions of government, such as maintaining
security for itself and for all citizens, enforcing law
and order, delivering services to the population and
meaningfully resolving the multiple conflicts in
the country.
From our perspective as civil society, the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan provides a
reasonable framework for peace in our country. The
consistent and full implementation of the agreement
would enable the South Sudanese to restore peace,

S/PV. 8801

security and stability, address the humanitarian
crisis, reform and strengthen the effectiveness of
public institutions, deliver transitional justice, write a
permanent constitution and conduct credible elections
within the agreed implementation schedule.
As it stands now, however, 33 of the 44 months
of the original timeline of peace implementation have
elapsed without achieving key milestones of the peace
agreement. The transitional security arrangements,
which were supposed to have been accomplished in
the first eight months of the peace agreement, are
collapsing. Not a single soldier of the initially agreed
83,000 necessary unified forces has graduated.
Due to an acute shortage of food and medicines, the
forces have been deserting their cantonment sites
and training centres. The report of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism, presented at the seventeenth
plenary session of the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, held in Juba on 20 May,
indicated that there were only about 75 soldiers left in
a cantonment site that held had about 1,500 soldiers.
Needless to say, the functioning of all the security
mechanisms created by the peace agreement is severely
impaired due to lack of funds.
While implementation of the transitional security
arrangements delays and faulters, civilians continue to
pay the price of insecurity in the country. It may be
noted that women have been among the main victims of
this situation. In a nationwide public consultation held
with women in all 10 states of the country in March this
year, they strongly expressed concerns about the slow
implementation of the peace agreement and the poor
delivery of basic services, such as health, education
and water. They felt that the implementation of the
peace agreement’s affirmative-action quota of 35 per
cent would help increase the voices of women in public
decision-making geared towards the resolution of the
crisis in the country. However, most of the parties to the
peace agreement have not been meeting their share of
the 35 per cent representation in the institutions of the
unity Government.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) is the mediator and main guarantor of the peace
agreement. With regard to the peace agreement, the
effectiveness of IGAD appears to be diminishing. First,
almost all States members of IGAD have been more
involved in their internal issues rather than in regional
efforts over the past 12 months. Secondly, the South

21-161205/19

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudanese parties to the peace agreement have become
fairly immune to pressure from IGAD. For example,
IGAD called on them to dissolve Parliament within two
weeks, but it took over 10 months for that to happen.
The current situation of ineffective leadership and
deliberate neglect of the purpose of our independence
have kept our country in crisis for the past 10 years.
Without a change in this status, the future can only
be expected to remain the same or even worsen. The
volatile political, economic, security and humanitarian
situations are likely to remain mutually exacerbating.
This will further complicate the situation for civilians
in the country and stifle efforts to address the crisis and
restore peace, security and stability.
It is also highly likely that the civil population,
civil servants and political groups will become
increasingly frustrated. These public frustrations risk
causing instability of their own through demand for
improvement, especially in the security, economic and
humanitarian situations in the country.
IGAD member States are likely to remain occupied
in their internal national issues. This will only leave the
parties on their own, without robust regional oversight
and support.
Turning to the way forward and learning from the
past 10 years, South Sudan needs to chart a new and
clear path for the next 10 years.
First, South Sudanese who genuinely represent the
suffering masses need to be at the core of the solutions
moving forward and not just those who wield power by
the barrel of a gun. On this note, the full spectrum of
civil society — civil society organizations, faith-based
leaders, women, youth, professional groups and the
business community — must demand of the leaders in
the unity Government that they effectively discharge
their mandates, as stipulated in the Constitution and
the peace agreement or accept a reconfiguration of the
political order into one that is capable of meaningfully
resolving the problems in the country.
Secondly, the South Sudanese in their diversity
should demand and ensure that South Sudan is governed
on the basis of the principles that informed the struggle
for the liberation and independence of our country.
The Security Council should support the efforts of
South Sudanese from the categories outlined earlier in
any initiative to address the crisis in the country. The
support of the United Nations may take many forms.
6/19

21/06/2021

The Security Council may work jointly with IGAD,
the African Union and other actors in the international
community to raise extremely high the cost of wilful
sabotage of peace implementation, including the
perpetuation of violence, human rights abuses and
restrictions on civic and political space.
The President: I thank Mr. Mohandis for
his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Haysom for his briefing today
and congratulate him on taking on his new role. We
commend him, as well as the uniformed and civilian
personnel of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), for their work to protect civilians,
deter violence, support peacebuilding activities and
advocate for human rights, especially, as he noted, in
today’s even more challenging environment.
We greatly appreciate Mr. Mohandis’s briefing
from the perspective of civil society in South Sudan.
It is essential that the Security Council continue to
hear views such as his as we consider next steps on this
important issue. We also welcome the participation of
the representative of South Sudan in today’s briefing.
As Mr. Mohandis pointed out, in a few weeks South
Sudan will commemorate the 10-year anniversary of
its independence. We recognize the pledge by South
Sudan’s leaders to restore peace and stability in the
country through the implementation of the 2018
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, but we are concerned
with the slow pace of progress. We strongly encourage
South Sudan’s leaders to accelerate implementation of
the peace Agreement.
Last month, the Presidency announced appointments
for the Transitional National Legislative Assembly,
but members have yet to be sworn in. We urge the
prompt finalization of the Legislative Assembly and
the appointment and swearing in of the members of
21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Council of States so that they can fulfil their duties
as legislators.
We note the commitment by the South
Sudanese parties and stakeholders at last month’s
constitutional workshop to a process that includes
robust public consultation procedures to achieve a
constitution that reflects the will of the people. Now
the Transitional Government should deliver on that
commitment expeditiously.
The United States views free and fair elections
in South Sudan that are both timely and peaceful as
essential to sustaining peace and stability in the
country. We call on the Transitional Government to
develop the institutional and legal framework necessary
to ensure that elections are peaceful and reflect the will
of the people. That includes ensuring the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in elections.
The United States looks forward to the results of
the United Nations needs assessment on the electoral
process currently under way. Delays in implementing
transitional security arrangements in the peace
agreement remain a significant barrier to progress.
The Transitional Government must follow through
on its commitment to expediting the graduation of
the Necessary Unified Forces and the establishment
of a joint command. Claims by some South Sudanese
officials that the United Nations arms embargo prevents
the graduation of Necessary Unified Forces are
disingenuous. The arms embargo, which was recently
renewed by the Council, includes straightforward
exemption procedures should South Sudan require
arms and materiel necessary for implementation of the
peace agreement.
We call on South Sudanese officials to work together
with the Security Council on achieving the benchmarks
set out in resolution 2577 (2021), so that we can consider
appropriate adjustments to the sanctions regime.
The United States is also alarmed at the rise of
subnational violence in South Sudan, often involving
large and well-equipped armed groups, sometimes
with support from political actors and members of
the security services. We deplore the violence against
civilians which has been documented by UNMISS,
including extrajudicial killings and sexual and genderbased violence.
This year has also seen a significant increase in the
killing of and attacks on humanitarian personnel. We

S/PV. 8801

call on South Sudan’s leaders to take immediate and
effective measures to protect civilians, humanitarian
workers and internally displaced persons and to
hold accountable those responsible for attacks
on humanitarians.
The South Sudanese authorities continue to
obstruct ceasefire monitors and peacekeepers; that is
unacceptable. Ongoing restrictions on UNMISS patrols
and movements, as reported by UNMISS, violate
obligations under the Status of Forces Agreement.
Those restrictions put civilians and UNMISS personnel
at risk. We call on South Sudan’s leaders to cease
obstruction of the Mission and to view UNMISS for
what it is: a full partner in the process of transition.
The United States remains committed to the
people of South Sudan and to working closely with the
Transitional Government, the Security Council and
all stakeholders to enable peace and prosperity for the
country and for the region.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom for his briefing on the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) and the recent developments
in South Sudan. I also thank Mr. Rajab Mohandis,
Executive Director and co-founder of the Organization
for Responsive Governance, for his insights. I join
others in welcoming the representative of South Sudan
to today’s meeting.
Recent developments in South Sudan have been
encouraging. The Revitalized Transitional Government
of National Unity completed one year in February.
The peaceful cohabitation of various political parties
despite their having diverging views provides hope for
peace and stability in South Sudan. The beginning of
the constitution-making process recently is another
positive development. However, the Revitalized
Transitional Government has a huge task ahead, as
do the parties to the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The parties need to quickly reach a consensus
agreement on the duration of the transition and on the
time frame for holding the elections.
The reconstitution of a 550-member Parliament
and the setting up of a task force to oversee the
implementation of chapter V of the Revitalized
Agreement are welcome developments. We hope that
steps will be taken in the coming months to set up

21-161207/19

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and operationalize the Hybrid Court. The Community
of Sant’Egidio-brokered peace talks between the
South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance and
the Transitional Government, and the signing of a
Declaration of Principles between the Transitional
Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement–North demonstrates the commitment of the
South Sudanese leadership to peace.
On the security front, the ceasefire has continued
to hold, though localized violence has increased.
That calls for the early establishment of the unified
command of the military and the graduation of the
Necessary Unified Forces, which is a critical aspect
of the agreement. We appreciate the continuing
cooperation between the Transitional Government
and UNMISS in providing protection to internally
displaced persons in the camps where they are located,
which are now under the control of the Government.
We urge UNMISS to continue to move forward on the
transition of the Malakal protection-of-civilians site
as conditions permit and in line with its mandate. The
humanitarian needs of the population are increasing,
and the international community needs to step in to
bridge the huge funding gap of almost $1 billion.
We are concerned over violations of the Status of
Forces Agreement. The issue needs to be addressed
at the earliest possible time in a proactive manner
by the Transitional Government, working together
with UNMISS.
India has been one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to UNMISS since its establishment 10 years
back. Indian peacekeepers have made a significant
contribution to peace in South Sudan in implementing
crucial aspects of the mandate, including engaging
communities and helping them to successfully address
challenges concerning their daily needs such as
health care, drinking water and education. India has
contributed more than $2 million to UNMISS over the
past year.
It is a matter of immense pride that 135 of my fellow
countrymen serving as part of UNMISS were recently
awarded United Nations medals for their outstanding
performance in Jonglei state and the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area. I particularly salute the bravery of
the three Indian peacekeepers who were posthumously
awarded the prestigious Dag Hammarskjöld medal this
year for their courage and sacrifice in the line of duty.
Corporal Yuvraj Singh and Ivan Michael Picardo had
8/19

21/06/2021

served in UNMISS, and Mulchand Yadav had worked
with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
All three laid down their lives while serving in United
Nations peacekeeping missions last year.
South Sudan is on the cusp of a historic moment.
The youngest nation in the world will be completing
a decade of existence as a sovereign and independent
country in the next few weeks. Indeed, 10 years back
India joined other Council members in welcoming
South Sudan into the comity of nations, on 9 July 2011.
India is cognizant of the enormous challenges that
South Sudan is confronted with on its path towards
peace and stability. We also recognize the progress
made by South Sudan and its people, particularly in
the past three years. It is important to maintain that
momentum. We believe that at this transformative
phase South Sudan requires the wholehearted support
of the international community, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
United Nations.
India firmly believes that our actions in the
Council should enable the emergence of South Sudan
as a confident nation in order to realize the dream of
its leaders. Just as India and Africa fought colonialism
together, India will continue to support South Sudan
and its people in their journey towards sustainable
peace and a prosperous future.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative Nicholas Haysom and
Mr. Rajab Mohandis for their comprehensive briefings.
I welcome Mr. Haysom to his first Security Council
meeting as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan. We look forward to working
closely with him. I welcome Ambassador Akuei Bona
Malwal, Permanent Representative of South Sudan, to
our meeting today.
July 2021 marks the tenth anniversary of South
Sudan’s independence. Since the beginning of the year,
further progress has been achieved in South Sudan.
The Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity is functioning at the central and local levels. The
permanent ceasefire continues to be largely upheld.
We highly commend the recent reconstitution of the
Transitional Legislative National Assembly (TLNA)
of South Sudan. While the implementation of the
Peace Agreement remains limited overall, the progress
achieved so far should be fully recognized, especially
when the country continues to face the challenges of
21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, natural
disasters, intercommunal violence and food insecurity.
The Sudanese parties should be further encouraged.
In the light of recent developments, I wish to
highlight the following four points. First, we call on the
Government of South Sudan and the relevant parties to
step up the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
particularly in the formation of the Necessary Unified
Forces and the expeditious operation of the TLNA. We
note with satisfaction that the high female representation
in some federal and local agencies has met the 35 per
cent goal, and we call on the Government to further
facilitate women’s participation and leadership in the
transitional process, in line with the Peace Agreement.
We commend and call for continued efforts from the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and other international partners in
promoting peace and development in the country.
Secondly, it is critical to continue upholding
the permanent ceasefire. Furthermore, we urge the
Government of South Sudan to make greater efforts to
address the intercommunal violence to prevent possible
adverse impacts on the current transitional period. It
is important to tackle the root causes of this issue. In
this regard, more dialogue and confidence-building
measures should be introduced to promote trust
and reconciliation.
We commend and reiterate our support for the work
of UNMISS, particularly in the protection of civilians.
Viet Nam will continue to actively contribute to the
work of UNMISS and promote the participation of our
female peacekeepers in the Mission. We also commend
the continued efforts of the United Nations Mine Action
Service in mine-clearance and risk-education activities
in the country.
Thirdly, it is equally important to tackle the
increasing economic and humanitarian challenges
in the country. It is concerning that the high level of
food insecurity continues to affect more than half
of the population in South Sudan, including over
108,000 people at the catastrophic level. We call on the
international community to strengthen its humanitarian
assistance to and financial support for South Sudan, as
well as to provide further assistance to the country in
combating COVID-19 and accelerating the process of
vaccinating against the disease.

S/PV. 8801

Fourthly, Viet Nam reiterates its position that
Security Council sanctions should be only a temporary
tool for promoting conditions conducive to the
maintenance of international peace and security in
special situations. Sanctions should be lifted as soon as
the conditions are met.
We call on the Government of South Sudan and
relevant parties to fully implement relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2577 (2021),
with a view to moving towards the lifting of sanctions
measures. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, Viet Nam will continue to foster cooperation
and dialogue between South Sudan and the States of
the region in this regard, thereby contributing to longterm peace, stability and development in the country.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and
Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(A3+1). We take note of the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report (S/2021/566) and thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom and Mr. Rajab Mohandis for their briefings.
We welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan, our colleague
Ambassador Akuei Bona Malwal.
The A3+1 is fully cognizant of what South Sudan
has gone through for years and acknowledges and
commends the people of the country for the gradual
and cumulative progress they have made in the
implementation of the Revitalized Peace Agreement.
Notably, the reconstitution of the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly and the formation of the State
and lower levels of Government are paving the way for
adoption of laws and policies that will further accelerate
the peace process. The new administrative structures
will also be critical to efforts aimed at improving
governance, providing much-needed public services
and dealing with insecurity, including by resolving
localized intercommunal conflicts.
We salute all the parties for their continued
commitment to the permanent ceasefire, which has now
held for the last three years. We welcome the transition
of a United Nations protection-of-civilians site in
Bentiu, Unity state into internally displaced persons
camps under the responsibility of the Government of
South Sudan, as well as the return of refugees. These

21-161209/19

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

positive developments are indicative of increased public
confidence in the peace process and the country’s
nascent institutions.
The A3+1 is encouraged by the progress made under
the Rome initiative of the South Sudan peace process,
including the signing of the Declaration of Principles
by the Government of South Sudan and the South
Sudan Opposition Movement Alliance in Naivasha,
Kenya. We commend the Community of Sant’Egidio
and Kenya for their role and urge the parties to remain
committed to the process.
To speed up and sustain the peace process, it is
necessary to pay attention to a number of concerns. The
A3+1 remains concerned by the slow progress of the
transitional security arrangements. We acknowledge
the limitations and challenges of technical capacity and
resources. However, the parties can and should do more
to advance the training, graduation and redeployment
of the Necessary Unified Forces. Equally critical are
the implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, the finalization of the
Strategic Defence and Security Review Board, and the
establishment of proper management systems of arms
and ammunition stockpiles.
The A3+1 is also concerned at the dire humanitarian
situation. Food insecurity remains alarming and has
worsened owing to climate-change-induced challenges,
including drought and resource-based intercommunal
violence. The coronavirus disease pandemic has also
had the greatest impact on the most vulnerable.
We extend our appreciation to all humanitarian
agencies working in South Sudan for their assistance
and urge international partners to continue to extend
much-needed humanitarian support to address existing
shortfalls. We further urge the Government to take
appropriate measures to ensure the safety, protection
and security of all humanitarian aid agencies and
facilitate the delivery of assistance.
As a way forward, and in addition to the foregoing,
the A3+1 wishes to underscore three points. First,
as South Sudan celebrates its tenth anniversary,
peace consolidation through State-building and
institution-building must remain an utmost priority.
With enhanced institutional capacity at the State level,
South Sudan will be better positioned to address the
root causes of conflict. In this regard, the launch of
the permanent Constitution-making process envisaged
10/19

21/06/2021

under Chapter VI of the Revitalized Peace Agreement
is an encouraging step.
We commend the initiative by the United Nations in
partnership with the Governments of Sweden, Ireland
and Kenya to facilitate the conduct of the population
and housing census in 2022. This is not only a key
prerequisite for socioeconomic planning but also an
imperative for the political process towards the conduct
of the next general elections.
The A3+1 holds the view that South Sudan’s
engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
would be complementary to the efforts of the Council.
We therefore encourage South Sudan to consider
engaging the PBC for support for its programmes,
including the development plan and the Women, Peace
and Security National Action Plan.
Secondly, the A3+1 reiterates its call for the
increase of international support for South Sudan.
The peace process and the Revitalized Agreement is
complex and costly arrangement, requiring a strong
political commitment, as well as a considerable amount
of time and resources.
We are grateful for all diplomatic support, as well
as technical, financial and logistical assistance from
regional and international partners. We encourage
the international partners to continue to provide
the much-needed resources to sustain the peace and
stabilization efforts.
Thirdly, the A3+1 notes that the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is as old as South
Sudan, having been established on the eve of South
Sudan’s independence. Today, UNMISS is one of the
largest United Nations peace operations globally, with
an annual budget $1.17 billion. As the Mission marks
it tenth anniversary, it is important for the Security
Council to reflect on whether UNMISS has been
achieving its mandate.
The most important role of UNMISS must remain
to support the people of South Sudan in laying a firm
foundation for the achievement of peace, stability and
development. It is important that the Mission calibrate
its priorities to focus on giving concrete support to the
peace process, including technical and logistical support
for the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement.
To conclude, the A3+1 would like to reiterate its
appreciation for the continued efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Authority on Development and all international
partners in supporting the people of South Sudan on
their journey towards sustainable peace, stability
and prosperity.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
congratulate Mr. Haysom on his appointment as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan, and I thank him for his briefing today.
I also listened carefully to the briefing by Mr. Rajab
Mohandis. I welcome the representative of South Sudan
to today’s meeting.
Next month, South Sudan will celebrate the tenth
anniversary of its independence. We should take that
opportunity as a new starting point to redouble our
efforts to achieve the peaceful development of South
Sudan. The international community should continue
to provide constructive support. In connection with the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/566), I would like to
make the following comments.
Recently, South Sudan’s Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity has overcome numerous
difficulties. It has completed the restructuring of the
Transitional National Legislative Assembly, improved
the local government structure and started the
constitution-making process, as well as achieving other
significant progress. All parties in South Sudan should
continue to advance the preparations for the general
elections and the building of the unified forces and
implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan so as to
lay the foundation for lasting peace.
China calls on the opposition coalition to reach a
peace agreement with the Government of South Sudan
as soon as possible. The issue of South Sudan is complex
and the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
cannot be achieved overnight. The international
community should take the national conditions of
South Sudan fully into account, fully respect its
leadership in handling its own affairs, support the
African Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and other regional organizations in
playing an active role and provide targeted assistance
instead of merely exerting pressure. The Security
Council should respond to the AU’s appeal as soon as
possible by lifting the sanctions against South Sudan
and sending a positive message.
The ceasefire in South Sudan is generally
respected, while the security situation remains fragile.

S/PV. 8801

Intercommunal conflict, armed violence, competition
for land resources and other issues persist. China calls
on the parties concerned to respect their ceasefire
obligations and actively commit themselves to the
peace process. Intercommunal conflict is a longstanding issue. Efforts should be made to strengthen
early warning, adopt preventive actions and promote
intercommunal reconciliation in order to eliminate the
root causes of the conflict.
The international community should strengthen the
capacity-building of the Government of South Sudan and
enhance its ability to protect civilians. At present, South
Sudan faces great economic difficulties, significant
food insecurity, insufficient health-care capacity
and a huge shortfall in humanitarian assistance. The
international community should continue to increase
humanitarian assistance to South Sudan to combat the
pandemic and provide coronavirus disease vaccines to
help overcome the current difficulties.
China commiserates with South Sudan. We sent
more than 3,000 tons of food and other humanitarian
aid to its Government, as well as over 10 batches of
anti-pandemic supplies, and dispatched medical expert
teams. At the same time, we maintained our support to
South Sudan in infrastructure construction, education,
health care and other fields.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has played an important role in protecting
civilians, advancing intercommunal reconciliation and
promoting the implementation of the peace agreement,
which China commends. We hope that UNMISS will
strengthen its communication with the Government of
South Sudan, enhance mutual trust and properly resolve
problems, such as the restrictions on movement.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by joining other speakers in thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom for his
briefing and his honest analysis and reflections, as well
as for setting out a very action-oriented plan for United
Nations Mission in South Sudan going forward. It is
clear from what he said that there are some encouraging
signs at the higher political level, but that there are still
very significant challenges at the security, governance,
development and humanitarian levels. We also thank
Mr. Rajab Mohandis for his briefing. As he spoke, it
seemed to me that the solution to many of the challenges
in South Sudan lies in the title of his organization, the
Organization for Responsive Governance. Lastly, it is

21-1612011/19

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

also very good to see Ambassador Malwal here today. I
hope that he can carry the messages that he hears back
to Juba.
As many speakers observed, it has been almost 10
years since the world’s newest nation was born, and it is
good that, as the Security Council, we join in marking
that important milestone. The peace agreement that
we have again discussed today ended five years of
subsequent war, and we commend the compromises
shown in agreeing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. It is an important peace agreement, and it is
good to hear of some of the steps being taken towards
its implementation. However, reading the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/566) and listening today, it
is also very clear to us all that so much more remains
to be done, since the stark reality is that South Sudan
remains one of the world’s least developed countries,
with its short history dominated by violence, corruption
and subsequent suffering. Progress in implementing the
peace process has been too slow and too limited. There
are many reasons for that, but, again as we listened
today, it is clear that one of the reasons is an absence
of the political will necessary to deliver. We know that
there are billions of dollars in oil revenues but, despite
that, over the period the economy has significantly
contracted. We also know that natural resources — those
very oil dollars — are being exploited and public funds
diverted, leaving next to no money available to invest in
public infrastructure or services, as Mr. Mohandis set
out so clearly in his briefing.
We should also acknowledge that there is a significant
humanitarian crisis in South Sudan. Many more people
are in need of humanitarian assistance than at any time
since South Sudan’s independence. The great tragedy
of that is of course that the situation is largely humanmade and preventable. Today we therefore call on the
Government of South Sudan to take responsibility and
act in genuine partnership with the donor community
to address this crisis, because development assistance
is only part of the solution. The Government itself must
tackle corruption, drive economic reform and respect
the status-of-forces agreement. With 60 per cent of the
population facing acute food insecurity, obstructions
against aid workers are unacceptable, as is the killing
of humanitarian workers. We urge the South Sudanese
authorities to take action to guarantee the safety of those
delivering life-saving assistance and hold perpetrators
12/19

21/06/2021

to account. If they fail to do so, we need to consider
new sanctions listings.
We welcome the fact that the Security Council
recently renewed the arms embargo, the sanctions
regime and the Panel of Experts’ mandate. We
encourage the Government to take forward tasks on the
arms embargo benchmarks, including the establishment
of the necessary unified forces with a genuinely
unified command.
In closing, let me reiterate the call for South
Sudan’s leaders to use this milestone — this decade
anniversary — to reflect on the future they want for
their country and build on their commitment to working
together for the benefit of all, for the benefit of the
people they are there to serve. We know what needs to
happen, but all of it requires the Government of South
Sudan to take ownership. I will not repeat the list of
actions because my Kenyan colleague set out much
better than I could, on behalf of the African members
of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and
Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
the actions that we need to see. But I will say that what
we need is a renewed effort from the Government of
South Sudan, with support from the international
community, and that this can change South Sudan’s
course. We can ensure that the next decade delivers the
stability and prosperous nation its people deserve, so let
us seize that opportunity.
Ms. Juul (Norway): First, let me congratulate
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom on his new role. Norway wishes him all the
best in that important endeavour. I also thank him
and Mr. Mohandis for their briefings. I also welcome
the Permanent Representative of South Sudan to
today’s meeting.
As others have mentioned, this briefing is being
held on the eve of an important milestone for both South
Sudan and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) — the 10-year anniversary of the declaration
of independence on 9 July 2011. A decade is not a very
long time and as we reflect on the present and the way
forward, we should apply a long-term perspective.
South Sudan was born out of a long history of conflict,
displacement and civil war. Violence marked the lives
of generations. Basic infrastructure was lacking and
many institutions had to be set up from scratch. Indeed,
building a modern State takes time and is difficult.
The complexity of the situation is reflected in the
21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

three elements at the heart of the mandate of UNMISS:
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and State-building.
Norway’s support for the people of South Sudan has
been consistent for the past 50 years. We are a partner
in words and in deeds. South Sudan consistently ranks
among our top aid recipients, as we want to see a country
at peace with itself and in which all people — especially
the most marginalized — enjoy basic human rights and
benefit from the fruits of development.
There are important signs of progress. The
cessation-of-hostilities agreement is in large part
holding firm. And we appreciate all efforts to
implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and
welcome the reconstitution of the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly.
South Sudan has engaged constructively in the
Sudan’s peace processes, as witnessed by the Juba
Peace Agreement and ongoing negotiations between
Khartoum and the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth. We are impressed with the brave voices of local
civil society. They need to be heard, especially those
of young people. Independence means freedom and
democracy means respect for different opinions.
However, overall we are disappointed with the
current state of affairs. The people continue to suffer
too much from national political dynamics and the
absence of peace dividends, which continue to be the
most important drivers of conflict and displacement
in South Sudan. Subnational conflicts in turn create
food insecurity and lead to a vicious cycle, one made
worse when humanitarian workers are prevented
from — or worst of all attacked during — the provision
of life-saving assistance. Such attacks are unacceptable.

S/PV. 8801

The Government of National Unity should speed up
the implementation of the revitalized peace agreement,
including the 35 per cent provision for the representation
of women in Government positions. Work on the new
and permanent constitution should start in order to
ensure the inclusive and meaningful participation of
women and young people.
Political leadership is crucial to ensuring that the next
decade is better than the first. The current leader must
honestly assess where progress is lacking and learn from
those challenges. Support from the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and regional actors
is key to the successful implementation of the peace
agreement and an irreversible transition to free and
fair elections. We will continue to support IGAD and
regional actors to those ends.
I want to conclude by stating that Norway’s
commitment to the people of South Sudan remains as
strong as ever. We look forward to the day when the
promise of 9 July 2011 is finally fulfilled.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom for his briefing
on the developments in the situation in South Sudan.
We welcome Mr. Haysom in his first briefing to the
Council. We sincerely wish him every success at the
head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). We will certainly continue to support the
work of the Blue Helmets, who are an important part
of the international community’s efforts to stabilize the
situation in South Sudan. We also thank the countries
that contribute troops and police officers to UNMISS.
We welcome the Permanent Representative of South
Sudan to today’s briefing. We also listened carefully to
Mr. Rajab Mohandis.

Climate change also exacerbates conflict and
displacement in South Sudan, including through
unseasonal flooding that sharpens competition for
scarce resources. We are pleased to see that UNMISS
is now mandated to address climate change.

We believe that the formation of the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity in South
Sudan and the completion of the pre-transition
period have created the necessary conditions for
the country to move towards political stability and
national reconciliation.

Many issues need urgent attention. It is therefore
necessary to prioritize. The national dialogue made
specific recommendations in that regard. Yet,
comprehensive peace is essential. We call on all
parties to negotiate in good faith and reach inclusive
agreements. And humanitarian actors need immediate
and unfettered access to all areas of the country.

We welcome the measures taken by the South
Sudanese Government on key peacebuilding issues,
including the appointment of state governments and the
confirmation of county-level governing bodies. We also
note President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s recent decisions
to reconstitute the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly and the Council of States and to begin work

21-1612013/19

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on drafting a new constitution. We believe that only
a timely and full implementation of the agreements
reached will enable the parties to build mutual trust and
avoid repeating the mistakes of the past.
We expect that work will continue towards forming
unified armed forces of South Sudan. That work is
complicated by an acute lack of the necessary material
and technical equipment and financing.
We call on the non-signatories to the Revitalized
Peace Agreement to join the process of State-building.
We would like to highlight, in that connection,
the initiative of the Community of Sant’Egidio on
conducting consultations among the representatives of
the Government and the non-signatories. We hope that
those negotiations will produce concrete results.
We also welcome the mediation efforts of the African
Union and member States of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development towards providing assistance
in implementing the concrete provisions of the peace
Agreement. It is essential to maintain unity in their
approaches. That makes it possible to act in the spirit of
the principle of African solutions for African problems.
We must express our concern about the sporadic
intercommunal armed clashes in a number of regions of
the country. We strongly condemn any violations of the
ceasefire agreement and any acts of violence against
civilians, including humanitarian actors.
We are convinced that as the situation normalizes
in South Sudan, we will need to conduct a review
of the current sanctions regime in force against the
country. We expect that, with a view to easing the
arms embargo, the South Sudanese authorities will
manage to make significant progress in fulfilling the
benchmarks established by resolution 2577 (2021),
adopted on 28 May.
In conclusion, we would like to note that next month
we will mark the tenth anniversary of South Sudan’s
declaration of independence. The country currently
faces unprecedented challenges. Nevertheless, we
clearly see the aspirations of the citizens of South
Sudan to peace and prosperity. Much remains to be
done. We are convinced that the task of the international
community, including the Security Council, is to
provide the necessary support for Juba on the path
towards consolidating this young State.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to join my
colleagues in wishing Nicholas Haysom a very warm
14/19

21/06/2021

welcome and sincere best wishes in his new role — a
challenging one, no doubt, but one in which we have
every confidence that he will be able to deliver.
I also want to express my appreciation for the
remarks made earlier by Mr. Rajab Mohandis. I am also
very happy to see my friend and colleague, Ambassador
Malwal, with us this morning.
As many before me have remarked, in a few
short weeks we mark the tenth anniversary of the
independence of South Sudan. It remains incumbent
on all of us to ensure that the aspirations of the people
who believed so much in the power and potential of that
joyous moment can truly be fulfilled. We must work to
deliver above and beyond the promise of peace, which
will simply no longer suffice. Promise and potential
need to be translated into action and real change for the
people of South Sudan.
As the Secretary-General has noted, we have seen
some important developments in the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, such as the
recent reconstitution of Parliament. We hope to see the
signing of a memorandum of understanding with the
African Union on the long-awaited and much-needed
hybrid court. Yet we also have to acknowledge that
the pace of progress should be greatly accelerated,
particularly as the way forward is clearly signposted.
That includes the benchmarks incorporated last month
into the sanctions regime, setting out steps for the
potential future lifting of the arms embargo.
We continually hear that the ceasefire is holding
firm. That cannot be taken for granted. However, the
absence of active conflict is not enough and subnational
violence continues unabated. It is not enough when the
number of civilian killings is doubling year after year,
it is not enough when hunger is on the rise and it is
certainly not enough when the most vulnerable remain
subjected to the most heinous treatment, including from
those who are meant to protect them.
It is distressing to hear how challenging the
humanitarian situation has become, with South Sudan
now facing its highest level of food insecurity since
independence, exacerbated by conflict, climate and the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Ireland is also deeply concerned by the rise in
attacks on humanitarian workers. We appeal to the South
Sudanese authorities to better protect humanitarian
21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

personnel and ensure accountability for those killed.
The rise in violations of the Status of Forces Agreement
is completely unacceptable and must stop. We welcome
the meeting of 31 May but we need urgently to see
sustained efforts by the Government of South Sudan to
prevent and remove impediments to the work of United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Ireland remains seriously concerned by the dire
human rights and protection environment, which
continues to disproportionately affect women and
girls. The persistence of grave violations, including
conflict-related sexual violence against children,
also remains worrisome. We call on the Government
of South Sudan to hold perpetrators accountable so
as to break the recurring cycle of violence, provide
services for survivors and ensure justice and support
for them. We call again for the swift establishment
and operationalization of all the transitional-justice
institutions mandated by the peace Agreement. Steps
must also be taken to address the increasing subnational
violence and on that point I want to commend the
prevention and containment efforts of UNMISS.
Like others, we look forward to elections being
held in accordance with the Revitalized Agreement.
However, we strongly urge the incorporation of
appropriate constitutional guarantees on a consensual
basis in advance of any elections being held. Ireland sees
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
as a barometer of how a peace process is advancing.
We know from experience that women’s involvement is
critical to peace. Ireland deeply regrets that the 35 per
cent quota and the associated opportunity for women to
be involved in peacebuilding has not been met. We look
forward to the development of a new national action
plan on women and peace and security to enable South
Sudan to drive forward progress in that area.
We recognize that a vibrant civil society is also
essential for sustaining peace and we call for the
expansion and security of civil society space wherever
its diverse membership can thrive.
While we are cognizant of the issues that the country
is grappling with and the conscious effort required to
alleviate them, let me state here today, without agenda
or judgment, that Ireland believes in South Sudan as it
did in 2011 — it believes in the potential of its people,
in particular of its women and young people, as well
as in the pathways to peace that have been identified.
Furthermore, Ireland believes that further gains can

S/PV. 8801

and must be achieved. It is now up to South Sudan to
lead the way.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We extend a very warm welcome to Special
Representative Haysom on the occasion of his first
briefing to the Security Council as Head of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). We also
thank Mr. Mohandis for the insights he kindly shared
with us and we welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan.
As we glance back over the past decade just one
month before the tenth anniversary of South Sudan’s
independence, Mexico recognizes the commitment of
the transitional Government. However, we urge the
full and effective implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, which constitutes the basis
for progress, stability and growth in the country. The
reconstitution of the Transition National Legislative
Assembly and efforts towards the drafting of the
constitution undoubtedly represent significant progress.
We note with concern the selective application
of the provisions in terms of security regarding
transitional justice, accountability, reconciliation and
respect for the gender quota. Those are all pillars on
which the governance and stability of the country will
be built. The appointments to the Legislative Assembly
are not in line with the 35 per cent quota for women.
We reiterate that it is absolutely essential that we have
the full participation of women and young people in the
peace process.
South Sudan is facing its highest levels of food
insecurity and malnutrition since its independence.
Today 8.3 million people in the country are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Given those circumstances, it
is disturbing to see the resurgence of violence in parts
of Central Equatoria and the plundering and violence in
Tonj and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area, as well
as the ongoing attacks and threats against humanitarian
personnel. Those attacks left at least two humanitarian
workers dead in May. We call on the Government to
exercise its responsibility to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance by creating the conditions and
provisions necessary for security.
The protection of civilians continues to be one of
the main challenges facing the Government. As part
of the recent redesignation of the Bentiu protection-ofcivilians site, we strongly call on UNMISS to maintain

21-1612015/19

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a flexible posture when it comes to risk analysis,
contingency planning and its capacity to respond in
the event that the security situation in the recently
redesignated camp requires it, as indicated in resolution
2567 (2021). We also call for the redesignation of the
protection-of-civilians site in Malakal to be carried out
when conditions allow.
The support and cooperation of UNMISS in
protecting civilians remains vital, and we recognize
that having the capacity for rapid deployment to address
the changing situation on the ground is crucial. Mexico
deplores the impact of the violence, especially in the
Jonglei region, where in early May scores of people died.
Those cycles of violence undermine the inter-ethnic
peace process and chip away at the confidence between
parties. Accountability is one of the sore points in
the peace and reconciliation process. For that reason,
we call on the authorities to conduct the necessary
investigations and to prosecute the perpetrators of the
violence that is ravaging Jonglei. We also are concerned
at the reports of extrajudicial executions in Warrap.
The strengthening of the rule of law is one of
the key issues under the Revitalized Agreement. The
operationalization of and full compliance with the
agreement must be a priority if we are to put an end
to the cycles of violence and insecurity. Failure to
fully implement the agreement would be tantamount to
removing any guarantees of the future of the country.
I close with a special mention of civil society,
whose contribution is vital to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. Mr. Mohandis’s briefing today is a
reminder that the Council benefits when a plurality of
South Sudanese voices are heard, which always help us
to better grasp the situation on the ground there.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and Mr. Mohandis
for the very enlightening details he brought to
our attention. I also welcome the presence of the
representative of South Sudan, to whom we will soon
be listening very closely.
I wish to assure Mr. Nicholas Haysom of France’s
full support. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) plays a key role, especially in the
runup to the elections that are planned to be held when
the transition is complete, and must also support the
efforts of civil society, especially women and young
16/19

21/06/2021

people, who both play a key role in the future of
South Sudan.
France, like other partners, is concerned at the
ongoing violence, especially in the Malakal, Upper Nile
and Jonglei regions, and we call on the Government to
put an end to it. That means in particular that governors
and deputy governors must be given the resources
necessary to carry out their missions.
We call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law, and we, too, condemn the attacks
against humanitarian and medical workers. The
South Sudanese authorities must bring to justice the
perpetrators of those acts. The Security Council must
also further sanction the perpetrators of attacks against
humanitarian and medical workers. At a time when
humanitarian needs are tremendous, such workers must
be able to act without fear of being targeted and with
the full support of the Security Council.
The facilitation of humanitarian access also
requires guarantees of full freedom of movement for
UNMISS. However, the increasing restrictions we have
seen imposed over the past few months, especially
by the security forces, demonstrate disregard for the
Government’s obligations.
France also stands ready to make the Security
Council’s outreach to South Sudan more meaningful
provided that the goals set by the Council are met
by the Government. The Security Council recently
identified several options going forward. In March,
when the UNMISS mandate was renewed, the Council
expressed its willingness to adjust the staffing levels
and mandate of UNMISS. In May, when the sanctions
regime was renewed, we stated that we were prepared
to review the arms embargo measures. The Council set
clear conditions in that respect that must be realized by
the Government of South Sudan, with the support of
the Mission.
Here I wish to welcome the assumption by the
authorities of South Sudan of their responsibility to
ensure the security of displaced persons at former
protection-of-civilians sites. The reconstitution of the
Transitional National Legislative Assembly and the
formal launch of the constitutional process are also
signs of progress and must be further strengthened.
The bulk of the measures are still pending,
especially security-sector reform; the establishment of
unified forces under a unified command structure; the
21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

completion of the strategic defence and security review;
progress on the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration track; the proper management of weapons
and ammunition stockpiles; and the implementation of
an action plan for conflict-related sexual violence.
Lastly, the lifting of restrictions on UNMISS’s
freedom of movement and humanitarian access is among
the pending measures, as is the operationalization of the
transitional justice bodies, including the Hybrid Court,
provided for under the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, whose establishment was approved in February.
The President: I should now like to make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I want to welcome Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom to his first
briefing on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and also to thank Mr. Rajab Mohandis
for his presentation. I welcome the participation of
Ambassador Malwal, the Permanent Representative of
South Sudan, in this meeting.
In two and a half weeks, South Sudan will be
celebrating its tenth anniversary as a republic. We have
seen some positive developments over the years, but
there is still a long way to go to create a safe and stable
environment for the South Sudanese. We commend the
reconstitution of the National Legislative Assembly, and
we duly hope that every change towards implementing
the peace agreement will not simply be on paper but
will also be operationalized. Sadly, we are still falling
short of the 35 per cent quota for women’s participation
in the public sector that had earlier been agreed upon.
It is worrisome that too many political developments
have been delayed over the past years, including most
recently the elections that should have taken place in
2022 but are now postponed until 2023. Free, fair and
peaceful elections are essential for the peaceful future
of the country.
In the light of the upcoming elections, it is also
necessary that activists and human rights defenders
operate freely in South Sudan, not fearing for their
lives. We call on the Government and the African Union
to finalize the draft statute and the memorandum of
understanding for the hybrid court to be operationalized.
On the positive side, we are encouraged to see
that the ceasefire continues largely to hold. However,
localized violence has been rising in many parts of

S/PV. 8801

the country. Estonia is very concerned about the
extradition executions carried out in in Warrap state at
the instruction of the Governor. This sends a counterproductive signal about accountability in South Sudan
as a whole. We call on the Government to investigate
these killings and to do so in compliance with its
international obligations under international human
rights law.
Community-based militias are continuing their
violent manoeuvres in Jonglei, killing individuals and
looting and destroying property. The cycle of violence
cannot be stopped if the Government will not bring the
perpetrators to justice. It is necessary to end impunity
and enhance accountability. Otherwise, we risk seeing
a rollback on the few gains South Sudan has achieved
so far.
The Status of Forces Agreement violations grew
by almost three times, compared to the previous
reporting period. This hinders the work of UNMISS
personnel and leaves civilians without much-needed
help and protection.
I want to bring the attention to the humanitarian
situation. South Sudan is facing its highest levels of
food insecurity and malnutrition since independence.
Approximately 60 per cent of the population is likely
to face acute food insecurity. Humanitarian access
continues to be challenged by the resurgence of armed
conflict in some parts of the country and by attacks
on humanitarian workers. Last month, at least two
aid workers were killed. We strongly condemn the
attacks on clearly marked humanitarian vehicles; it
is unacceptable.
In conclusion, I want to thank Nicholas Haysom
and UNMISS for their valuable work in South Sudan
during the pandemic. I also want to convey my best
wishes for the Republic of South Sudan on its upcoming
tenth anniversary.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to congratulate you on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June. Our delegation stands ready to cooperate
with you, Sir, during your tenure. I would also like
to acknowledge and welcome the presence of Special

21-1612017/19

S/PV.8801

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom after
his taking up the leadership of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in Juba. I hope he
has been warmly welcomed and that he has settled in
comfortably and feels at home in South Sudan. The
assignment is challenging, but there is no better person
to meet those challenges than Special Representative
Haysom. In addition, I would like to welcome the
statement of my brother, Mr. Rajab Mohandis, from
Juba, who is representing civil society. I can assure him
that the people of South Sudan and the leadership of
South Sudan are as concerned about the situation in the
country as he is, especially as we are about to embark
on celebrating our tenth anniversary. His statement is
therefore welcome at this juncture.
Before I continue, I would like, on behalf of the
Government of South Sudan, to first express our
condolences to the families of the humanitarian
workers and the peacekeeping personnel who recently
lost their lives in the line of duty, serving the people
of South Sudan. I can assure the Security Council
that most of these attacks are being investigated, but,
unfortunately, when they happen, they happen far away,
where there is no Government control, as a result of the
delayed formation of State governance as part of the
Revitalized Peace Agreement. But the Government will
look into the matter, and wherever the perpetrators can
be caught, they will be brought to justice. Nevertheless,
I would also like Council members to understand that
the Government is not everywhere in South Sudan.
At this juncture, we actually do not have much to
say other than to inform the Council that we take note
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/566) and
that we hope that Special Representative Haysom will
be able to find an amicable way to resolve or manage
the challenges the leadership of South Sudan is facing,
as laid out in the report.
Before concluding, however, I want to assure
Council members that their views and concerns will
be conveyed, that in a way we are not in fact deaf to
what everybody is saying. As I mentioned earlier, the
statement of Mr. Mohandis reflects the concerns of
the people of South Sudan and the leadership of South
Sudan. We are not happy with the way things are, and
we would like to see the next 10 years better than the
past 10 years.
However, I would like to say three things, with
regard to some of the comments that have been made
18/19

21/06/2021

in the Chamber this morning. First, we welcome the
statement by the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well
as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1) and its
encouragement and recommendations to the leadership
of South Sudan. I would also like to say, with regard
to our dealings with the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), we are thankful to the Secretary- General for
the letter we have received stating that we are qualified
to receive support from the PBC. I would also like to
say that we have actually started negotiating with the
leadership of the PBC and that we are hopeful that by
mid-July there will be an initial meeting — a high-level
meeting — between the South Sudanese Ministers in
various sectors with the PBC in order to discuss how
the Commission can best help South Sudan and what
kind of projects we would like to present to it.
Secondly, with regard to benchmarks, all Council
members know that we are not happy with the embargo,
but we would nevertheless like to bring to the Council’s
attention the fact that we think that UNMISS and
Special Representative Haysom would have been the
best situated to negotiate the benchmarks because,
essentially, what is the Council really saying through
the benchmarks? Indeed, the benchmarks are the Peace
Agreement. If we implement the Peace Agreement, we
will meet the benchmarks. Therefore, if the benchmarks
are placed under the embargo, knowing that how we
feel about the embargo, the Council is not helping the
Special Representative fulfil his mandate. It would
have been better if the benchmarks were assigned to
Special Representative Haysom in his dealings with the
leadership of South Sudan. I thought I would bring this
point up today so that it can be reviewed in May of next
year, if, God willing, everything goes well.
Finally, I would like to say that the Government is
committed to signing a memorandum of understanding
with the African Union (AU) on the formation and
operationalization of the hybrid court. And I think that,
this coming July, a delegation from the AU’s Office
of the Legal Counsel will come to South Sudan to
meet with officials in our Ministry of Justice to try to
finalize this point and see how soon we can complete
this task. The Government is committed to it, and we
think the hybrid court will be constituted soon. It is not
imposed by the Peace Agreement, but Mr. Mohandis
will know that there are people actually waiting for
justice to be done and for perpetrators of events that
occurred during the outbreaks of war in 2013 and 2016
21-16120

21/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to be held accountable. We are therefore committed to
achieving that end, and we hope that as we go along the
international community will assist us.
We hope that, as we go along, the international
community will assist us. I think that the Russian
representative talked about the lack of capacity and
facilities in South Sudan. That is why we need the
international community to come in. I have repeated
several times that we do not need the money. I know
that people think we are corrupt, so let them keep
their money but bring us their expertise, bring as their
material and help us deal with this situation. I would
encourage that.

S/PV. 8801

Before I finish, I was in South Sudan three months
ago, where I saw that some countries represented on the
Council were really engaged with the people of South
Sudan in trying to build the capacity. Those countries’
missions there are engaged and trying to help the
situation. We are thankful for that and we encourage
the international community to do more.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultation.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

21-1612019/19
