United Nations

A/RES/71/210

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 January 2017

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 107

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2016
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/71/486)]

71/210. Promoting the implementation of the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its
twentieth special session 1 and the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the
Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development, 2
Reaffirming also the commitments contained in the Political Declaration and
Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, 3 adopted at the high-level segment of
the fifty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and by the General
Assembly in its resolution 64/182 of 18 December 2009, as well as the joint
ministerial statement of the 2014 high-level review by the Commission of the
implementation by Member States of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action,
adopted at the high-level segment of the fifty-seventh session of the Commission, 4
Recalling its resolution 68/196 of 18 December 2013, in which it adopted the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development and encouraged
Member States, international organizations, international financial institutions,
entities and other relevant stakeholders to take into account the Guiding Principles
when designing and implementing alternative development programmes, including,
as appropriate, preventive alternative development programmes,
Recalling also Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolutions 52/6 of 20 March
2009, 3 53/6 of 12 March 2010, 5 54/4 of 25 March 2011, 6 55/4 of 16 March 2012, 7
57/1 of 21 March 2014 4 and 58/4 of 17 March 2015, 8
_______________
1

Resolution S-20/2, annex.
Resolution S-20/4 E.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I,
sect. C.
4
Ibid., 2014, Supplement No. 8 (E/2014/28), chap. I, sect. C.
5
Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 8 (E/2010/28), chap. I, sect. C.
6
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 8 (E/2011/28), chap. I, sect. C.
7
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 8 (E/2012/28), chap. I, sect. B.
8
Ibid., 2015, Supplement No. 8 (E/2015/28), chap. I, sect. C.
2

16-22583 (E)

*1622583*

Please recycle

Promoting the implementation of the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

A/RES/71/210

Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 9
and stressing that the implementation of the United Nations Guiding Principles on
Alternative Development will contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals contained in the 2030 Agenda,
Taking note of the outcome of the international seminar/workshop on the
implementation of the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development
and the Second International Conference on Alternative Development, 10 which
includes conclusions and recommendations drawn from the field visits, th e
seminar/workshop and the high-level International Conference, and noting in
particular the alternative development projects, as seen in the field visits, focused on
enhancing individual and community resilience and recognized as an example of the
sufficiency economy philosophy of the King of Thailand,
Reaffirming that alternative development is an important, lawful, viable and
sustainable alternative to the illicit cultivation of drug crops, that it is an effective
measure to counter the world drug problem and other drug-related crime challenges
and that it is one of the key components of policies and programmes for re ducing
illicit drug production,
Expressing concern that the illicit cultivation of drug crops and illicit drug
production, manufacture, distribution and trafficking remain major challenges in
countering the world drug problem, and recognizing the need to strengthen
sustainable crop control strategies that include alternative development, eradication
and law enforcement measures, for the purpose of preventing and reducing
significantly and measurably the illicit cultivation of drug crops, and the need to
intensify joint efforts at the national, regional and international levels in a more
comprehensive manner, in accordance with the principle o f common and shared
responsibility, including by means of appropriate preventive tools and measures,
enhanced and better-coordinated financial and technical assistance and action oriented programmes, in order to tackle those challenges,
Noting with concern that overall financial support for alternative
development projects and programmes, including, as appropriate, preventive
alternative development projects and programmes, has accounted for only a minor
share of official development assistance and has rea ched only a minor percentage
of communities and households involved in illicit drug crop c ultivation at the
global level,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the outcome of the international
seminar/workshop and the Second International Conference on Alternative
Development, held in Chiang Rai, Chiang Mai and Bangkok, Thailand, and Shan
State, Myanmar, from 19 to 24 November 2015 and hosted by the Government of
Thailand, in collaboration with the Government of Germany, the Government of
Myanmar and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 10 as an input to
continued discussions on and enhanced implementation of the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development, 11 in accordance with national
legislation;

_______________
9

Resolution 70/1.
E/CN.7/2016/13, annex.
11
Resolution 68/196, annex.
10

2/5

Promoting the implementation of the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

A/RES/71/210

2.
Reaffirms, as highlighted in the United Nations Guiding Principles on
Alternative Development, that alternative development, as an integral component of
policies and programmes for reducing drug production, is an important, viable and
sustainable option for preventing, eliminating or significantly and measurably
reducing the illicit cultivation of crops used for the production and manufacture of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances through tackling poverty and prov iding
livelihood opportunities;
3.
Urges Member States affected by or at risk of illicit crop cultivation to
consider integrating comprehensive and sustainable alternative development,
including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development, into national
development policies and strategies, as appropriate, to address illicit crop cultivation
and its related socioeconomic factors, provide sustainable alternative livelihoods
and significantly contribute to the building of inclusive and just societies in order to
reduce inequality within and among countries;
4.
Urges Member States, when formulating and implementing
comprehensive and sustainable alternative development strategies and policies,
including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development strategies and policies,
to take into account the specific needs of the communities and groups affected by
the illicit cultivation of crops used for drug production and manufacture, within the
broader framework of national policies;
5.
Stresses that, when designing and implementing comprehensive and
sustainable alternative development programmes and projects, including, as
appropriate, preventive alternative development programmes and projects, the focus
should be on empowering and encouraging ownership by local communities,
including women, children and young people, taking into account their specific
needs, and on strengthening local capacities, as ensuring the effective cooperation of
all stakeholders in the entire alternative development process is crucial for the
success of alternative development;
6.
Also stresses that comprehensive and sustainable alternative
development, as one of the tools available for tackling the world drug problem,
increases the State’s presence, builds trust between communities and government,
strengthens local governance and institutions, promotes peaceful and inclusive
societies and, under Sustainable Development Goal 16, includes th e promotion of
the rule of law;
7.
Encourages further discussions on the relationship and potential links
between alternative development and the promotion of the rule of law by individuals
and communities, as well as on the wide range of challenges affecting the
livelihoods and well-being of people, in order to further develop measures to
address the root causes of such challenges;
8.
Encourages Member States to ensure the proper and coordinated
sequencing of development interventions when designing alternative development
programmes;
9.
Stresses that access to productive land and land rights, such as legal titles
to land for farmers and local communities, should be promoted and protected in the
implementation of comprehensive and sustainable alternative development
programmes, in a manner that is consistent with domestic law and regulations as
well as with the full participation of and in consultation with local communities;
10. Emphasizes that the marketability of products stemming from alternative
development programmes should be assessed before implementing such programmes
and, where applicable, alternative development products should be aimed at creatin g
3/5

A/RES/71/210

Promoting the implementation of the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

value-added chains to enable target communities to obtain higher incomes in order
to support sustainable livelihoods and substitute the income generated from illicit
crop cultivation;
11. Encourages the international community, including civil society, the
scientific community and academia, to work with affected communities to develop
recommendations focusing on specific alternative development strategies that take
into account demographic, cultural, social and geographical conditions and include
ideas on supporting and promoting new products;
12. Calls upon Member States to apply the United Nations Guiding
Principles on Alternative Development when designing, implementing and evaluating
alternative development programmes and projects, including, as appr opriate,
preventive alternative development programmes and projects, and calls upon
Member States with experience in this area to share outcomes, assessments of
implemented projects and lessons learned, thereby contributing to the dissemination
and application of the Guiding Principles;
13. Urges Member States to sustain political will and a long -term
commitment with regard to implementing alternative development programmes and
strategies and to continue to engage in awareness programmes and in dialogue an d
cooperation with all relevant stakeholders;
14. Urges relevant international financial institutions, United Nations
organizations, non-governmental organizations and the private sector to increase
their rural development support for regions and populations affected by or at risk of
the illicit cultivation of drug crops through long -term and flexible funding, and
encourages States, to the extent possible, to remain strongly committed to financing
alternative development programmes, including, as appropria te, preventive
alternative development programmes;
15. Encourages Member States to strengthen intragovernmental coordination
when designing and implementing alternative development projects and programmes;
16. Encourages all relevant United Nations entities and specialized agencies
to further increase their interaction with the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in order to support Member States in
effectively implementing alternative development programmes, incl uding, as
appropriate, preventive alternative development programmes, with a view to further
enhancing coherence and coordination within the United Nations syste m;
17. Encourages development agencies, donors and financial institutions, the
private sector, civil society and academia to share information, experiences and best
practices, promote research and increase efforts on the promotion of alternative
development, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development;
18. Recognizes that more research is needed to better understand and identify
factors contributing to the emergence of illicit crop cultivation and to improve
impact assessments of alternative development programmes;
19. Affirms that, in addition to estimates of illicit cultivation and other illicit
activities related to the world drug problem, indicators related to human
development, socioeconomic conditions, rural development and the alleviation of
poverty, as well as institutional and environmental indicators, should be used when
assessing alternative development programmes in order to ensure that the outcomes
are in line with national and international development objectives, including the
Sustainable Development Goals, and that they reflect accountable use of donor
funds and truly benefit affected communities;
4/5

Promoting the implementation of the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development

A/RES/71/210

20. Calls upon Member States and other donors to consider providing long term support to alternative development programmes and projects, including, as
appropriate, preventive alternative development programmes and project s, that
target the illicit cultivation of drug crops, in order to contribute to the sustainability
of social and economic development and poverty eradication, including through
enhanced development-oriented approaches that implement measures for rural
development, strengthen local governments and institutions, improve infrastructure,
including the provision of public services such as water, energy, health and
education in areas acutely impacted by the illicit cultivation of drug crops, promote
the participation of local communities, enhance the empowerment of people and
strengthen the resilience of communities;
21. Encourages Member States to maintain and strengthen international
cooperation to support comprehensive and sustainable alternative development
programmes, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development
programmes, as an essential part of successful crop control strategies, in order to
increase the positive outcomes of such programmes, especially in areas affected by
or at risk of the illicit cultivation of crops used for the production of narcotic drugs,
taking into account the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative
Development;
22. Encourages Member States with extensive expertise in alternative
development, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development, to
continue to share best practices, upon request, promote research to better understand
factors contributing to illicit crop cultivation and foster and strengthen international
cooperation, including cross-continental, interregional, subregional and regional
technical cooperation on integral and sustainable alternative development, which
includes in some cases preventive alternative development;
23. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary
resources for the purposes described above, in accordance with the rules and
procedures of the United Nations.
65th plenary meeting
19 December 2016

5/5
