S/PV.8813

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8813th meeting

Wednesday, 7 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Repkin
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2021/587)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-18134 (E)
*2118134*

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of condolences in connection with the
death of the President of Haiti
The President (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the members of the Security Council, I
would like to express our sorrow following the death
of His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse, President of the
Republic of Haiti. The members of the Council are
deeply shocked by the assassination of President Moïse
earlier today in Port-au-Prince and are concerned
about the health of the First Lady, Martine Moïse, who
was also shot during the attack. The members of the
Council express their heartfelt sympathy to the family
of the President and to the Government and the people
of Haiti.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2021/587)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and
Ms. Ritha Kibambe, Deputy Head of the Laboratory of
Medical Biology, Ngaliema Clinic, Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/587, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
2/19

07/07/2021

Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak to the Security Council today to
present the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/587)
on the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and to provide an overview of the
current situation in the country. I remain convinced that
despite the serious political, security, humanitarian and
development challenges, the opportunities I spoke about
in my most recent briefing (see S/2021/316) remain.
What clearly links the work to be done for the
political and security stabilization of the country to the
ultimate departure of MONUSCO is the Government’s
action plan, which includes elements of civilian
protection and the neutralization of armed groups, a new
disarmament, demobilization, community reintegration
and stabilization programme, as well as a commitment
to hold national and local elections in 2023.
The action plan, which was adopted by the National
Assembly on 26 April, also marked the inauguration
of the new Government of Prime Minister Jean-Michel
Sama Lukonde Kyenge. I am pleased to note that the
new Government has 15 women in ministerial positions,
representing 27 per cent of the total number of positions.
That is an increase of almost 30 per cent compared to
the previous Government. The appointment of the first
woman governor of the Central Bank of the Congo is
another example of that encouraging trend.
In that context and as requested by the Council,
I worked with the Prime Minister to set up a joint
working group between the Government, MONUSCO
and relevant agencies. The working group, launched
on 5 July, will support the implementation of the
Government’s action plan and oversee the Mission’s
transition process. Its first task is to generate a transition
plan to be submitted to the Council in September. Its
activities will also contribute to the implementation
of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework 2020-2024.
The implementation of the Government’s action plan
will largely depend on the mobilization of the necessary
resources, but also on the stability of the new political
coalition put in place in April — the Union sacrée de
la nation. In that regard, the political manoeuvring
in relation to the preparations and management of
the 2023 electoral process must not distract from the
implementation of the necessary reforms.
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I cannot stress enough the importance of ensuring
that the 2023 elections are held within the constitutional
timeframe. It is essential, indeed, that a national
consensus be reached on the appointment of the officials
of the Independent National Electoral Commission, and
then on the reform of the electoral law. I encourage the
concerned leaders of institutions, political parties and
civil society organizations to work together to reassure
the country of the credible and independent organization
of the 2023 electoral process. I also stress the need to
organize inclusive and peaceful elections, while being
aware of the potentially dangerous consequences of
a divisive debate on nationality. Encouraging the full
implementation of the Government’s action plan is
therefore the current focus of my good offices.
(spoke in English)
The security situation in the provinces of Ituri and
North and South Kivu continues to be of grave concern.
The eruption of Mount Nyiragongo on 22 May — which
led to a large movement of population — further
exacerbated existing vulnerabilities in areas surrounding
Goma. From the recent bomb explosions in Beni to
other continuing violence and Allied Democratic
Forces attacks in North Kivu, as well as intercommunal
tensions in Ituri and in the Hauts Plateaux in South
Kivu, civilians remain under serious threat from the
attacks of armed groups and the broader security
context. With the transition of the Mission depending
in large part on the return of peace and stability to these
areas, I believe that there is still much work to be done
before MONUSCO can responsibly withdraw.
The Mission continues to implement a holistic
strategy to address security challenges in the east,
which includes the maintenance of a robust posture to
counter threats to the civilian population. In this regard,
I am delighted to report that the reconfiguration and
enhancement of the Force Intervention Brigade (FIB) is
on track with the deployment of the Tanzanian quickreaction force in May and the arrival of the remaining
three quick-reaction forces in the near future. Similarly,
MONUSCO’s ability to gather relevant tactical
information has received a boost with the Tactical
Intelligence Unit now having reached full operational
capacity and the deployment of a Geolocation Threat
Analysis Unit detachment to Beni, North Kivu. This
has already resulted in enhanced sharing of intelligence
with the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) in support of operations against
armed groups. Furthermore, the FIB has, since

S/PV. 8813

Monday, been supporting training of 1,700 FARDC
troops in Ituri province, which we hope will contribute
to strengthened protection of civilians in the area.
However, military means alone cannot provide
lasting solutions. Without the restoration of State
authority, including local civil administration, a
meaningful security sector reform plan and the
reconciliation of local communities, we are unlikely
to see sustainable progress. The actions taken must
focus on the many social, economic and governance
needs, including in relation to managing the security
apparatus, addressing the underlying challenges of land
reform and improving governance of the mining sector.
The solution, again, rests in the hands of the
Congolese Government. I am happy to report that
the PDDRCS legal framework was enacted by the
President on 5 July and that MONUSCO has developed
a draft strategy to support its operationalization, with
particular focus on the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of national and foreign combatants
active in Ituri, the Kivus and Tanganyika, building on
lessons learned from past experience. The PDDRCS is,
in fact, one of the priority areas in the newly created
joint working group with the Government.
Concurrently, the Mission is also accelerating its
political engagement in conflict areas, which includes
my recent outreach in the context of the ongoing
intercommunity violence in the Hauts Plateaux of
South Kivu. In this province we are supporting the
Government in advancing a larger political process in
support of stabilization, which will include meetings
held between the governors of South Kivu and those
of neighbouring areas in Rwanda and Burundi, along
with forums bringing together representatives of
women, youth and the private sector. Leveraging our
regional partnerships, this is being done in cooperation
with the Office of the Special Envoy and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
The International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy will also continue to be an important tool to
support these efforts.
That is part of a broader, encouraging pattern of
reduction of political tensions between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours, which
has been a priority of President Tshisekedi since his
assumption of office. The relationships between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda and the
Democratic Republic and Rwanda, in particular, have

21-181343/19

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

turned a corner, as demonstrated by the recent meetings
between President Tshisekedi and President Museveni,
and subsequently with President Kagame. I am hopeful
that this can provide a springboard for broader political
stabilization in the Great Lakes region.
Towards that end, I am working hand in hand with
Special Envoy Huang Xia, as well as with regional and
continental partners, to find non-military solutions
to cross-border conflict drivers. The fourth meeting
of heads of intelligence and security services on a
comprehensive regional approach to neutralizing
negative forces — which was held in an open and cordial
atmosphere in Burundi yesterday — is testament to this
positive development.
The state of siege declared in North Kivu and Ituri
on 6 May remains in effect following parliamentary
approval for extensions. We continue to engage with
civilian and military authorities on the matter and have
underlined, in particular, the need for strict respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law
in the implementation of this measure. In this sense,
MONUSCO not only continues to provide support
for military operations in strict compliance with the
human rights due diligence policy, but also seeks to
ensure humanitarian access, the strengthening of the
justice sector and the opening of legal proceedings on
any human rights violations committed during the state
of siege.
(spoke in French)
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team
are working closely with the Government to develop
a set of benchmarks and indicators that will structure
the Mission’s transition plan. This is an opportunity
for the United Nations to refine the parameters of its
assistance to the Government’s peace and development
priorities and to take the necessary steps to gradually
draw down the Mission in clear conditions. In this
regard, in line with the joint strategy for the drawdown
of MONUSCO, the Mission ceased its activities in the
Kasai region on 30 June. Working in close collaboration
with international partners, the United Nations country
team is actively involved in the implementation of
programmes to support peacebuilding in line with the
priorities identified by the Congolese authorities.
(spoke in English)
In summary, I see the immediate primary tasks
before us as follows. First, there is a need to actively
4/19

07/07/2021

support the implementation of the Government’s
programme of action. Secondly, we must intensify good
offices encouraging the establishment of the conditions
that permit the 2023 elections to be held on time and in a
consensual manner. Thirdly, there is a need to intensify
political engagement in the quest for non-military
solutions to the conflict in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo while increasing pressure on armed groups
through a more active force posture. And, fourthly, an
agreement must be reached with the Government on
a set of conditioned benchmarks that clearly links the
Government’s programme of action to the adjustment
of the Mission’s presence.
I ask the Council’s full support in that regard and
thank members for their continued engagement towards
peace and stability in the country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Kibambe.
Ms. Kibambe (spoke in French): I am honoured to
address the Security Council about the challenges that
women have faced since the beginning of the pandemic
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I speak to the Council as a doctor; a social
actor, through the MEJI Foundation, of which I am
co-President; and as a woman.
Through a variety of experiences, we have been
able to identify the major difficulties encountered
during the management of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) crisis in both professional and family
spheres, difficulties that have made such management
into a titanic daily ordeal. Faced with those challenges,
women have risen up against COVID-19 despite their
small numbers, despite prejudice, despite the fear
of death.
I should like to tell the Council about those heroines,
those in the shadows who through their acts of bravery
have saved lives. We are telling these stories because we
believe that the international community, represented
here, can and must engage by way of strong resolutions
aimed at the improvement of our communities’ healthcare and educational systems.
Let me tell you about Godelive and Thérèse, who
are in charge of infection control and prevention in one
of the largest COVID centres in the city-province of
Kinshasa, the Ngaliema clinic. That centre experienced
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

large-scale contamination of health-care personnel
owing due to a lack of adequate protective equipment.
Ten nurses from the same unit were infected by an
unknown COVID patient. Women then mobilized, and,
in the space of a month, Godelive and Thérèse organized
cascade training for more than 300 hospital staff. After
that, we had no further serial contaminations at the
level of care units.
That makes the following clear.
First, we have not only serious problems with
personal protective equipment but also communication
problems in our communities. People do not believe in
the disease or in the vaccine. Many hide their symptoms
and do not respect social distancing. As a consequence,
the weakest are seriously affected and die.
Secondly, the major logistical challenges associated
with care management remain the availability of
oxygen, ambulances, medicines and heart monitors.
Those are scarce commodities for which we urgently
need support. Recently the World Bank took steps to
ensure that Riposte hospitals have oxygen. However,
we are seeing difficulties in the delivery of that oxygen
due to the shortage of empty cylinders and the lack
of transport vehicles. There is an imperative need for
intra-hospital oxygen production.
The most important lesson learned is that the
national health-care system is still precarious and
unable to absorb even the slightest shock. Women, who
are the majority of health-care personnel, have been the
most affected.
Women have not only been heroines but also
major victims of the pandemic. COVID-19 has had a
particularly negative impact on the quality of education
and on families. There are many examples of children
in difficulty. During COVID, neither parents nor
teachers were ready for distance learning. What level
of education are we giving our children, who are like
Martha, a 14-year-old girl in grade 3 of secondary
school, who no longer studies math although she is still
going to school? What future are we seeing for them,
and particularly for these girls?
The achievement of the fourth Sustainable
Development Goal of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is failing in our country. Urgent solutions
for improving the quality of education are needed that
would enable families to work with their children in
cooperation with schools, and schools to maintain

S/PV. 8813

ongoing contact with their pupils. That will be possible
if we introduce digital support for teaching.
In conclusion, if we want to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals at all, we have a duty to learn from
the crises we face and to develop innovative strategies
for sustainable development. We therefore hope that
the Council can provide genuine, effective and lasting
support in the management of the pandemic, in the
life of our communities and in the support provided to
women, who is at the centre of family life in Africa.
How? By strengthening the health-care system in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to ensure
access to quality care and the safety of health-care
professionals, by financing medical research for local
production of health-care items and medicines, by
strengthening the communication system and adapting
it to our people’ realities, and, finally, by creating
structures for educational support that are digitally
based beginning in primary school.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Kibambe for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Keita for her briefing. I also listened attentively to the
statement made by Ms. Kibambe as a representative of
civil society. I also welcome the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to today’s meeting.
The current political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is generally positive. China
welcomed the smooth formation of the new Government
and the adoption of its three-year programme of action.
That demonstrates the firm resolve of President
Tshisekedi and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to maintain national stability,
promote reforms, improve people’s livelihoods and
enhance governance capacity. China expects all parties
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to unite as one
and work together to achieve those goals.
The security situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains grim, with armed
violence continuing unabated. It is hoped that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will promote the disarmament, demobilization,
community reintegration and stabilization programme
so that militants will lay down their weapons,

21-181345/19

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

reintegrate into society and effectively tackle the root
causes of conflict and violence.
At the same time, countries in the region should
strengthen cooperation to jointly deal with the illegal
exploitation of and trade in natural resources and
prevent the cross-border movement of weapons,
ammunition and combatants.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes region have made
tremendous efforts to advance the resolution of security
issues in South Kivu and implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme in the
region. China highly commends those efforts and hopes
that the various entities of the United Nations system
will work closely together to support the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region
in responding comprehensively to the prevailing
security challenges.
Due to the effects of the volcanic eruption of
Mount Nyiragongo, the coronavirus disease pandemic
and the Ebola epidemic, the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing severe
challenges. China has noted that the International
Monetary Fund and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have signed a relevant credit
programme. We hope that the international community
will honour its commitments to providing assistance,
helping the Democratic Republic of the Congo rebuild
its economy, improving people’s livelihoods and the
humanitarian situation, and enhancing the country’s
capacity to respond to epidemics and natural disasters.
Under the leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Keita, MONUSCO has done a
great deal to stabilize the security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. China wishes to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries of
MONUSCO for their contributions. It is hoped that
MONUSCO will enhance its capacity to protect and
strengthen communication with the people so as to
increase their trust and support for MONUSCO.
MONUSCO has already withdrawn from the Kasai
provinces in accordance with its drawdown plan.
We hope that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government and the entities of the United Nations
system on the ground will jointly increase their input
into peacebuilding. Recently, a Malawi peacekeeper
6/19

07/07/2021

was attacked and killed. China strongly condemns
attacks against peacekeepers and calls for better
protection of the safety and security of peacekeepers,
in accordance with resolution 2518 (2020).
China will continue to support the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to achieve long-term peace and stability and is ready to
work with all parties to make positive contributions to
peace, stability and development in the country.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and
Tunisia — and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(A3+1).
It is with immense sadness that the A3+1 has
learned of the recent assassination of His Excellency
Mr. Jovenel Moïse, President of the Republic of
Haiti, and the injuries to his wife. We categorically
condemn that egregious act and look forward to a swift
investigation into the matter so that the perpetrators are
brought to justice.
We extend our heartfelt condolences to President
Moïse’s family, as well as the Government and the
people of Haiti and the Caribbean region, for their
great loss. Our prayers and thoughts are with our
Haitian brothers and sisters during this difficult period.
The A3+1 stands in solidarity with the Haitian people
and prays that President Moïse’s family, as well as the
Government and people of Haiti, find the strength and
fortitude to assuage their grief at this time of mourning.
The A3+1 thanks Ms. Bintou Keita for her briefing
on the activities of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and commends her for her commitment
to peace and security in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also thank Ms. Ritha Kibambe for
her briefing. We reaffirm our continued support for
MONUSCO’s mandate and its effective response to its
dynamic operating environment.
We remain concerned at the growing humanitarian
needs in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which are being worsened by the ongoing violence,
the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
the influx of refugees who fled the Central African
Republic in the wake of the December 2020 elections.
We commend the Government for its prompt
humanitarian response to the victims of the volcanic
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

eruption of Mount Nyiragongo. We call on all
international partners to provide the necessary
support to the 2021 humanitarian response plan for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The A3+1 recognizes the efforts of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in addressing
the incessant conflict, killings and grave violations
taking place in the eastern parts of the country, including,
as mentioned in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/587), the declaration of the state of
emergency in conflict-affected eastern provinces.
We support MONUSCO’s continued collaboration
with Government security agencies in combating
armed groups. We call for the intensification of joint
planning and tactical operations, including through
the deployment of intelligence and surveillance
capabilities for the early detection of potential threats
of armed group activity. We urge the United Nations
and financial and technical partners to support the
strengthening of the capacities of national institutions
responsible for the rule of law, security and inclusive
development in order to create safe environments
conducive to sustainable peace.
The A3+1 welcomes the establishment of a
disarmament, demobilization, community reintegration
and stabilization programme by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its programme
of action for 2021-2023. We further acknowledge
the establishment of a contact and coordination
group mandated to oversee non-military approaches
towards the eradication of hostile forces in the Great
Lakes region.

S/PV. 8813

that promote post-conflict reconstruction to prevent
potential relapse into conflict.
The A3+1 is gravely concerned by the increasing
incidents of violence, including sexual and genderbased violence against women and children, in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We strongly
condemn those egregious acts and call for redoubled
efforts to protect civilians and ensure that those involved
are brought to justice. The increasing indiscriminate
use of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) by armed
groups such as the Allied Democratic Forces to attack
civilians and United Nations personnel is alarming. We
call for stringent measures to deny such armed groups
access to components for the manufacture of IEDs.
The Government should continue strengthening
its justice sector to defend human rights in line with
its zero-tolerance policy on gender-based violence. To
that end, we call on international partners to provide
capacity-building support for the relevant State
institutions and agencies.
The A3+1 reiterates its commitment to the principle
of subsidiarity as enshrined in the letter and spirit of
the Charter. of the United Nations. We recognize the
significant role of regional organizations, in particular
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the African Union, in supporting mediation and
dialogue and promoting sustainable peace and security
and development.

The A3+1 stresses the importance of disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation programmes that offer
comprehensive solutions to ex-combatants and
strengthen the resilience of the communities that host
them. In that regard, we appreciate MONUSCO’s role
in disarming and providing reintegration support to
more than 120 disengaged Congolese ex-combatants.

The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as a whole have hardly benefited from their country’s
vast natural resources. Armed groups, militias and
other hostile forces are highly motivated to gain access
to those natural resources. The illegal proceeds are
then transported to multiple countries. In that way, the
natural wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has become a driver of conflict, violence and instability
rather than development and prosperity.

In view of the gradual exit and drawdown of
MONUSCO from the provinces of Kasaï, Kasaï-Central
and Tanganyika, it is critical to develop and execute
a transition plan that entails, inter alia, an efficient
transfer of important tasks such as early-warning
networks to the host Government. The transitions
should be complemented by peacebuilding efforts
focusing on socioeconomic development initiatives

If the Democratic Republic of the Congo is to know
sustained peace, the role of natural resources must
be turned around: first, by enhancing State presence
in mineral-rich areas; secondly, by ensuring that the
relevant agencies have the capacity to manage the entire
natural-resource extraction continuum; and thirdly, by
ploughing accrued proceeds into national development
and peacebuilding programmes.

21-181347/19

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

As such, we recognize the important role of regional
cooperation in promoting the implementation of the
provisions of the Addis Ababa framework agreement,
including implementing tools such as the Lusaka
Declaration to Fight Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources in the Great Lakes Region. We therefore
welcome the recent visits to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by the Heads of State of Kenya, Rwanda
and Uganda as positive steps in that direction.
We commend the efforts made by the Government,
with the support of MONUSCO and Member States, to
improve and strengthen its weapons and ammunitions
management to reduce the risk of the diversion of arms
to armed groups. We encourage continued regional
approaches, such as the Regional Centre on Small
Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region,
the Horn of Africa and Bordering States, to deal with
that menace. As the Democratic Republic of the Congo
makes progress in those areas, the Council should
give due consideration to the request for the removal
of the notification requirement for the Government to
acquire weapons.
In conclusion, we reiterate our steadfast support
for MONUSCO in its efforts to provide security for
the civilian population and support the strengthening
of key State institutions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We stand in solidarity with the Government
and the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in their quest for sustainable peace and
socioeconomic prosperity.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I would like to begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Bintou Keita, for her briefing on the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/587), as
well as Ms. Ritha Kibambe for her useful insights. I
also welcome the presence of the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at today’s meeting.
The political developments in recent months
illustrate the firm commitment of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s leadership, despite challenges,
to move forward on the reform agenda. We welcome
the formation of a new coalition and the installation of
a new Government.
Twenty-seven per cent representation of women
in the Council of Ministers is indeed a positive
development. The adoption of a programme of action
for 2021-2023 and legislation on the reform of the
Independent National Electoral Commission have
8/19

07/07/2021

also raised hopes. We are appreciative of the progress
being made towards the holding of elections in 2023.
The political climate remains vibrant, which is a
healthy sign. We hope that the ruling coalition and the
opposition will continue to work to reduce political
tensions and address the challenges that the country
currently faces.
The security situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains unstable. The activities
of armed groups, particularly the Allied Democratic
Forces, are a cause of serious concern. The civilian
population in the region has come under increasing
attacks in recent months. In that context, we take note
of the declaration of a state of siege by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in North Kivu
and Ituri provinces. We hope the military administration
and the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) will undertake operations to
neutralize armed groups in an effective manner and
address the grievances of the population.
We strongly condemn the killing of a peacekeeper
from Malawi and five civilians during an armed attack in
North Kivu on 10 May. I express condolences on behalf
of my Government to the families of the peacekeepers
and to the Government and the people of Malawi, as well
as to the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The perpetrators of the crime
must be swiftly brought to justice. It is unfortunate
and worrisome that crimes against peacekeepers are on
the rise and consequently we need to take urgent and
effective measures to protect the protectors.
We believe that the proactive regional diplomacy
practised by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will help to jointly address
the problem in the affected provinces in the east of
the country. The new disarmament, demobilization,
community reintegration and stabilization programme
and the implementation of reforms of the security sector
and justice system have found a place in the national
action plan.
We hope that the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will expedite those measures, in
addition to building the capacity of the FARDC. Only
concerted action can help find a long-term solution to
instability in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to stress that the primary responsibility
to fight armed groups lies with the FARDC, not the
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8813

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

so that parties can take steps to ensure peace and
stability in Haiti.

The humanitarian situation has further deteriorated
due to the pandemic and volcanic eruption of Mount
Nyiragongo. More than 9 million people are in need of
assistance. We hope that the glaring gap in funding for
the humanitarian response plan will be addressed by
generous assistance from the donor community.

We thank Special Representative Bintou Keita and
Ritha Kibambe for their briefings. We also welcome the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to today’s meeting.

I am happy to inform the Security Council that the
Indian peacekeeping contingent in Goma extended all
possible assistance to local authorities and the population
during the volcanic eruption. Indian peacekeepers
secured United Nations assets at the Goma airport and
positioned quick reaction forces.
They also played a key role in the activation of a crisis
control centre and aided and provided security to the
local population during the evacuation, as well as food,
water and medical assistance. Indian peacekeepers also
ensured safe accommodation and medical assistance
to evacuated United Nations personnel in Sake and
supported the safe return of the displaced population
to the area. The Indian level-3 hospital in Goma also
continued to function during the volcanic eruption.
Lastly, with regard to the joint strategy for the
progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO, we
look forward to receiving the transition plan in the
next report of the Secretary General, to be submitted
in September. The drawdown needs to be based on the
security situation on the ground and the capacity of
the FARDC to address challenges. With respect to the
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System, we call for its uniform implementation,
covering both the uniformed and civilian components,
including the leadership. There should be no selective
approach, holding only the troop-contributing
countries accountable for the effective performance of
the Mission.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): On waking up today, we were saddened to
learn about the news of the cowardly assassination
of the President of Haiti, Jovenel Moïse, in Port-auPrince. Mexico extends its deepest condolences to his
relatives and to the people and the Government of Haiti.
We categorically condemn the attack and violence in
all its manifestations. We hope that there will be a full
investigation into the incident. My country calls on all
parties to exercise restraint and condemn the violence

Since the Security Council’s last meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (see
S/PV. 8807) and as we have just heard, the country
has undergone a number of political and security
developments, such as the formation of the new
Government and the declaration of a state of emergency.
The humanitarian situation has also been affected by
the volcanic eruption of Mount Nyiragongo. All those
events have taken place alongside the phased drawdown
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO).
With respect to the political situation, Mexico
welcomes the formation of the new Government in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We acknowledge
efforts to increase the number of women in the Cabinet
and encourage the Government to continue along
that path.
With regard to security developments, we note the
recent extension of the state of emergency in North
Kivu and Ituri. However, despite those extraordinary
measures, we are concerned about the ongoing violence
in the east of the country. Mexico strongly condemns the
actions that resulted in civilian deaths and in some cases
also affected religious sites in Beni, as well as essential
services infrastructure such as the General Hospital in
Boga. We call for those incidents to be investigated and
for those responsible to be held accountable.
We are also concerned about the increase in the use
of improvised explosive devices. In that regard, we urge
the competent authorities to impose stricter controls on
the materials used in the making of those devices.
Turning now to the humanitarian situation, Mexico
thanks the various national authorities, humanitarian
actors and staff of the MONUSCO for their work
to provide support to those affected by the volcanic
eruption. We reiterate the importance of providing
unfettered humanitarian access and ensuring that the
protection of humanitarian workers is a priority.
Mexico also notes that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is now confronting its third wave of the

21-181349/19

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

coronavirus disease pandemic. We know that some
36,000 doses of the vaccine have been administered.
However, it is clear that that number is insufficient
for a country of approximately 90 million people. We
must therefore redouble efforts to facilitate universal,
fair, equitable and affordable access to vaccines for the
entire Congolese population. We must always bear in
mind that those vaccines are a public commodity.
With regard to the phased drawdown of
MONUSCO, we note the withdrawal from Kasai and
Kasai-Central provinces on 30 June. We thank the
Mission for its work in those provinces. Regarding the
transition process, Mexico welcomes the establishment
of the joint working group, comprising several entities,
including the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations. Such coordinated
efforts are essential for establishing benchmarks, which
will ensure the continuation of the phased drawdown of
MONUSCO and the transfer of functions to national
authorities. Mexico hopes that process will continue
and will include a diversity of voices from civil society,
in particular those of women and young people.
We also hope to see the establishment of
the
disarmament,
demobilization,
community
reintegration and stabilization programme, as well as
the implementation of security sector reforms. It is also
important to ensure the continuation of tasks in key
areas, such as caring for children in armed conflict.
That role is played by the MONUSCO Child Protection
Section, together with UNICEF. We must bear in
mind that the situation of children in armed conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is extremely
worrisome and that continuing efforts to address it will
prevent setbacks in that area.
In conclusion, Mexico believes that it is imperative
to ramp up activities to counteract narratives that incite
hatred among communities, which damage the social
fabric and lead to greater violence, including sexual
violence. Actions to combat hate speech must be an
integral part of all the political processes currently
under way in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Keita
for her briefing. It was very valuable to hear directly
from her what her priorities and goals are for the coming
months. We extend our continued appreciation to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
10/19

07/07/2021

its leadership and the troop- and police-contributing
countries. I thank Ms. Kibambe for sharing her sobering
perspective on the situation concerning coronavirus
disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
was very valuable to hear, as we look at the limited
progress that has been made and the actions that are
needed going forward.
Let me also join fellow Security Council members
in extending my deepest condolences to the family and
colleagues of Lance Corporal Kamanga, the Malawian
peacekeeper who was killed on 10 May while serving
in MONUSCO. The United States condemns all attacks
against peacekeepers in the strongest terms.
We welcome the inauguration of the new
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has a historic opportunity to deliver on crucial
reforms for the Congolese people. To that effect, we
also commend the appointment of a record number of
women to ministerial posts, which is a key milestone
for equitable gender representation. We look forward
to continued progress on the ambitious goals for gender
equity that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has set for itself.
As we heard today, insecurity and violence in
eastern Congo continues to threaten civilians and
imperil the fragile gains made by MONUSCO and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We remain deeply concerned about the deteriorating
security situation and the upsurge in civilian deaths
owing to attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, more
commonly known as the Allied Democratic Forces, and
other armed groups.
The extraordinary state of siege in Ituri and
North Kivu provinces continues. It is critical that the
security services respect human rights and guarantee
humanitarian access throughout all conflict-affected
areas. The Congolese Government has the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians and should
cooperate with MONUSCO as it implements its mandate
to protect civilians. In all stabilization efforts, we call
for transparency and coordination among regional
partners across the Great Lakes region.
The United States also welcomes the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s new
disarmament, demobilization, community reintegration
and stabilization framework and we encourage
continued steps to operationalize it, in partnership with
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

MONUSCO. The Congolese Government must also
work to continue advancing gender-responsive security
sector reform.
Confronting all the challenges in eastern Congo
requires the full implementation of the commitments
made under the African Union’s Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework to enhance security, end
impunity for human rights violations and abuses
and support stability. We reiterate the importance
of addressing the root causes of violence, including
by tackling the illegal exploitation of minerals and
trafficking in small arms and providing alternative
economic opportunities to former combatants and
their communities.
MONUSCO continues to play a key role in
stabilizing the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
reducing intercommunal tensions and helping minimize
the impact of military operations on civilians. We
are very encouraged by MONUSCO’s efforts to
implement Force Intervention Brigade reforms,
including the participation of new troop-contributing
countries and the deployment of new quick reaction
force units. But the real test will be in the Brigade’s
performance, especially in executing its protection of
civilian missions. We commend MONUSCO’s critical
contributions in the fight against impunity and its
support for the Congolese authorities in prosecuting
crimes involving human rights violations.
The United States remains concerned about reports
of rape and other forms of conflict-related sexual
violence. Women and girls remain disproportionately
impacted by violence, but they also play pivotal roles
in conflict prevention and resolution. We urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to promote women’s meaningful participation in the
security sector and we commend MONUSCO’s ongoing
efforts to support that important work.
We welcome the extension of the mandate of
the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the renewal of the arms embargo, the
travel ban and the asset freeze for another 12 months.
Those measures will continue to promote peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Group’s reporting continues to be of great value to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to the Security Council.

S/PV. 8813

Looking ahead, we welcome joint efforts by
MONUSCO and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to set benchmarks to guide
future transition planning and the transfer of tasks
to the United Nations country team in what will be
the eventual Government ownership that will allow
the peacekeeping mission to end. Strengthening the
capacity of local authorities, supporting communitylevel mediation and building rule-of-law and judicial
systems remain critical to ensure that MONSUCO’s
contributions underpin long-term stability and peace
for the Congolese people.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Let me also start by
offering my deepest condolences to the people of Haiti
for the killing of President Moïse and the wounding of
his wife. We strongly condemn those horrific crimes.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita and Ms. Kibambe for their briefings.
I would like to start by welcoming the establishment
of a new Government and the progress made towards
greater representation of women in public life. We praise
the commitments of the Government to implement
security and justice reforms under its programme of
action and facilitate the protection of women’s rights.
It is important that the implementation of those reforms
remain high on the agenda, together with preparations
for the 2023 elections.
We remain concerned that, despite the declared
state of siege, the security situation in the eastern
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
continued to deteriorate. It is worrisome that multiple
armed groups and State agents continue to perpetrate
human rights violations and abuses, including conflictrelated sexual violence.
In that connection, we condemn the recent attack
against the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), which took the life of a peacekeeper as
she served to ensure the protection of civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Accordingly, it is crucial to make further efforts
to address the root causes of the conflict, investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators of serious violations
and bring them to justice. In that regard, we commend
the work of MONUSCO, together with its Force
Intervention Brigade, for its continued support for the

21-1813411/19

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congolese authorities and civilians in providing area
security and combating impunity.
It is equally concerning that the number of grave
violations committed against women and children
remains very high. In that regard, we encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to pursue its commitments and efforts to prevent such
violations. We also express support for the work of
MONUSCO, UNICEF and other partners for their
engagement in preventing such violations.
The recent volcanic eruption has triggered
additional hardship for the Congolese people and put
more pressure on the dire humanitarian situation.
We praise the efforts carried out by the Congolese
authorities, MONUSCO, international partners and
humanitarian actors in response to the eruption’s
devastating effects. We encourage the Government
to continue its efforts in addressing the impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
In conclusion, we commend the progress made
on the implementation of the Joint Justice Reform
Support Programme. We also believe that it is crucial
to further advance the implementation of the national
strategy on the security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.
Lastly, we welcome the Special Representative’s
continued engagement with the Congolese Government
in the implementation of the joint strategy for the
progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO. It is
important that the transition plan include benchmarks
and indicators that are objective and measurable. The
Government should also ensure equal opportunities
for all stakeholders, including civil society and
humanitarian actors, who are engaged in the
development and implementation of this plan.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would also like to express
our shock and deepest condolences with regard to the
assassination of Jovenel Moïse, President of Haiti, and
the attacks on his family. Our thoughts are with his
family and the people of Haiti.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I also thank Special Representative Keita and
Ms. Kibambe for their informative briefings. Let me
start by highlighting some recent positive developments
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
installation of a new Government, with more women
than ever before, and the adoption of the Government’s
12/19

07/07/2021

programme of action for 2021-2023 both provide a solid
basis for advancement in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At the same time, we urge the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to ensure the meaningful participation
of all stakeholders in the current electoral reform
efforts. Norway expects everyone’s voice — including
civil society, women and youth — to be heard in this
comprehensive effort leading up to the Presidential
election in 2023.
While we welcome progress in some areas, we
cannot downplay the serious challenges related to
humanitarian needs and the protection of civilians
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. These challenges have only been exacerbated
by the eruption of Mount Nyiragongo in May.
The increasing violence, particularly in Ituri
province, and the growing number of violations against
children is deeply concerning. We condemn all attacks
and demand that all actors respect and comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. That also applies
to Ituri and North Kivu provinces, which are both
presently under a state of siege.
As the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) is drawing down, root causes of conflict
must be addressed. Security sector reform and a
sustainable framework for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration are crucial. Yet, these efforts must
also be complemented by initiatives to promote peace
and reconciliation, including through strengthening the
fight against impunity and providing greater support to
transitional justice and dialogue.
Peace and reconciliation efforts need to encompass
and empower the people affected by instability and
violence, including victims and survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence. In that regard, we commend the
extraordinary work of organizations and individuals,
such as Nobel Peace Prize laureate Mr. Mukwege, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
One thing is clear — innovative grassroots
initiatives led by local people are needed if we are
to reach a more stable situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Moreover, these initiatives
must be supported by the Council, the broader United
Nations membership and countries and organizations
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the region. My delegation hopes that the formation
of a new Government will create new momentum to
address those challenges.
We are at a turning point in terms of MONUSCO’s
presence. The complete drawdown from the Kasai
region this month will be followed by the exit from
Tanganyika province next year. Norway expects
MONUSCO to continue to work with all relevant
stakeholders to ensure that the drawdown remains
sustainable and that the stabilization and peacebuilding
priorities outlined in the mandate can continue. The
Mission’s role in ensuring the protection of civilians
must remain a priority, even with fewer troops. In
that respect, we are looking forward to receiving
the transition plan for MONUSCO in September, as
requested in resolution 2556 (2020).
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I would like to express our
condolences to the family of President Moïse of Haiti
and the Government and the people of Haiti for this
tragic event.
I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for her informative
briefing, and Ms. Ritha Kibambe for sharing her
insights. I also welcome the participation of the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
at today’s meeting.
Viet Nam welcomes the steps taken by the newly
formed Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure political stability in
order to carry out key reforms towards sustainable
peace and development. This support is evident in the
nearly unanimous endorsement of the Government’s
programme of action for 2021-2023 by the Parliament.
We also commend genuine efforts to increase the
representation of women in Government, resulting in a
10 per cent increase — from 17 to 27 per cent — in the
number of women members of the Government.
However, on the security front, my delegation is
troubled by the deterioration of the situation in North
Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri due to the increase of
illegal activities of armed groups, as well as persistent
intercommunal violence in those three provinces and
Tanganyika. Many innocent civilians, including women
and children, have fallen victims to those hostilities.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of attacks against
civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel,
and call for strengthening their protection.

S/PV. 8813

The humanitarian situation continues to be alarming
due to the volatile security situation, combined with the
impact of socioeconomic hardship, displacement, the
coronavirus disease epidemic and natural disasters, such
as the eruption of Mount Nyiragongo. The number of
people in need of assistance has risen from 15.6 million
in 2020 to 19.6 million this year — 21 per cent of the
population. In addition, 27.3 million people — 29 per
cent of the population — more than half of whom are
women, are facing food insecurity, 6.7 million of whom
are at emergency level 4 of the Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification.
We call on the international community to step up
its assistance to the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The current situation in the country
necessitates sustained and coordinated action to address
the root causes of instability. We encourage greater
concerted efforts to combat the illegal exploitation of,
and trade in, natural resources, as well as to promote
reconciliation among communities, address hate speech
and promote socioeconomic development and education.
To that end, we also support efforts to accelerate
activities relating to disarmament, demobilization,
community reintegration and stabilization programmes,
as well as security sector reform. My delegation values
the importance of intensifying regional cooperation
and the support of the international community in
addressing those root causes.
Stability in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region requires meaningful cooperation
among regional parties. We take note of the efforts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and countries of
the region in order to deepen cooperation in the fight
against common security threats. We also welcome the
engagement of President Tshisekedi in his capacity as
Chairperson of the African Union.
At the same time, it is critical that efforts to ensure
peace and development for the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo be coupled with the assistance of
international partners. We call for the continuation and
expansion of this valuable support.
My delegation strongly supports the important
role played by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) on the ground. With regard to
the Mission’s exit strategy, we take note of the close
coordination among the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Mission, the United Nations

21-1813413/19

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

country team and other partners to implement the joint
strategy for the progressive and phased drawdown
of MONUSCO.
Given the uncertainty in several parts in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is important to
preserve the prior hard-won achievements by ensuring
a conditions-based transition of the Mission in the light
of the evolution of this situation. A detailed transition
plan, as requested in resolution 2556 (2020), will be
greatly instrumental in evaluating our steps forward.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): Before I begin
my statement, I would like to join others and you,
Mr. President, in condemning the abhorrent murder
of President Moïse of Haiti. We send our condolences
to the people of Haiti and to President Jovenel Moïse’s
family, and our thoughts are with the injured first
lady. The Security Council should continue to closely
monitor developments in Haiti, and we must ensure
accountability for those responsible for the murder.
Let me begin my response to this morning’s briefing
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita for her comprehensive briefing and
also for her reassuring leadership. I would also like
to express through Special Representative Keita our
condolences on the killing of the peacekeeper, Lance
Corporal Chitenji Kamanga, who was simply trying
to protect civilians in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and do her job. It is appalling that she should
be murdered, and we condemn that. I am also very
grateful to Ms. Kibambe for her first-hand account
of responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
under what are very challenging circumstances.
I will focus my statement on three issues: the state
of siege in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the humanitarian situation and the transition of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
including the Special Representative’s action plan.
The United Kingdom continues to be concerned
by the deteriorating situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in North Kivu and
Ituri. The civilian population continues to withstand
appalling attacks by armed groups, and personnel from
MONUSCO and the Forces Armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) continue to lose
their lives as they attempt to tackle these armed groups.
Concerted efforts are required to combat the armed
14/19

07/07/2021

groups and, critically, to disrupt support from their
political and economic backers.
We take note in this context of the state of siege
announced by President Tshisekedi on 6 May, his
acknowledgement of the challenges the FARDC
need to overcome in order to tackle armed groups
effectively, and his commitment to addressing those
challenges. The manner in which the state of siege is
implemented will determine its success, and in this
regard, the United Kingdom urges the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure
that the state of siege remains transparent and time
limited and that it continues to be implemented
with full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. We also encourage the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to increase
FARDC collaboration, including joint planning with
MONUSCO, to ensure coordinated efforts to tackle the
armed groups.
On a related note, we look forward to the completion
of the enhancements brought to MONUSCO’s Force
Intervention Brigade later this month, and we also agree
wholeheartedly with Special Representative Keita’s
assessment that military means alone cannot provide or
guarantee security. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must focus on using security to
enhance governance.
As we have noted several times before, the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is dire. We remain concerned about the
ongoing threat posed by COVID-19, which makes, as
we have heard today, the country extremely vulnerable
to the health, food, security, social and economic
impacts of the pandemic. The United Kingdom has
provided almost $17 million to support the Democratic
Republic’s response to COVID-19 and the rapid, and
the effective response to the recent resurgence of
Ebola in North Kivu demonstrated the importance of
responding to health emergencies through local health
structures and leadership.
Turning to the transition of the United Nations
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United Kingdom welcomes the establishment of
the joint working group between the Government and
the United Nations. We encourage the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage
fully with MONUSCO and the United Nations country
team through the joint working group, including on
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8813

the articulation of a joint transition plan that is being
provided to the Council in September.

her informative briefing. We also carefully listened to
Ritha Kibambe’s briefing.

Effective coordination between MONUSCO
and the United Nations country team will also be
essential to the success of the transition, and we
encourage continued efforts to overcoming remaining
coordination challenges. In this respect, we welcome
the progress that has been made in Tanganyika to bring
MONUSCO, the United Nations country team, local
authorities and civil society together to operationalize
the provincial transition plan. In addition to the cessation
of MONUSCO’s operations in the Kasais, these joint
efforts in Tanganyika will enable MONUSCO to
focus its efforts on the three remaining provinces in
the eastern Democratic Republic heavily affected by
conflict. As MONUSCO’s transition progresses, it will
be important to reflect on the experiences and lessons
learned in provinces from which the Mission has
already departed.

Russia is closely monitoring the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where, owing
to constant attacks by armed groups in the eastern
provinces, a state of siege was imposed. In spite
of the efforts of the Government and MONUSCO,
illegal armed groups continue to maintain significant
military capacity.

Finally, we want to support Special Representative
Keita’s four objectives, which she set out so clearly in
her briefing this morning. We agree that it is critical
that the Mission support the Government in the
implementation of the Government’s action plan. We
agree that it is particularly critical that the elections in
2023 happen on time, and we encourage her to continue
to press for the right appointments being made now so
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo can prepare
effectively and deliver credible elections. We also
think that political engagement to ensure non-military
solutions to the violence should be pursued energetically.
Lastly, we agree that, where it comes to the transition
benchmarks, we need to see a clear connection between
the Government’s action plan and the results that drive
the transition process.
I again thank
her leadership.

Special

Representative

for

Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We learned with great sadness of the terrible
events that led to the assassination of the President
of Haiti, Jovenel Moïse. We would like to express
our sincere condolences to the Government and the
people of Haiti and to the family of the President who
was killed.
We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Bintou Keita, for

The main threat is represented by the Allied
Democratic Forces. We are very concerned about the
increase in the number of victims among the civilian
population killed by the guerrillas. That number,
according to the United Nations, just for the period
from March to June, has exceeded 500 persons.
It is very disconcerting that the Congolese
authorities have so far not been able to resolve the
problem of the illegal exploitation and export of natural
resources from the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which are used by illegal allied groups to finance
their activities.
At the same time, we note that thanks to the efforts
of the Government and MONUSCO, the situation in
Tanganyika province is gradually stabilizing. We are
also very concerned about the humanitarian situation,
which is a source of concern to us. The situation
has deteriorated owing to the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the incipient economic downturn in the
country, and it was further worsened by the eruption of
the Nyiragongo volcano, in North Kivu, which killed
more than 30 people and left over 20,000 homeless.
Thousands were forced to flee to neighbouring regions.
We would like to particularly commend the rapid
reaction of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, thanks to which most people were able to
return to their homes. We would also highlight the role
of the MONUSCO peacekeepers, including Russiancontracted pilots, who provided assistance to refugees
and victims.
We expect that the Government will manage to
retake control of the security situation, focus its efforts
on improving the humanitarian situation, contribute to
sustainable socioeconomic development, resolve the
border disputes with its neighbours and intercommunal
conflicts, and implement the programme for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. In that connection, we take note

21-1813415/19

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the approved Government programme of action
for 2021-2023.
At the same time, it is important to continue to work
on implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. One of the key pillars of that agreement
is expanding security cooperation among the countries
of the region. We also hope that the United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention
and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region will
contribute to normalizing the situation there.
We welcome the peacekeeping role of the leaders
of the States of the Southern African Development
Community region and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. We deem it very important for
regional players to continue their efforts to establish an
atmosphere of cooperation on that part of the continent.
In that connection, we welcome the peace initiatives
by the States of the region and in particular the readiness
of President Félix Tshisekedi, as Chair of the African
Union, to offer his good offices in resolving disputes
on the continent. We also welcome his meetings with
the Presidents of Uganda and Rwanda. During those
meetings, issues of establishing bilateral economic
cooperation were discussed as well as joint measures
against illegal armed groups.
Russia, including as a participant in the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region, intends to continue
to actively contribute to the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region as
a whole.
In conclusion, we would like to express our support
for the efforts of MONUSCO to stabilize the situation
in the country. We were dismayed to hear reports of the
protests against the presence of MONUSCO that took
place in early April in North Kivu as well as attacks
by the local population against the Mission. We believe
that such actions could derail its activities.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): We
are deeply saddened by the horrible assassination of
President Jovenel Moïse of Haiti and the attack against
his wife. We convey our sincere condolences to the
family and to the people and the Government of Haiti.
I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita and Ms. Ritha
Kibambe for their very relevant and enlightening
statements. Ireland is grateful to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
16/19

07/07/2021

Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for its very
important work and for the information provided today
on the situation with respect to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We also take note of the recent COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility delivery and hope that vaccine
doses will be distributed and administered throughout
the country.
The adoption of the programme of action of the
Union sacrée de la nation is a significant step forward
for change and reform in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the region. That could benefit
the Congolese people in various ways, including
by improving stability, strengthening governance
systems, empowering women, and combating impunity
and corruption.
We welcome the efforts of President Tshisekedi, as
Chair of the African Union, to deepen the engagement
of the African Union in the region.
It is vital to facilitate cooperation with other
regional organizations as well as neighbouring States
to respond to common threats, in particular the ongoing
threat posed by armed groups in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ireland commends the priority attached by President
Tshisekedi, in his role as Chair of the African Union,
to the participation of women in the peace process and
negotiations. We also commend his efforts to increase
the number of women in the Government. That trend
must continue to make true strides in terms of gender
equality and women’s empowerment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
(spoke in English)
Ireland is deeply concerned by the rising insecurity,
the deteriorating humanitarian situation and the
alarming levels of human rights violations and abuses,
including by State actors, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The recent volcanic eruption added to and indeed
illustrated the multiple and overlapping fragilities facing
the people of the country and the Great Lakes region.
President Tshisekedi’s declaration of a state of
siege demonstrates the scale of the violence in Ituri and
North Kivu provinces. We believe that it is important
that all actors respect human rights during this period.
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Grave human rights violations and abuses in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including by State
actors, remain of deep concern. Ireland welcomes
efforts to end impunity for such violations. However,
the continuing reports of widespread sexual and
gender-based violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence, highlight the fact that the authorities
must urgently redouble their efforts to hold perpetrators
to account.
The precarious situation of the most vulnerable
of all, children, affected by the armed conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo simply must remain
our focus. All victims and survivors deserve and must
have access to appropriate supports and to justice. The
Congolese Government has a clear responsibility to
ensure that this is provided.
In our briefings today we heard that the humanitarian
situation remains bleak, with a shocking 20 million
people now in need of assistance. The rates of acute
food insecurity, severe malnutrition and displacement
are deeply worrying.
The combination of conflict, natural disasters and
a resurgent COVID-19 pandemic clearly contribute
to that worsening situation. Ireland is continuing to
provide support to the people and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and has provided
more than €4.5 million in humanitarian assistance so
far this year.
It is vital that humanitarian workers can operate
freely and that humanitarian space be respected. We
condemn all attacks against humanitarian workers in
the strongest possible terms.
Looking forward, it is crucial that MONUSCO’s
gradual withdrawal be conditions-based and
undertaken in step with the security situation on the
ground. The implementation of the drawdown must
also include critical reforms in the justice and security
sectors, drawing on tools and actors right across the
fields of humanitarian assistance, conflict resolution
and sustainable development.
Ireland welcomes the establishment of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. We believe that it must be effective and
inclusive if we are to achieve lasting peace. Recent
events in Goma highlight once again the importance of
the links between peacebuilding, humanitarian action
and sustainable development.

S/PV. 8813

The operationalization and implementation of the
transition should take place with the participation of
all stakeholders, including United Nations agencies,
the Peacebuilding Commission, non-governmental
organizations and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is absolutely fundamental
that women and civil society groups be meaningfully
included in the planning, implementation and
monitoring of the transition. That offers by far the best
prospect for sustainability.
We know that MONUSCO is doing much to
address increases in attacks on civilians, which is at the
core of its mandate. Ireland is concerned, however, by
the growth in anti-MONUSCO sentiment in the form
of protests and attacks. Delivering on MONUSCO’s
mandate can succeed only with the support of the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
will continue, for our part, to support MONUSCO’s
important work.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, it is clear that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is at a critical moment in its
history. It requires the continued and deep engagement
of the international community and the Council in
particular. I wish to reaffirm the strong support of my
country, Ireland, for MONUSCO and for the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of France.
(spoke in French)
I thank Ms. Bintou Keita for her briefing. I also
welcome the commitment of Ms. Ritha Kibambe and
all the women on the front lines of the response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, there is an urgent need to put a stop to the
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The use of homemade bombs in Beni is a disturbing
development that France strongly condemns. In
view of the increase in attacks by armed groups, it is
imperative to refocus the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) on the eastern provinces. The
means to protect civilians must be fully mobilized by the
Mission, in conjunction with the country’s own armed

21-1813417/19

S/PV.8813

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

forces. The Force Intervention Brigade, which has just
been reinforced, must play its full part in that regard.
France welcomes the commitment of several
political leaders and members of civil society to fight
against hate speech, which incites intercommunal
violence. Hate speech must not be directed against
Congolese institutions or the international presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi recently stated in Beni:
“MONUSCO is here to help us stabilize the country”.
That brings me to my second point regarding the
rights and health of the population, which must be the
focus of our attention. Human rights must be respected
and civic spaces guaranteed, especially in areas in a
state of siege. The fight against impunity must continue
and, in that connection, France welcomes the conviction
of 21 Union des révolutionnaires pour la défense du
peuple Congolais fighters by the Ituri military tribunal
for crimes against humanity.
The humanitarian situation is deteriorating.
Ms. Kibambe recalled the magnitude of the population’s
needs in the face of COVID-19. As the country has
been hit by a third wave of the disease, France and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have just signed
an agreement for €9 million in order to strengthen the
health system in North Kivu. The attacks on hospitals
are unacceptable. Since the renewal of the sanctions
regime concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, those who carry out attacks against medical
or humanitarian personnel, as well as those who plan,
support or participate in such attacks, may be designated
and placed under sanctions by the Security Council.
Thirdly and finally, reforms are needed to
accompany MONUSCO’s transition. Stabilizing the
east of the country must remain a priority for the
new Government. That includes the implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
strategy, which should prevent a new cycle of violence.
The reform of the police and the army must continue.
A transparent and credible framework must also
be developed for the 2023 elections. Those efforts
will bear fruit only with the firm commitment of the
countries of the region. It is high time to provide an
operational translation of the consultation undertaken
between the stakeholders within the new contact and
coordination group. France welcomes that initiative,
which is in keeping with the spirit of the Addis Ababa
Framework Agreement.
18/19

07/07/2021

The withdrawal of MONUSCO from the Kasaïs
and then Tanganyika requires an increased presence
of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
The involvement of international financial institutions
and regional organizations will be essential. The
Peacebuilding Fund must also continue its work, in
coordination with the Stabilization Coherence Fund.
The future of the Congolese people, which we hope
will be marked by stability, development and peace,
depends on our continued commitment.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Before I begin, allow me to extend
my delegation’s sincere condolences to the Government
and the people of Haiti, as well as to the family of His
Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse, President of the Republic
of Haiti, in the wake of his assassination. We also wish
his wife, who was injured, a swift recovery.
Let me also congratulate you, Sir, on France’s
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/587), presented by his Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Bintou Keita, whom I thank
for her presence and sustained efforts for peace and
security in my country. I also welcome the presence of
Ms. Ritha Kibambe, Deputy Head of the Laboratory of
Medical Biology at the Ngaliema Clinic, and appreciate
her briefing to the Council.
Allow me to make several remarks on some of
the points addressed in the abovementioned report,
primarily on the political, security and human rights
situations, as well as on MONUSCO’s exit strategy.
The political situation during the reporting period
was characterized at the national level by the formation
of the Union sacrée de la nation Government, the new
political coalition that was set up on the initiative of His
Excellency Mr. Félix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That Government, led by the Prime Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Michel Sama Lukonde Kyenge,
21-18134

07/07/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

was invested by Parliament on 26 April following the
approval of its action programme.
With that approval and recognition by the elected
representatives of the people, the Government was
thereby authorized to implement the reforms included
in its action programme, particularly in the areas of
security, justice and administration, in order to improve
the living conditions of the population and achieve
sustainable development in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At the level of regional cooperation, the Head of
State is pursuing his efforts to normalize relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
neighbouring countries, both in the context of economic
integration and in the quest for peace and security in
the region. In that context, it is appropriate to note,
in particular, the June signing of a memorandum of
understanding between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda on locating Ugandan Allied
Democratic Forces rebels, cross-border trade between
the two countries and construction of a road from
Uganda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through Beni, inter alia. Three cooperation agreements
were also signed between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, including an agreement on the
promotion and protection of investments.
On the security front, news in the country was
dominated by the establishment of a state of emergency
in the provinces of North Kivu and Ituri by the Head of
State on 3 May, as well as the appointment of military
and police Governors and Vice-Governors in the two
provinces. That decision has made it possible to achieve
significant progress in the fight against resistant
armed groups and the demilitarization of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, thanks to
that measure, many gains have been made, including
the neutralization and surrender of many elements
of those armed groups, as well as the dismantling of
several illicit trafficking networks smuggling arms and
ammunition, minerals and food and non-food supplies
to armed groups.

S/PV. 8813

My Government’s announcement of the state of
emergency and its results to date are an opportunity
we should seize by uniting our efforts to eliminate the
negative forces and end once and for all the vicious
circle of violence. Furthermore, in order to ensure
the promotion and protection of human rights during
the state of siege in the two provinces concerned, the
Government and the army have set up disciplinary
mechanisms to severely punish soldiers who violate
those rights.
In the context of the implementation of resolution
2556 (2020) and its recommendations on the gradual
withdrawal of MONUSCO, a joint working group of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and MONUSCO has been established to develop
a transition plan to ensure the gradual, responsible,
orderly and definitive withdrawal of MONUSCO.
Meanwhile, the MONUSCO offices in Kananga and
Tshikapa in Kasai have been closed since 30 May,
thereby starting the disengagement process.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my
Government’s call on the international community and
friends and partners of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to work together to eliminate the negative forces
that have operated in the eastern and northern parts of
our country for the past 20 years. I assure the Council
of our President’s determination to restore peace in the
east of our country to enable the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to continue along its steady path towards
genuine rule of law. That will be achieved with an
effective Administration, capable of better managing
and defending its borders and exercising State authority
over the entire country.
Before ending my statement, on behalf of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I must thank troopcontributing countries for their support and pay tribute
to all those who have lost their lives in the quest for
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in particular MONUSCO Blue Helmets,
including those from Malawi, as mentioned earlier.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

21-1813419/19
