XII
RESOLUTION ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF TI-IE JOINT MEETING OF THE
JOINT SECOND AND THIRD COMMITTEE AND me FIFTH COMMITTEE
RESOLUTION ADOPTEE SUR LE RAPPORT DE LA SEANCE COMMUNE DE
LA COMMISSION MIXTE DES DEUXIEME ET TROISIEME COMMISSIONS
ET DE LA CINQUI EME COMMISSION
125 (II). Relations with and co-ordination
of specialized agencies and work programmes of the United Nations and
specialized agencies

125 (Ill. Relations avec les institutions specialisees, coordination de leur action
et coordination des programmes de
travail de !'Organisation des Nation!i
Unies et des i""!stih.,tions specialis6es

Having examined the report of the Economic
and Social Council, (document A/382)1 and the
interim report of the Secretary-General on the
budgetary and financial rclatiomhips between the
United Nations and the specialized agencies ( document A/39·1/Rcv.l);

Ajm1s a,•oir examine le rapport du Conseil
<-corn,n1ique d sucial ( ducuml'nt A/'.l82) 1 et le
r:1pport int<-rirnair<' clu ~we rctairc: gcnfral sur ks
rcL, i ion:- ln1d)-'/Uircs et lin:incit'rr., \'!llfl' l'Organi~at 1nq dl', !\':'lion:- t 'nic, l'! ks in~titc;t;,,n~ ~pt;ci:tli,fr,, . do< t:tncnt :\/'.l(J4/Rcv. l);

Having had its attention drawn to thl' interim
report of the Co-ordination Committee to the Economic and Social Council ( documrnt A/ 404),
which deals with budgetary and financial relationships of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and related programme matters;
Considcriag that it i~ <;.,cntial. in lJrdcr to prevent overlapping of activities and dupl;cation of
effort, to develop more effective en-ordination in
the economic and social fields among- the organs
and sub.;ichary orgam uf tlH; United Nations,
among the United l\'c1tinns and the specialized
11.~,•- ncic.<;, and amun,c.; the spccia\i;,cd a:.:encies
t hcirn,dvcs, and to prov1tk rncans for assessing the
rc!,,tivl' 1ir;;n1cy and inqiurtdnc:c of proj,'cts;

Consi,1"'1m;; lh:tl it i-, ,k>ir:d ,le ,, itb,_,ut tktr iment to co,cntial activiti,·s tc, :tii11irnizc the fo1:u1ci:d burden imposed upun :\ic1ubu,, by tlte acti\ itics uf the Unite{: ?\atir:11s and the ,pccializnl
:t.~.clli. H.."-"~

;iud

Considailli!, tl1at tLc~c 1c:,:.lb ( an most dkctivdy be acbic\·nl bv mut11:1l apphation of the
a,l:;l'l't•1~1cnb httWL'.l'It the United N:ttitJ11s and
the speci;tliznl agenciL·s, and the development of
the methods uf co-operation forcsffn in ffsolu1 ioi1s :'iO (I) and B l (];_"

The Grneral Llssem/Jly therefore

1

-'1/irt, 1n'oir Jnrt,· son 11ttr11Iion att :·apport pro1·isoirc ;,dtcs.c; par le ( :omitc de counlination au
Conseil fronumiquc c-t sf\cial ( document A/ 4(h)
conn:rnant ks rehtions hudgctaircs et financieres
de l'Organisation des Natinns Unies et des institutions ~pfrialisccs, ainsi q11c Jes programmes qui
s'v rapportent;

Considhant qn.il est indispensable, pour cviter
q ue plusicurs org,rnismcs a la fois nc poursuivcnt
lcs m0mcs tr,1vaux et CJUC lcs efforts ne fassent
double ,-rnploi, de favnrisl'I 1mc coordination plus
dfr,-ti\ ,· d.rn., !,·., dorn:1illL', {conomiquc et social,
entre le,: m,,;:mts •:t l"s organcs subsidi:1ircs des
Na.ti( n, l in1cs, cntrL· !'Organisation des Nations
Cnic~; , t Jc:; instituti"ns spfrialisecs, et entre. le..,;
inst1tut io1 i,, ,p(,, ialisccs rlks-mr:rncs, et de fournir
Jt,,; nHnt:'1,; ,.It: dt'-1nminn l'ordrc cl'urgcncc des
t1 ,i\ .u1:-. l'.i lcnr 1rnporta11< ,· rcLti\'c,
1

( u!l",i/r,rnt qn"il rst ~.nuh;iitabk, sans p,>rter
attnrn( .IllX cldi, it,:, indiSJH'llSablcs, ck rcduirc les
ch:1rc;-.',. linanricrcs irnpos(es .,ux Etats l\1cmbrcs
p:11 le-, travaux (!,, ]"( hgani_.;ation de~ Nations
l T1,i,·., t des !t"tiwti"Il·' :<pl'L ialisfrs, ,·L
Co11i1dh1utt quc J"on attcindrait ccs resultats de

la fa\r,n la 11lus ,·ompli'-tc p.1r !'application rcciprnquc des accords rnnrlus cntre !'Organisation
des Nations U 11ies et lcs institutions spccialisecs, et
par le dc\'t'luppcment des mcthodes de coopcra1ion p1 ,:v1w:, ;1u, rt'-.,oli1t ions •,() i, l) et ll 1 : I.,,. de
L\:,scnihltc c•/ncralc,
/.·. ! ,.~· 1nl1l/<' /:,/1u;1,dt'. 1'!! ( ons/qucnc.._·,

I. Calls ujwn rnrn1hcr:, to take measures to
t'.ni-llrc ull the national level a ro-or<linate<l policy
uf their delegations t<J the United Nations and to
the different specialized :tgcncics in order that full
co-operation may he achieved between thL'. Organi,:ation and the specialized agencies, and, in
particular, to in~truct their representatives in the

l. lm·ite ses membres :t prendrc des mcsures
proprcs it rcafoer, sur le plan national, la coordination ck b politique ck !curs delegations auprcs
de l'Oq.;anisation des N:1tions C 11ic: et aupri::s des
divcr:,cs in;:titutions sp(·cialisfrs, en vuc d'assme.r
u1H'. cntii:-re coopcrati, ,n entrc !'Organisation et lcs
in,titul irn1s sp(,cialisfrs. et. t·n partin1licr, ;\ inviter

l St·~ Offiriai Rt'C1 nlJ of the second sejsion of tlu: (Jenual ,!ssnnbly, Supplcmrnt No. '.).
:: ;,;l'c Rtsolutions adoj,ted b-v the Glnt:ral ASJembly dur-

' \ nir 11·:> 1)/1, t1mntl.\ i1J/.:1 id.1 d,, la tfruxi,;nit· ff.H 1r1.•1 dt
f':1\!if'rllhU,· J~1.-:11(,a 1c..·, S11pp!(:.w11t .:'\o '.).

1

i:v- tlH ::,;er:nnd Jl,trt of it, fir::.t se%ion, page 148.

. \ 7 uil le, Ri:!inlutiori~ ,,1/,1p!/t'J /1nr r.-1.H1:mhh:1' gCn(i1al,;
p, ·1d,:~,t 1:1 '-( c,mdc 11.11 :le·(),· -,1 llrt 111it"..r1· sc:-sit1n, page l·1S.

governing bodies of the specialized agencies to use
every effort to ensure the transmittal of reports,
programmes of operation, and budgets or budgetary estimates referred to in paragraph 3 of this
resolution;

leurs representants au sein des organes directeurs
des institutions spccialisees a faire tout leur possible pour assurer la transmission des rapports, des
programmes de travail et des budgets ou previsions budgetaires dont il est fait mention au paragraphe 3 de cette resolution;
2. Felicite le Conseil economique et social, le
2. Commends the Economic and Social Council, the Secretary-General and the specialized Secretaire general et les institutions specialisee.~
agencies for the steps already taken, including the pour les mesures deja prises, notamment pour la
establishment of a Co-ordination Committee, to creation d'un Comite de coordination charge d'asachieve programme and administrative co-ordi- surer la coordination des programmes et des disnation among the specialized agencies and the positions administratives entre les institutions speUnited Nations;
eialisees et l'Organisation des Nations Unies;
3. Demande au Corn;eil d'apporter une atten3. Requests the Council to give constant attention to the factor of the relative priority of pro- tion constante a l'ordre d'urgence des propositions,
posals, and to consider as a matter of urgency the et de considerer comme urgentes les mesures noufurther steps which should be taken to develop vclles qu'il faudrait prendre pour developper de
effective co-ordination of the programmes of the maniere effective la coordination des programmes
United Nations and its subsidiary organs on de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et de ses orthe one hand and the spccializcrl agencies on the ganes subsidiaires d'une part, et des institutions
other;
spccialisecs, d'autre part;
4. Calls upon the specialized agencies, as ap4. / nvite les institutions specialisees, en tenant
propriate under the terms of their respective agree- compte des clauses de leurs accords respectifs avec
ments with the United Nations:
l'Organisation des Nations Unies:
(a) To present each year, to the session of the
a) A presenter chaque annee, a la session du
Economic and Social Council preceding the open- Conseil economique et social qui precede l'ouvering of the regular session of the General Assembly, ture de la session ordinaire de l'Assemblee genetheir reports on past activities and their pro- rale, leurs rapports sur leur activite passee ainsi
grammes of operations for the subsequent fiscal que le programme de leurs travaux pour l'exercice
year to enable the Council to promote the most financier a venir, de fai;on a permettre au Conseil
efficient and practical use of the resources of the de travailler a l'utilisation la plus efficace et la plus
United Nations and the specialized agencies by ;:iratique des ressources de !'Organisation des Narecommendations concerning the definition of re- tions Unies et des institutions specialisees, par le
sponsibility for specific prnjects and concerninis moven de recommandations concernant la deterpriorities for action;
mi~ation de l'organe responsable de travaux detcrmin<:s et l'ordre de priorite de ces travaux;
( b) To transmit their budgets or budgetary
b) A adre.sser au Secretaire general des Nations
estimates for 1949, and for each year thereafter, Unies, avant le lcr juillet de l'annee precedente,
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations leurs budgets OU leurs previsions budgetaires pour
b('forc l July of the prcrt'<ling year, in order that
1!l•19 et pour chanme des annees suivantes, de
the Secretary-General may incorporate these fa1,oli q UC le Secretaire general puisse joindre a
budgets or budgetary estimates as information an- ; ,.., prh isions buJgctaires annuelles, a titre d'innexes in his annual budget estimates for transmit- : urmation et sous forme d' annexes, ces budgets ou
tal to the General Assembly, together with such l CS previsions budgetaircs, et les presenter a l'Assummaries as he may deem appropriate and use- semhlcc generate avec telles indications qui Jui
ful:
,nnhlnont, onvn1abks et utiks:
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consulta). 1n uit,: k Secn'.:taire g<:ncral, en consultation,
tion with the specialiLed agencies through the Co- cl"une part, avec les institutions specialisees, par
ordination Committee and in consultation with lintermediaire du Comite de coordination et,
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and cl'autre part, avec le Comite consultatif pour les
Budgetary Questions, to prepare a report for sub- q uc~tions administratives et budgetaires, a rediger
mission to the Economic and Social Council and un rapport qu'il prcsentera au Conseil economithe third regular session of the General Assemblv q ue et 5ocial et a 1' Assemblee generale lors de sa
with recommendations concerning:
· trnisieme session ordinaire et qu'il accompagnera
de recommandations concernant:
(a) Measures for achieving greater uniform it~
a) Les mesures propres a realiser une plus
i11 presentation of the budgets of the United Na-grande uniformitc dans la presentation des
tions and of the specialized agencies with a view budgets de !'Organisation et des institutions speto providing a basis for comparison of the several cialisees, pour permettre la comparaison des dibudgets;
Yers budgets;
( b) The fiscal year and schedule of meetings
h '· L'exercice financier et le programme des
of the specialized agencies in their relation to th-c rcunions des institutions specialisees dans leur rapprocedures envisaged in paragraph 3 above;
port avec Jes dispositions envisagees au paragraphe
'.\ ci-dessus;
(_c) The feasibility of improved budgetary co, ) La possibilite d'ameliorer la coordination
ordmation between the llnited Nations and the budgetaire entre !'Organisation des Nations Unies
specialized agencies, and
,., k" institutions spccialisees, et

6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the specialized agencies through the Coordination Committee and, where appropriate,
the Advisory Committee, to promote the development of similar budgetary, administrative and
financial practices in the United Nations and
the specialized agencies.
Hundred and twenty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

6. Invite le Secretaire general, en consultation
avec les institutions specialisees par l'intermediaire
du Comitc de coordination et, s'il y a lieu, avec le
Comitc consultatif, a favoriser !'adoption, au sein
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies et des institutions specialisees, de pratiques budgetaires, administratives et financieres similaires.

Cent-vingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.
