United Nations

A/RES/64/132

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 February 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 61 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/432)]

64/132. Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/167 of 18 December 2002, in which it endorsed the
Political Declaration 1 and the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, 2
its resolution 58/134 of 22 December 2003, in which it took note, inter alia, of the
road map for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and its resolutions
60/135 of 16 December 2005, 61/142 of 19 December 2006, 62/130 of 18 December
2007 and 63/151 of 18 December 2008,
0F

1F

Recognizing that, in many parts of the world, awareness of the Madrid Plan of
Action remains limited or non-existent, which limits the scope of implementation
efforts,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 3
2F

1.
Encourages Governments to pay greater attention to building capacity to
eradicate poverty among older persons, in particular older women, by mainstreaming
ageing issues into poverty eradication strategies and national development plans,
and to include both ageing-specific policies and ageing-mainstreaming efforts in
their national strategies;
Encourages Member States to strengthen their efforts to develop national
2.
capacity to address their national implementation priorities identified during the
review and appraisal of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002,2
and invites Member States that have not done so to consider a step-by-step approach
to developing capacity that includes the setting of national priorities, the
strengthening of institutional mechanisms, research, data collection and analysis and
the training of necessary personnel in the field of ageing;
0H

_______________
1
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
A/64/127.

09-46975

*0946975*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/132

3.
Also encourages Member States to overcome obstacles to the
implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action by devising strategies that take into
account the entirety of the human life-course and foster intergenerational solidarity
in order to increase the likelihood of greater success in the years ahead;
Further encourages Member States to place particular emphasis on
4.
choosing national priorities that are realistic, feasible and have the greatest
likelihood of being achieved in the years ahead and to develop targets and indicators
to measure progress in the implementation process;
Recommends that Member States increase awareness-raising of the
5.
Madrid Plan of Action, including by strengthening networks of national focal points
on ageing, working with the regional commissions and enlisting the help of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to seek increased attention to
ageing issues;
Encourages Governments that have not done so to designate focal points
6.
for handling follow-up of national plans of action on ageing;
Invites Governments to conduct their ageing-related policies through
7.
inclusive and participatory consultations with relevant stakeholders and social
development partners, in the interest of developing effective policies creating
national policy ownership and consensus-building;
Calls upon Governments to ensure, as appropriate, conditions that enable
8.
families and communities to provide care and protection to persons as they age and
to evaluate improvement in the health status of older persons, including on a
gender-specific basis, and to reduce disability and mortality;
Encourages Governments to continue their efforts to implement the
9.
Madrid Plan of Action and to mainstream the concerns of older persons into their
policy agendas, bearing in mind the crucial importance of family intergenerational
interdependence, solidarity and reciprocity for social development and the
realization of all human rights for older persons, and to prevent age discrimination
and provide social integration;
10. Invites Member States to ensure that older persons have access to
information about their rights so as to enable them to participate fully and justly in
their societies and to claim full enjoyment of all human rights;
11. Calls upon Member States to develop their national capacity for
monitoring and enforcing the rights of older persons, in consultation with all sectors
of society, including organizations of older persons through, inter alia, national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights where applicable;
12. Also calls upon Member States to strengthen and incorporate a gender
perspective into all policy actions on ageing, as well as to eliminate and address
discrimination on the basis of age and gender, and recommends that Member States
engage with all sectors of society, including women’s groups and organizations of
older persons, in changing negative stereotypes about older persons, in particular
older women, and promote positive images of older persons;
13. Further calls upon Member States to address the well-being and
adequate health care of older persons, as well as any cases of neglect, abuse and
violence against older persons, by designing more effective prevention strategies
and stronger laws and policies to address these problems and their underlying
factors;
2

A/RES/64/132

14. Encourages Member States to consider how best the international
framework of norms and standards can ensure the full enjoyment of the rights of
older persons, including, as appropriate, the possibility of instituting new policies,
instruments or measures to further improve the situation of older persons;
15. Calls upon Member States to take concrete measures to further protect
and assist older persons in emergency situations, in accordance with the Madrid
Plan of Action;
16. Stresses that, in order to complement national development efforts,
enhanced international cooperation is essential to support developing countries in
implementing the Madrid Plan of Action, while recognizing the importance of
assistance and the provision of financial assistance;
17. Encourages the international community to enhance international
cooperation to support national efforts to eradicate poverty, in keeping with
internationally agreed goals, in order to achieve sustainable social and economic
support for older persons;
18. Also encourages the international community to support national efforts
to forge stronger partnerships with civil society, including organizations of older
persons, academia, research foundations, community-based organizations, including
caregivers, and the private sector, in an effort to help to build capacity on ageing
issues;
19. Encourages the international community and the relevant agencies of the
United Nations system, within their respective mandates, to support national efforts
to provide funding for research and data-collection initiatives on ageing in order to
better understand the challenges and opportunities presented by population ageing
and to provide policymakers with more accurate and more specific information on
gender and ageing;
20. Recommends that Member States reaffirm the role of United Nations
focal points on ageing, increase technical cooperation efforts, expand the role of the
regional commissions on ageing issues and provide added resources for those
efforts, facilitate the coordination of national and international non-governmental
organizations on ageing and enhance cooperation with academia on a research
agenda on ageing;
21. Reiterates the need for additional capacity-building at the national level
in order to promote and facilitate further implementation of the Madrid Plan of
Action, as well as the result of its first review and appraisal cycle, and in that
connection encourages Governments to support the United Nations Trust Fund for
Ageing to enable the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat
to provide expanded assistance to countries, upon their request;
22. Recommends that ongoing efforts to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 4 take into account the situation of older persons;
3F

23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, and also
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session,
_______________
4

See resolution 55/2.

3

A/RES/64/132

taking into consideration the discussions and conclusions of the Commission for
Social Development at its forty-eighth session, a comprehensive report on the
current status of the social situation, well-being, development and rights of older
persons at the national and regional levels.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

4
