42
Session
= - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -General
- - _Assembly-Twenty-eighth
: _ _____________________________
-

8. Asserts the fundamental importance of ensuring
that the reformed system should both create conditions
and contain arrangements for promoting an increasing
flow of real resources from the developed countries
to the developing countries;
9. Recommends that, within the framework of the
reform of the international monetary system, the earliest possible decision should be reached, itD accordance
with the time-table established by the Committee on
Reform of the International Monetary System and Related Issues, on the outstanding issues, including the
question of establishing a link between special drawing rights and additional development finance;
10. Emphasizes that the additional creation of
special drawing rights in an adequate and orderly
manner by the International Monetary Fund should be
determined on the basis of global liquidity needs;
11. Agrees that wherever possible the developing
countries will be exempted frorn import and capital
outflow controls for balance-of-payrnents purposes and
that special circumstances of developing countries will
be taken into account in assessing controls which these
countries feel it necessary to apply;
12. W elcomes the decision of the Committee on
Reform of the International Monetary System and
Related Issues to set up a Technical Group on the
Transfer of Real Resources in order to examine in detail specific suggestions for action which could be taken
by the Committee in accordance with its mandate so
as to promote the flow of real resources from developed to developing countries.

2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973
3085 (XXVIIl). Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 82 (111) of 20 May _1972 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development17 and General Assembly resolution 3041
(XXVII) of 19 December 1972,
Recalling the important declaration of 14 September
1973, which was approved by the Ministerial Meeting
of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade held in Tokyo, as well as the
concluding statement of the Chairman of the Meeting,
Reaffirming that the multilateral trade negotiations
shall aim, inter alía, at securing additional benefits for
the international trade of developing countries, so as
to achieve a substantial increase in their foreign exchange eamings, the diversification of their exports,
the accelcration of the rate of growth of their trade,
taking into account their development needs, an improvement in the possibilities for these countries to participate in the expansion of world trade, and a better
balance as between developed and developing countries in the sharing of the advantages resulting from
this expansion, through, in the largest possible measure, a suhstantial improvement in the conditions of
access far the products of interest to the developing
countries and, wherever appropriate, measures designed
to attain stable, equitablc and remunerative prices for
primary products,

1, Jbid.

Taking note of the Economic Declaration adoptcd
by the Fourih Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algícrs
from 5 to 9 September 1973, 18 in which they exprcssed
the belief that the multilateral trade negotiations will
pave the way far a new and just international division
of labour and help in the establishment of a new sys~em of world economic relations based on cquality and
the common interests of ali countrics,
l. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Dcvelopment Board for the period from 26 Octobcr
1972 to 11 September 1973;rn
2. Emphasizes that the Tokyo Declaration is cxpressed in broad terms and opens the way for advancing further work along lines cxpressed by delegations
at the Ministerial Meeting and, in particular, enablcs
Governments, in the course of the work of the Tradc
Negotiations Committee, to take due account of thc concerns, perspectivcs and principies voiced at Tokyo by
different delegations, particularly those of developing
countries;
3. Notes with satisfaction that a numbcr of Governments have decided to enter into comprehensive multilateral trade negotiations within the framcwork of
the General Agreernent on Tariffs and Trade in which
all countries, developed and developing, will be enablcd
to participate;
4. Expects that among the basic objectives guid-ing these negotiations will be the conccpts, as agrccd
upon in Tokyo, of non-reciprocity and of special a.nd
more favourable treatment through differcntial mcasures in favour of developing countries, throughout
the negotiations, where this is feasiblc and appropriatc;
5. lnvites the participants in the multilateral tradc
negotiations to ensure that:
(a) The Trade Negotiations Committe.e will enablc
the Secretary-General of the United Nations Confcr-ence on Trade and Development to attcnd its meetings
as appropriate;
(b) The Director-General of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade will keep the Secrctary-Gencral
of the United Nations Conference on Trade ancl Dcvelopment informed, on a continuing basis, of dcvclopments in the multilateral trade negotiations in such
a manner as to facilitate the work of thc SecretaryGeneral of the Conference in assisting the dcveloping
countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the Unitcd
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to r,>
port to the Trade and Development Board at its fourteenth session on ali aspects of the negotiations pcrtinent to the trade and development of dcvelnpin¡'.
countries.
2192nd plenary meeting
6 Decembrr !973
3086 (XXVJII). Aetivities of the lhiil••d i\alÍmH
Industrial Development Orµ;a11i:t.alio11

The General Assembly,
Hal'illg ,·onsidered the rcpo1t of thc Industrial fk-

velopment Board on the work of its seventh scssion,'-'º
IBA/9330 and Corr.l, p. 57.
19 Official Records of the General Assembfy, Twc11¡_1•-t1gh1h
Scssio11, Supp/ement No. 15 (A/9015/Rev.1).
20 Jbid., Supplement No. 16 (A/9016).

Resolutions a,lopterl on the report~ of the Sec-onrl Commiuee

---------------~

and in particular the recommendations contained in the
Board's decisions I (VII) of 11 May 1973 and II
(VII) and III (VII) of 14 May 1973, 21
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966 on the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization,
Recalling further its resolution 2823 (XXVI) of
16 December 1971 on the report of the Special International Conference of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization,
Bearing in mind the need to strengthen the capabilities of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to serve the requirements of the developing
countries in the key sector of industrial development,
1. Takes note of the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its s.eventh session;
2. W e[comes the recommendation contained in decision I (VII) of the Industrial Development Board
to increasc the planning level and budget of the regular
programme of technical assistance of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization as from
1975, the supplementary resourc::s to be dcvoted to
special measurcs in favour of the least developed
countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the question of the establishment of a United
Nations industrial development fund through the consolidation of ali voluntary contributions to the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization other than
those to the United Nations Development Programme,
as envisaged in paragraph 2 of decision II (VII) of the
Industrial Dcvelopment Board, and to submit the report to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth sess.ion;
4. Endorses the recommendation contained in decision III (VII) of the Industrial Development Board
for an increase in the ,number of industrial development field advisers, and the instructions given to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization to explore thc possibility
of financing the increase from the United Nations budget
or other sourocs, without prejudice to thc examination
of the question of United Nations Development
Programmc support for industrial dcveloprnent fidd
adviscrs currently being undertaken by the Governing
Council of the Programme;
5. Endorses also the recomrnendation contained in
paragraph 5 of Industrial Dcvelopment Board resolution 36 (VII) of 14 May 1973 21 to include as a high
priority item in the budgetary provisions for the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization the new
componcnt relating to industrial co-operation among
developing countries.
2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973
3087 (XXVIII). Second General f:onference of
the United Nations Industrial Dev«.>lopment
Organization
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2952 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972 and Industrial Developmcnt Board resolution 3 3 ( VI) of 2 J une 1972, ~~
annex ll.
2 2 /bid., Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 16 (Al
8716), annex II.
21 [bid.,

_____________ .

Bearing in mind thc invitation of thc Government
of Peru to hold the Second General Conference of thc
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
at Lima and the rccommendation of the Indmtrial Dcvelopment Board at its seventh session regarding thc
venue and date of the Confercnce,2J
l. Accepts with deep appreciation the invitation of
the Government of Peru;
2. Decides that the Second General Conference of
the United Nations Industrial Ikvelopment Organization will be held at Lima from 12 to 26 March 1975.
2192nd plenary meeti11~
6 December 1973

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 Novcmbcr 1966 on thc Unitcd Nations Industrial Dcvclopm,·nt
Organiz:ition,
Recalling further its resolution 2952 (XXVII) of
11 Dccembcr 1972 on the Second General Confcrencc
of thc Unitcd Nations Industrial Developmcnt Organization,
Having considered the rcport of the Industrial Dcvelopment Board on the work of its seventh session/ 4
in particular thc recommendations of the Board, contained in chapter I II of its report, on the Scconcl Gcnera l Conference of the United Nations Industrial Dcvcloprnent Organization,
Bearing in mind the important role of thc Sccond
General Conference of the United N ations Industrial
Development Organization as the highcst forum for
defining policies for international co-opcration in the
fie,ld of industrial develor'.~ent,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the rccommendations of the Industrial Development Board on the
Sccond General Confcrence of thc lJnited Nations Industrial Devclopmcnt Organization, as containcd in
its rcport. and of the rcport of the Executivc Director;~"
2. Reque.1ts thc Industrial Dcvelopment Board and
its Pcrmanent Commfrtcc to kcep in mind. in connexion
with th1: functions eatrusted to them under paragraphs
3 and 4 of General Assemblv resnlution 2952
(XXVII), the need to cnsure that adcquate prcparatory work is done so as to enable the Sccond General
Confcrcncc of the Unitcd Nations Industrial Devclopment Organization, in the light of progrc,s in thc implementation of the International Dcvelopmcnt Strategy for the Second United Nations Developmcnt
DccadL'. to analysc thc role of industrialization in the
promotion of the developmcnt of the dcvelnping countric,, to focus on thc basic prnblcms facing thosc countrie~ in thc field of industrial policics anJ planning,
and to define, within a dynamic framework, thc contribution of thc intcrnational community to the prncess
of industrialization of the devcloping countrics, with
duc attcntion to thc exchange of cxpcricncc- 111-I incrcascd co-opcration among the dcvcloping cuuntrics
themscl ves;
3. Reco111mends that thc Second General Ccinferencc of thc Unitcd Nations Industrial Dcvclopmcnt
Organization ,hould examine co-operatio11 of devci
'.}.1 fbid., Twentv-eighth Scs.1iorr
Sll['['lcm~nt No.
9016). paras. 45-55.
2 4 lhíd., Supplement No. 16 (A:9016).
~~ A/9072.

/(,

(A:
