S/2014/36

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 January 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Office in Burundi
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2090
(2013), in which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Office in
Burundi (BNUB) and requested the Secretary-General to inform it of progress in
implementing the mandate of BNUB, as assessed against the benchmarks jointly
agreed with the Government of Burundi, with a view to determining the future
evolution of BNUB into a United Nations country team presence. The present report
provides an update since the previous report of 18 January 2013 (S/2013/36), and is
structured around eight benchmarks and the findings of the strategic assessment
mission, which was conducted in Burundi pursuant to resolution 2090 (2013). In the
annex to the present report, baselines and indicators of progress are reviewed in
additional detail.

II. Progress in peace consolidation
A.

Democratic process
2.
During the reporting period, Burundi made important strides towards more
open and inclusive political dialogue. The return of key opposition leaders and their
inclusion in formal meetings that led to the adoption of several consensual political
frameworks were notable developments. However, the adoption of a number of
restrictive laws and ongoing intimidation, harassment and violent attacks by youths
affiliated with political parties contributed to decreasing political space and limited
the ability of opposition actors to exercise their political freedoms ahead of the 2015
elections. Government efforts to push through a wide-ranging and controversial
revision of the Constitution further fuelled tensions.
3.
In a positive development regarding political dialogue, BNUB, in close
collaboration with the Government, organized and hosted a workshop on electoral
lessons learned in Bujumbura from 11 to 13 March, in which representatives of
major political parties and other actors were brought together for the first time since
the 2010 elections. The participation of several opposition politicians who had
returned from exile for the occasion, such as Alexis Sinduhije of the Mouvement
pour la solidarité et le développement (MSD) and Pascaline Kampayano of the

14-20526 (E) 220114

*1420526*

S/2014/36

Union pour la paix et le développement (UPD), signalled a thaw in the relationship
between the Government and the extraparliamentary opposition. The workshop was
also attended by former Presidents of Burundi, Domitien Ndayizeye and Sylvestre
Ntibantunganya. The former leader of the Forces nationales de libération (FNL),
Agathon Rwasa, and the former UPD presidential candidate, Léonard Nyangoma,
were represented by their spokespersons. The main objective of the workshop was
to draw lessons from the 2010 elections and chart a course for the 2015 elections. A
42-point consensual electoral road map was agreed at the meeting, covering aspects
of the legal framework for the elections; the creation of a security environment that
protects political actors and facilitates their activities; and the management and
conduct of the elections. In October, the President of Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza,
endorsed the road map and stressed the commitment of the Government to
implementing all of its recommendations.
4.
Against the backdrop of the successful workshop on electoral lessons learned,
the Government organized, in partnership with the United Nations, a follow-up
workshop in Kayanza from 22 to 24 May, again with inclusive participation, in
order to accelerate the revision of the 2009 electoral code. Participants reached
consensus on 22 out of 23 amendments to the 2009 electoral code proposed by the
Independent National Electoral Commission. The new draft electoral code contains
important provisions, including on the use of a single ballot paper and on combining
the presidential, legislative and communal polls, seen by Burundian political actors
as essential to increasing transparency and preventing election fraud.
5.
Following the returns of Ms. Kampayano and Mr. Sinduhije, Mr. Rwasa, who
contested the 2010 elections for FNL, re-entered political life on 6 August 2013
after three years in hiding. His return leaves Mr. Nyangoma, the head of the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDD), as the only major opposition
leader who has not yet returned to Burundi. Just days after the return of Mr. Rwasa,
on 13 August 2013, the chiefs of the Congolese Tutsi community in Burundi filed a
complaint against him with the Chief Prosecutor for his alleged involvement in the
massacre of 166 Congolese Banyamulenge in Gatumba in 2004, an accusation that
he has denied. On 14 August, he was expelled by the FNL executive bureau, which
accused him of destabilizing the party. On 20 October, the new FNL President,
Jacques Bigirimana, was elected during an ordinary congress held in Bujumbura.
However, Mr. Rwasa continues to dispute his expulsion and to claim the leadership
of FNL.
6.
A workshop held in Bujumbura from 27 to 29 November to assess progress in
implementing the electoral road map showed that mistrust between the Government
and the opposition remained a persistent challenge. The participants, which included
political parties and actors, as well civil society organizations and national and
international non-governmental organizations, adopted a series of recommendations
to speed up implementation of the road map, including an agreement to organize
consultations on the constitutional review process; the organization of periodic
meetings among political parties and actors; and the creation of an inclusive
mechanism to facilitate consultation between the Independent National Electoral
Commission and political parties and other actors throughout the preparatory phase
of the elections. On 11 October, the Commission held its first meeting with political
parties. However, the regular dialogue mechanism requested by the opposition
political parties has yet to be established.

2/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

7.
The issue of the eligibility of President Nkurunziza to run for a third term in
the 2015 elections led to a sharp diversion of views between the ruling party and the
opposition. On 7 September, at an event marking the third anniversary of the ruling
party’s election victory, the President of the Conseil national pour la défense de la
démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD), Pascal
Nyabenda, declared that President Nkurunziza had served only one term in office
through direct suffrage, having been elected by the population only in 2010. His
statement drew reactions from opposition leaders, who argued that another mandate
for President Nkurunziza would be a violation of the Constitution and the 2000
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi (hereinafter, “Arusha
accords”). On 12 September, the CNDD-FDD Spokesperson, Onésime Nduwimana,
reiterated the same position and noted that the Constitutional Court would decide on
disagreements about the interpretation of legal instruments.
8.
Opposition and civil society activists continued to complain about being
prevented from exercising their political rights and freedoms by the Imbonerakure,
the youth wing of the ruling party. During the period under review, BNUB
documented 50 such politically motivated acts involving Imbonerakure members,
including intimidation, violence, disruption of political meetings and physical
assaults. There were also complaints that Imbonerakure members were typically not
arrested or, if detained, were immediately released following the intervention of
local authorities. On one notable occasion, members of the Imbonerakure paraded in
military gear in Ngozi on 7 September during the celebrations of the third
anniversary of the ruling party’s election victory. On 8 May, the President of the
Sahwanya-Front pour la démocratie au Burundi (Sahwanya-FRODEBU) and the
Alliance démocratique pour le changement-Ikibiri (ADC-Ikibiri) called on members
of his party’s youth wing to respond in kind to violent acts from the Imbonerakure.
Meanwhile, the President of the Imbonerakure declared that CNDD-FDD did not
endorse violent acts and called upon the judiciary to individually punish those who
violated the law. However, his assertion was disputed by others, including the
President of the Union pour le progrès national (UPRONA), who said that those
were not acts committed by individuals since the Imbonerakure were often
accompanied or protected by local administrators or the Burundian National Police.
On 7 September, the President of CNDD-FDD called on the Imbonerakure to rid the
movement of members who tarnish the name of the group and stressed the need for
the Imbonerakure to respect members of other political parties. However, tensions
between youth groups remained high, as on 6 October when over 100 members of
the Imbonerakure clashed with over 50 MSD youth supporters in Gihanga
Commune, Bubanza Province, during a morning workout exercise, leaving three
Imbonerakure and two MSD members severely injured.
9.
In the light of continuing acts of political violence, BNUB organized meetings
with leaders of youth movements affiliated with the main political parties who
unanimously agreed on the need to hold an inclusive workshop to develop a code of
conduct that would address election-related violence. Youth-related violence
remains a highly sensitive issue and requires urgent action, particularly in the leadup to the 2015 elections.
10. During the reporting period, several pieces of legislation were passed limiting
the exercise of political rights and freedoms, including the Media Law and the Law
on Public Gatherings, which were promulgated on 4 June and 5 December,
respectively. The former was widely condemned by national and international

14-20526

3/29

S/2014/36

actors, who expressed serious concerns over some provisions having the potential to
undermine freedom of expression, thereby running counter to international human
rights standards and instruments of which Burundi is a signatory. Among the causes
for concern was the obligation for journalists to reveal their sources in certain
situations, as well as fines imposed for press offences. The Law on Public
Gatherings constitutes another infringement on political rights and freedoms since it
limits, for instance, the duration of public demonstrations to one day, and makes
organizers of public meetings directly responsible for any infractions of the law
during such gatherings by any person present. It also allows authorities to send a
delegate to monitor all public meetings and demonstrations and to interrupt or
cancel the activity if they determine that there is a risk to public order. Amid
criticism from non-governmental organizations in Burundi, a 2012 draft law
regulating the activities of non-profit organizations was not adopted by the National
Assembly in 2013.
11. In a similar vein, and underlining the persistent fragility of Burundi’s political
landscape, efforts by the Government to revise the 2005 Constitution without broadbased consultations led to significant political tensions and raised fears among
opposition parties of an authoritarian turn in the country. On 9 and 10 October, the
Council of Ministers discussed and adopted a draft law to revise the 2005
Constitution, citing the need to harmonize the Constitution with the draft electoral
code, as well as the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community.
The draft Constitution eliminates requirements for qualified majorities for most
decisions of Parliament, allows the ruling party to appoint judicial, military and high
civilian officials without Senate approval and creates a post of Prime Minister,
replacing one of the Vice-Presidents while retaining one Vice-President of a
different ethnicity than the President. Draft provisions would also lower the
parliamentary majority required to appoint members to the election and human
rights commissions, from 75 to 51 per cent, thereby increasing their dependence on
the Government.
12. Opposition parties, civil society and religious actors immediately denounced
the absence of consultations and argued that the draft Constitution would cement the
power of the ruling party and fundamentally alter the ethnically based powersharing balance and principles enshrined in the Arusha accords, which ended a long
history of devastating and divisive ethnic conflict in the country. On 19 October,
UPRONA and FRODEBU-Nyakuri, both represented in the Government and
Parliament, called upon members of Parliament not to vote for the constitutional
changes in their current form, while on 31 October, the President of FNL and the
Union des partis de l’opposition extra-parlementaire (UPO), called for a consensual
revision of the Constitution. On 24 November, the ADC-Ikibiri coalition issued an
ultimatum to the Government to open the process to consultations within 14 days,
threatening to stage mass demonstrations if the demand were not met. On
6 December, in a rare public statement, the Conference of Catholic Bishops issued a
communiqué also calling for inclusive and genuine dialogue, stressing that the
Parliament, while legally entitled to adopt a new constitution, could not do so
without fully taking into account the views expressed by the people.
13. In order to help stave off a crisis around the constitutional review, my Special
Representative in Burundi, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, met with several senior
political leaders, including the President of the National Assembly and the President
of ADC-Ikibiri, throughout November and early December. On 18 December, the

4/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, Paul Seger of
Switzerland, wrote to the President of the National Assembly noting that the
constitutional review process would benefit from broad and inclusive consultations,
while offering the support of the Commission to contribute to the success of the
constitutional revision process.
14. In the light of considerable domestic and international concern, the President
of the National Assembly convened a workshop on 19 and 20 December to hear the
views of all political parties and civil society on the constitutional review. At the
workshop, which was attended by political parties and other actors, the majority of
the participants called for a limited constitutional amendment, focusing only on
those provisions in the Constitution that enjoyed broad consensus at the workshop
and postponing the discussion of contentious areas, which included many
substantive provisions that would affect decision-making and the structure of
Government, until after the 2015 elections.
15. On 16 October, Bernard Busokoza of the UPRONA party was appointed First
Vice-President, replacing Thérence Sinunguruza, also a member of the UPRONA
party, who was forced to resign from the Government on 14 October after losing his
party’s support. Mr. Sinunguruza was accused by his party of opposing ongoing
talks to reunite UPRONA and of fomenting divisions among the UPRONA
leadership to further his personal interests. During his acceptance speech,
Mr. Busokoza declared his intention to work in the interests of all Burundians and
prioritize the reunification of his party, the amendment of the Constitution and the
revision of the electoral code.
16. On 9 December, the Vice-President of Sahwanya-FRODEBU and a former
Vice-President of Burundi, Frédéric Bamvuginyumvira, was arrested for allegedly
encouraging debauchery, adultery and attempting to bribe a law and order official.
While the first two charges were dismissed, the attempted corruption charges were
upheld. On 12 December, senior officials of Sahwanya-FRODEBU called for his
immediate release, accusing the ruling party of trying to cripple the leadership of
ADC-Ikibiri ahead of the 2015 elections.
17. In response to the letter dated 13 April 2013 from President Nkurunziza to me,
in which he requested United Nations support for the 2015 elections, I deployed a
needs assessment mission to Burundi from 2 to 12 September 2013. The mission
noted that the 2015 elections would be a test for Burundi’s peace consolidation
efforts and stability, underlining the need for all stakeholders to create an
environment conducive to credible, inclusive and peaceful elections. The mission
concluded that United Nations electoral assistance to Burundi should be regularly
reassessed against progress made by the country in implementing proposed reforms
and in improving the pre-electoral environment. Such assistance should be provided
in an integrated manner through BNUB, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and other United Nations entities in their respective areas of
responsibility from 2013 until the end of 2015. In particular, the mission noted that
United Nations electoral assistance should be funded through a UNDP-managed
basket fund and focus on reinforcing the capacities of the Independent National
Electoral Commission to administer the elections.

14-20526

5/29

S/2014/36

B.

Security and stability
18. The security situation across the country remained stable. However, crime,
especially arson, kidnapping, assault and theft, increased in 2013, often as a result
of worsening economic conditions and increased unemployment.
19. The threat of a possible terrorist attack remains a cause of concern in Burundi
as the country is a troop contributor to the African Union Mission in Somalia. On
25 September, the national police conducted a search operation in four provinces,
including in Bujumbura Mairie, in connection with the 21 September terrorist attack
on the Westgate Mall in Nairobi. More than 300 people were arrested, and military
uniforms and weapons were seized during the operation. Search operations
continued in October, leading to several arrests.
20. A slight reduction was noted in the number of armed confrontations between
Government security forces and armed opposition groups, including FNL remnants,
Congolese militia groups and criminal elements, decreasing from a monthly average
of about seven in 2012 to four in 2013. Kibira forest and the provinces of Cibitoke
and Bubanza, which border the Democratic Republic of the Congo, were the scenes
of the most significant confrontations.
21. BNUB continued to support the professionalization of security and defence
forces through programmes implemented by bilateral partners in cooperation with
the Government. In partnership with national counterparts, about 1,900 members of
the Forces de défense nationale were trained on human rights, while 60 officers
were trained to become human rights trainers. Specialized training sessions were
also organized for about 45 officers in the national intelligence service on judicial
issues, training of trainers, human rights and governance.
22. Alongside other partners, BNUB provided technical advice regarding the
development of the strategic plan for the Ministry of Public Security, which was
adopted by the Government in June 2013. Together with the defence review for the
Ministry of Defence, which has yet to be completed, the strategic plan will provide
the baseline for reforms in FDN and the national police.
23. The second national voluntary disarmament campaign, which had been
planned with support from UNDP and BNUB, was officially launched on
11 November, with the Law on Small and Light Weapons having been amended on
6 November to allow for a grace period of three months for those who were still
holding weapons illegally. BNUB also sponsored a workshop on 25 and
26 September on the role of women in the second disarmament campaign, which led
to the creation of a network of women from the defence, security forces and civil
society, in order to advocate for and increase women’s participation in the
disarmament process.

C.

Transitional justice
24. No significant progress has been made towards the establishment of a truth
and reconciliation commission since a draft law on such a commission was
transmitted to the Parliament in December 2012. In an address to the nation on
26 August 2013, President Nkurunziza declared that the truth and reconciliation
commission would be put in place by the end of the year. In addition, progress in
establishing a special tribunal has been slow.

6/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

25. In preparation for the eventual adoption of the draft law on the truth and
reconciliation commission, BNUB organized awareness-raising and capacitybuilding workshops for key stakeholders, including members of Parliament and civil
society. A workshop for representatives of the National Assembly was held on
18 April and another one for Senators on 27 November. The workshops focused on
international norms and standards relevant to the adoption of laws in that area. The
workshops also disseminated the outcome of the 2009 national consultations that
had captured the views of Burundians regarding transitional justice mechanisms.

D.

Governance and institution-building
26. Given the slow progress in implementing the national strategy on good
governance and the fight against corruption, the Council of Ministers acknowledged
on 23 May the need to accelerate implementation. In 2013, the Anti-Corruption
Brigade received 300 complaints, of which 247 were transmitted to the Parquet
général at the Anti-Corruption Court for appropriate action. During the period under
review, the Anti-Corruption Brigade recovered 1.2 billion Burundi francs that had
been deposited at the Public Treasury. From January to November 2013, the
Anti-Corruption Court received 205 complaints, of which only 32 were prosecuted.
For the third year in a row, Burundi improved its ranking in the “ease of doing
business” global report, rising from 159th to 140th position. At the same time, the
2013 Transparency International report ranked Burundi 157th of 175 countries in its
Corruption Perceptions Index.
27. The Office of the Ombudsman continued to play an important role in defusing
social tensions and resolving conflicts arising from land disputes, the abuse of
power in the public administration, the enforcement of legal judgements and
financial embezzlement. In 2013, the Office received 131 complaints and dealt with
140 cases.
28. The handling of many land disputes by the Commission nationale des terres et
autres biens during the reporting period has been without controversy. However, the
implementation of some of its decisions has elicited violent responses from the
public. This was the case on 26 March when the Commission faced resistance from
the local population while trying to evict two residents from houses in Bujumbura
Mairie. While Commission staff were accompanied by a significant national police
force, the residents were supported by a group of local youths. The expulsions were
condemned by opposition leaders as a violation of the Arusha accords. At a
workshop on the Commission held in Bujumbura on 24 June, President Nkurunziza
stressed the need for the Commission’s work to be guided by the Arusha accords,
including the principles of promotion of justice, reconciliation and social cohesion.
On 23 and 24 October, the Council of Ministers adopted two draft laws on the
mission, composition, organization and functioning of the Commission, and on the
establishment of a special tribunal to deal with land issues, which have arisen as a
result of conflict in Burundi. The draft was widely criticized by opposition political
parties and civil society actors, who expressed concern that a specialized court
might lack objectivity. On 28 December, the draft law was adopted by the majority
CNDD-FDD, backed by Sahwanya-FRODEBU. Parliamentarians of UPRONA and
those representing the Batwa community walked out in protest.

14-20526

7/29

S/2014/36

29. BNUB continued to support the strengthening of oversight institutions, notably
the Parliament, the Office of the Ombudsman, the Anti-Corruption Brigade and
non-governmental organizations active in the fight against corruption. BNUB also
sponsored the elaboration of an internal manual and a code of conduct for the
Anti-Corruption Brigade and, on 19 and 20 March, funded a sensitization workshop
organized by the Anti-Corruption Brigade in Kayanza for civil society
organizations, civil servants, and national police and military officers. Further,
BNUB supported two workshops on how to improve collaboration between
non-governmental organizations and Government institutions in the fight against
corruption; two anti-corruption awareness-raising workshops organized by the
Conseil national des églises; and one awareness-raising campaign on good
governance and accountability at the decentralized level organized by the
non-governmental organization Observatoire de l’action gouvernementale.

E.

Rule of law
30. In the course of 2013, some positive developments were registered in the
justice sector. New court regulations, which BNUB had been supporting since 2008,
were adopted on 12 June 2013. Some of the provisions are expected to contribute to
the improvement of the performance of the country’s courts. A new criminal
procedure code, which conforms to international standards, was also promulgated
and will enhance respect for the right of victims and defendants and improve
oversight by prosecutors of the judicial police.
31. However, the lack of progress in establishing an independent judiciary remains
a concern. The National Conference on Justice (Etats généraux de la justice) — a
national forum to address judicial challenges, including the independence of the
justice system, in a transparent and inclusive manner — was held in Gitega from
5 to 9 August. The Conference, which was supported by BNUB, UNDP and bilateral
partners, brought together 350 participants from the Government, civil society
organizations, judicial institutions, political parties and partners. However, the
Conference failed to adopt the recommendations guaranteeing the independence of
the judiciary. A follow-up committee to the Conference has yet to be established.
32. BNUB continued to support the Ministry of Justice particularly on improving
judicial independence and accountability. In collaboration with UNDP, BNUB
worked to finalize the strategic plan of the Conseil supérieur de la magistrature and
organized training on judicial ethics for more than 196 magistrates from the higher
courts. It also supported judicial oversight bodies by developing new inspection
tools, organizing pilot inspections and helping judicial inspectors to draft reports.
BNUB, as part of the Ministry of Justice committee against corruption, also
supported the development of the strategic plan on combating corruption in the
justice sector, in addition to finalizing the ongoing training programme for
magistrates.
33. In the area of corrections, BNUB assisted the Ministry of Justice in
rehabilitating a number of prisons, revising the prison legal framework and drafting
a corrections policy. However, serious challenges remain in this area, including
overcrowding, lack of resources and the absence of a unified organizational
structure under the Ministry of Justice.

8/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

F.

Human rights
34. The human rights situation in Burundi continues to be a cause for concern
owing to recurrent reported cases of extrajudicial killings, as well as acts of
intimidation, harassment and violence allegedly committed by members of the
Imbonerakure. The impunity that many perpetrators enjoy also remained an issue of
major concern.
35. The Independent National Commission on Human Rights continued to
contribute to strengthening the culture of human rights, expanding its reach to the
population with the establishment in May 2013 of three regional offices in Ngozi,
Gitega and Makamba. The regional offices were funded by the Peacebuilding Fund
and donors. As a follow-up to the opening of those offices, BNUB organized a series
of workshops to explain the mandate, role and functions of the Commission and to
build partnerships between the Commission, local administrations, civil society
actors and the local population. On 14 May 2013, in recognition of its crucial role in
promoting and monitoring the effective implementation of international human
rights standards in Burundi, the Commission was granted “A” status, valid from
2012 to 2017, by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions
for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in Geneva. Between January and
July 2013, the Commission received 102 cases and conducted investigations into 84.
However, major challenges remain, including in providing services throughout the
entire national territory and in building sufficient capacity to carry out consultative
functions, conduct the effective monitoring of economic, social and cultural rights,
as well as of cases of gender-based violence, and utilize effective assessment
techniques.
36. The number of extrajudicial killings increased slightly, from 30 in 2012 to
35 in 2013 as documented by BNUB. However, none of the killings were found to
be politically motivated. During the same period, BNUB documented 125 cases of
torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, most of which were
perpetrated by the national police and local administrators. In 13 of those cases, law
enforcement actors were accompanied by elements of the Imbonerakure. Impunity
remained a major problem in Burundi; for instance, only 16 of the 61 cases of
extrajudicial killings documented by BNUB in 2011 have so far been tried in a court
of law. Ten perpetrators were convicted and received sentences ranging from
20 years to life in prison; six were acquitted; and four cases were dismissed owing
to lack of evidence. Investigations are continuing on the remaining cases.
37. Victims and witnesses are at times reluctant to testify for fear of reprisal from
alleged perpetrators, notably when they are high-ranking members of the security
forces. In an effort to help to address that challenge, BNUB organized a workshop in
Bujumbura on 7 May 2013 for the adoption of a strategy on the protection of
victims and witnesses in Burundi. As a follow-up to the workshop, a study on
protection mechanisms was conducted between February and May 2013 to identify
the country’s needs in that area and to provide proposals for the development of a
draft law on victims and witness protection.
38. Civil society organizations continued raising awareness on human rights and,
with the support of BNUB, improved their monitoring and reporting capacities.
BNUB also worked closely with the Ministry of National Solidarity, Human Rights
and Gender to help the country to meet its reporting obligations to the human rights

14-20526

9/29

S/2014/36

treaty bodies and to implement the recommendations of the universal periodic
review. The Ministry, with the support of BNUB, is drafting a legal framework for
the protection of human rights defenders.

G.

Regional integration
39. Despite continuing to strengthen its regional relations, Burundi faced
challenges in deepening its regional integration within the framework of the East
African Community. In response to the series of tripartite summits of the East
African Community, held by the Presidents of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda, to
which Burundi and the United Republic of Tanzania were not invited, the
Government of Burundi issued a communiqué on 27 September emphasizing that
decisions on East African Community projects should be reached by consensus, in
line with the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community. The
Government also announced that Burundi would not participate in programmes in
whose design and implementation it was not involved.
40. In a positive development, Burundi attended the 15th Ordinary Summit of East
African Community Heads of State held in Kampala on 30 November, which
approved the protocol on the establishment of the East African Monetary Union and
recommended that the single customs territory system commence on 1 January
2014. Throughout the reporting period, BNUB continued to provide support to the
Ministry of External Affairs and International Cooperation through the organization
of capacity-building activities on a range of pertinent matters, including the
harmonization of Burundian laws with East African Community legislation.
41. Burundi also hosted two meetings of the Parliamentary Forum of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region from 11 to 13 November and
the meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Economic Community of the
Great Lakes Countries held on 9 and 10 May, which agreed to establish a regional
court with jurisdiction over transnational crimes in the Great Lakes region.

H.

Social and economic development
42. The economy of Burundi was projected to grow by 4.8 per cent in 2013, with
inflation declining from a peak of about 25 per cent in March 2012 to 8.2 per cent in
late May 2013. At the same time, the 2013 national report of Burundi on the
Millennium Development Goals showed that Burundi was likely to achieve only
1 of 18 initial targets. Since the State budget depends heavily on external financing,
the crisis in the euro zone, among other things, led to lower budgetary support
starting in early 2013. The Government adopted fiscal and budgetary measures to
preserve the sustainability of public finances, including the recovery of value-added
tax on food and petroleum products.
43. In a follow-up to the conference held in Geneva on 29 and 30 October 2012
for Burundi’s development partners, the Government of Burundi organized two
conferences, on 15 and 16 July and from 28 to 30 October, with support from
BNUB, UNDP, the African Development Bank, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. Both conferences aimed at helping to strengthen
cooperation between the Government and its bilateral and multilateral partners and
produced specific plans to implement Burundi’s poverty reduction strategy. The

10/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

second conference, which focused on investments in governance, peace
consolidation, energy, environment, regional integration and public health, saw
donors pledge $1.75 billion for various projects and programmes. Overall, the
Government expressed satisfaction with the delivery of the Geneva pledges,
estimated at 52 per cent, and committed to pursue the reforms recommended at the
conference held in Geneva and the two follow-up conferences.
44. As a result of renewed hostilities in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
in 2013, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in Burundi registered some 7,000 asylum seekers from South Kivu as at
October 2013. At the end of 2013, about 55,600 refugees were expected to be
registered. UNHCR is currently working with resettlement countries on a multi-year
plan aiming at the resettlement of 10,000 Congolese refugees from Burundi. At the
same time, legal frameworks for the repatriation of Burundian refugees remaining in
countries of asylum in the region are being finalized.
45. Since July 2013, between 35,000 and 40,000 Burundian migrants illegally
residing in the United Republic of Tanzania have been deported to Burundi by the
Tanzanian authorities. Since the majority of that population is returning to areas
with deep socioeconomic challenges, including places where former Burundian
refugees were recently reintegrated, there are serious risks of a long-term impact on
the coping capacity of the receiving communities. On 26 August, President
Nkurunziza met with President Jakaya Kikwete in the United Republic of Tanzania
to discuss bilateral issues, including the expulsion.
46. UNDP assisted the Government and communities in developing and
implementing the national strategy on socioeconomic reintegration for people
affected by conflict. UNDP also supported the implementation of 174 projects to
rehabilitate social infrastructure and the creation of 14,647 short-term jobs. The
programme was expanded recently to support the reintegration of 35,000 returnees
from Mtabila camp in the United Republic of Tanzania.

III. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Gender
47. In an effort to strengthen medical, psychological, judicial and social support
for victims of sexual and gender-based violence, the Government adopted a draft
law in June 2013 to strengthen the protection of victims and improve prevention. In
addition, the new criminal procedure code promulgated in April 2013 introduced
special sections on sexual and gender-based violence in the courts and public
prosecutor offices while also allowing civil society organizations to subrogate
victims before the courts at both the national and local levels.

B.

Child protection
48. About 20,000 Burundian children were repatriated and another 20,000
expelled from the United Republic of Tanzania during 2013 as part of the wave of
expulsions from the United Republic of Tanzania (see para. 45 above). The United
Nations is providing support to the Government for birth registration, access to

14-20526

11/29

S/2014/36

water and the health and education of returned children, but the sustainable
reintegration of the children remains a challenge that the Government of Burundi
has yet to address.
49. The Council of Ministers adopted a national child protection policy in March
and minimum standards on children living in institutions and deprived of family
care in May. Following a presidential decree on 5 June, the National Children’s
Forum was launched on 12 June, the Day of the African Child, and 34 children,
representing all provinces of the country, were elected as members. In addition,
more than 1,000 child protection committees have been functioning at the
community level in order to prevent violence against children and provide care for
vulnerable children. Despite such significant progress, strengthening the capacity of
the country’s social welfare workforce and adopting the Child Protection Code
remain urgent priorities to ensure the protection of child rights and care in Burundi.

C.

Activities related to the Peacebuilding Commission
50. The Chair of the Burundi Configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
continued to support the work of my Special Representative and engaged the
Government and key partners in the follow-up to the 2012 conference held in
Geneva for Burundi’s development partners. The Chair was actively engaged on the
Burundi dossier with the members of the Burundi configuration both in New York
and during visits to Burundi in January, June and October 2013. During his visit in
October 2013, the Chair attended the second follow-up meeting to the development
partners conference and emphasized the need to address key peace consolidation
challenges, including the constitutional review process, the revision of the electoral
code and violence related to youth wings affiliated with political parties.
51. On 3 December, my Special Representative co-signed the peacebuilding
priority plan for Burundi with the Minister of External Relations and International
Cooperation. The plan will provide funding for critical areas to foster the
consolidation of peace and democracy in the run-up to the 2015 elections, including
social cohesion and national dialogue, youth participation in political and social
initiatives, human rights, and the resolution of land disputes. The plan is expected to
be submitted to the Forum politique for information in January 2014 before being
officially submitted to the Peacebuilding Support Office for review and approval.
The implementation of the plan will be managed by a local joint steering committee,
which will be co-chaired by the Government and the United Nations and include
members from the Government, the United Nations, international partners and civil
society.
52. The ongoing reintegration project under the second Peacebuilding Fund
tranche delivered 86 per cent of its activities by 30 October and was extended until
March 2014. Carried out by several United Nations funds and programmes, the
project focuses its work in the three provinces of Bujumbura Rural, Cibitoke and
Bubanza, where there is a high concentration of ex-combatants, internally displaced
persons and returnees. Its objective is to consolidate peace and rebuild social
cohesion. An independent evaluation commissioned by the Peacebuilding Support
Office took place in November to assess the progress made through Peacebuilding
Fund projects since 2007, and its findings are expected in early 2014.

12/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

IV. Strategic assessment
53. In its resolution 2090 (2013), the Security Council took note of the progress
made in the implementation of the BNUB mandate and in Burundi’s peace
consolidation efforts, as assessed against the benchmarks for the future evolution of
BNUB into a United Nations country team presence. The Council requested that I
provide a report reflecting particularly the outcome of the strategic assessment
mission that I had indicated my intension to deploy to Burundi in the course of
2013. In a note verbale dated 16 August 2013, the Government of Burundi called for
the termination of the BNUB mandate on 15 February 2014, expressed the hope that
the strategic assessment mission would “meet the Government’s views”, and
conveyed its wish to see BNUB hand over its responsibilities to the United Nations
county team.
54. The strategic assessment was conducted from September to December, in a
process led by the Department of Political Affairs through the Burundi Integrated
Task Force, which included representatives of relevant departments, offices,
agencies, funds and programmes. It comprised an analysis phase, followed by a field
mission, in which a multidisciplinary team held consultations with representatives
of the Government of Burundi, political actors, civil society, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and regional and international
partners. Subsequently, I consulted President Nkurunziza and regional leaders on the
findings of the strategic assessment before the findings and recommendations were
finalized.
55. The strategic assessment mission found that despite the remarkable progress
Burundi has achieved in recent years, the country continues to experience
considerable tensions in its efforts to consolidate democracy and the rule of law. The
political scene remains deeply polarized, with the Government using its prerogatives
and dominance in Parliament to enact laws that infringe upon political and civil
rights, thus contributing to a shrinking of political space, and with the opposition
threatening to take steps to confront the Government.
56. In respect of human rights, the strategic assessment mission found that, despite
increased national capacities, there was limited progress in the prosecution of
alleged perpetrators of serious human rights violations. Limited space for political
dialogue negatively affected the accountability and effectiveness of various sectors,
notably security institutions and the judiciary. Insufficient efforts have been made to
address past grievances, and the delay in the establishment of transitional justice
mechanisms contributes to the entrenchment of impunity.
57. Despite sustained financial support by donors, the strategic assessment mission
found that the socioeconomic peace dividends Burundians expect have been slow to
materialize. The country’s social and economic indicators are among the lowest in
the world, with three quarters of Burundians living in extreme poverty. Particular
attention will be required to mitigate the risk that the economic situation might
exacerbate existing tensions, leading to renewed violence.
58. Against such a background, the strategic assessment mission noted that the
general elections in 2015 are widely regarded as a potential trigger for violence.
While there are opportunities ahead, the road towards 2015 will not be smooth;
indeed, the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law may drive conflict as
Burundian stakeholders struggle to find a consensual way forward. Burundian

14-20526

13/29

S/2014/36

authorities at all levels expressed appreciation for the work of BNUB. While the
President and ruling party insisted that BNUB had fulfilled its mandate, the
opposition and civil society organizations pressed for its continuation.
59. The strategic assessment mission concluded that the continued presence of
BNUB through the 2015 elections remains the preferred option for accompanying
Burundians in the consolidation of peace. However, taking into account the
expressed wish of the Government to draw down BNUB, while at the same time
recognizing that the United Nations country team does not currently have the
capacity to assume all BNUB functions, two further options could be envisaged. The
second option would entail the draw down of BNUB, which would be replaced by a
new peacebuilding mission with a more focused mandate, as an interim step to
preparing the ground for a transition of functions to the United Nations country
team. The third option, which the Council may wish to consider as a last resort,
would envisage the appointment of a special envoy to promote and facilitate
dialogue between national actors and mechanisms for broad-based participation in
political life. The special envoy would also coordinate international efforts to ensure
an environment conducive to the holding of free and open elections in 2015. The
second and third options would have significant programmatic, resource and staffing
implications for the United Nations in Burundi. In particular, the United Nations
country team would require sufficient time and resources to develop the capacity to
effectively assume the core peacebuilding tasks of BNUB, including human rights,
transitional justice and other areas of governance. A special funding appeal would
need to be launched to address these capacity and programming gaps in a timely
manner.
60. In view of the above, I met with President Nkurunziza in Paris on 6 December
to discuss the future of BNUB, noting that the findings of the strategic assessment
mission, largely shared by the international community, pointed to the continuing
need for a political presence of the United Nations through the 2015 elections.
During the meeting, President Nkurunziza reiterated his view that a further renewal
of the BNUB mandate would have a negative impact on partners and investors,
stressing that Burundi did not want to continue to be perceived as a post-conflict
country.
61. Following the meeting and a further exchange between my Special
Representative and senior officials of the Foreign Ministry, I proposed to President
Nkurunziza that the future political engagement of the United Nations in Burundi be
modified to concentrate on the following main areas: (a) political dialogue;
(b) electoral process; (c) human rights; (d) transitional justice mechanisms and
support to the justice sector; and (e) capacity-building for the reform of the security
sector. At the same time, the United Nations country team would take on providing
support to the Government of Burundi in promoting development, strengthening
governance and deepening regional integration. I also proposed that a joint
transition plan between the Government of Burundi and the United Nations be
developed to determine, starting in February 2014, the practical modalities for the
transition of the United Nations engagement in Burundi towards activities related to
development, under the direct responsibility of the United Nations country team.
62. President Nkurunziza, in his letter to me dated 31 December, expressed
appreciation for the multifaceted support provided by the United Nations to the
Burundian people. However, in contrast to my proposal for a future United Nations

14/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

political presence in the country, he noted that Burundi had registered some positive
developments in 2013 and that “the transfer of responsibilities from BNUB to a
United Nations country team could take place as of 15 February 2014, in line with
resolution 2090 (2013)”. The President also suggested that future political
engagement could be left to the agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system. In that context, the President stated that establishing a transitional
structure, such as a follow-on United Nations mission, would be “inopportune” if
the aim was to immediately facilitate the transfer of responsibilities from BNUB to
a country team.
63. On 7 January, my Special Representative, together with his Deputy, who also
serves as Resident Coordinator, met with his Government counterparts and advised
them that the United Nations country team was currently neither prepared nor
equipped to assume BNUB responsibilities. He warned that their abrupt interruption
could have a detrimental impact on peace consolidation efforts in Burundi. On
12 January, he conveyed the same message directly to the Minister of Foreign
Relations and International Cooperation, Laurent Kavakure. During his visit to
Burundi, from 13 to 17 January, the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Seger, also called on the Government of Burundi to
ensure that the transition to the United Nations country team would take place
within a reasonable time frame of at least 12 months. On 15 January, Mr. Kavakure
addressed a letter to me, in which he referred to the exchange of letters between his
President and me, as described in paragraphs 61 and 62 above. In the letter,
Mr. Kavakure noted that his Government would be pleased to see the draw down of
BNUB within a transitional period of six months, from 16 February, in order to
allow for a closure of the ongoing political programmatic activities of BNUB and to
enable the transfer of its responsibilities to the United Nations country team.

V. Observations and recommendations
64. Burundi has made substantial progress, overcoming formidable challenges
since the end of the civil war. The country has successfully managed a delicate
transition period and is consolidating its democratic institutions. Today, Burundi
enjoys peace and security, regional relations are deepening and development efforts
are gathering pace.
65. However, the significant gains are far from irreversible. Now, more than ever,
the Government of Burundi must demonstrate visionary leadership by continuing to
promote the spirit of dialogue and consensus enshrined in the Arusha accords, which
has helped Burundians to address the structural causes of conflict in their country.
Given Burundi’s history and social make-up, majority rule and a winner-takes-all
mentality could erase such hard-won gains.
66. The presidential elections in 2015 will be a litmus test for the country’s longterm stability. Stakeholders across the political spectrum have laid the groundwork
for the elections in the March 2013 electoral road map. This includes agreeing to the
electoral reforms required to ensure that the elections are fair, inclusive and
transparent, with results that are accepted by all. I call upon the Government and all
political stakeholders to fully implement their respective commitments as contained
in the road map.

14-20526

15/29

S/2014/36

67. A strong and healthy democracy needs a vibrant opposition. I therefore
welcome the return to Burundi of political leaders who were in exile, which marked
the normalization of the country’s political life since the boycott of the elections in
2010. I note the increasing tensions and intra-party disputes facing some of
Burundi’s political parties. I urge all political parties and actors to refrain from
using incendiary language and to peacefully resolve their differences through
dialogue, in the interest of their own parties and for the sake of multiparty
democracy in the country.
68. I am convinced that the period ahead represents an opportunity for Burundians
to actively and peacefully participate in the political life of their country in order to
build a better and more stable future for all. For that, Burundians across the political
spectrum must be free to exercise their civil and political rights without fear of
intimidation or violence. I urge the Government of Burundi and political parties to
launch a public campaign against political violence ahead of the 2015 elections.
69. As the country prepares for the 2015 elections, I am troubled by the acts of
violence committed by youth affiliated with political parties and by the apparent
impunity they seem to enjoy. Acts of political violence, including those committed
by these youths, must be prosecuted. I urge the Government and political parties to
take all necessary measures to ensure that youth are not exposed to political
manipulation that could lead to acts of violence and intimidation. I call upon youth
to collaborate with other citizens in dedicating their energy, talent and unique
perspective and experience to the important processes of reconciliation and
development.
70. I welcome the constructive atmosphere that prevailed during the consultations
held on 19 and 20 December on the constitutional review process chaired by the
President of the National Assembly. I encourage the Burundian authorities to resist
the temptation to rush such an important undertaking. Should the process continue, I
call upon Burundi’s political parties and other stakeholders to place national
interests above all other considerations and to seize the opportunity to enhance the
role of democratic institutions and promote the rule of law, justice, good governance
and reconciliation.
71. While there were no politically motivated extrajudicial executions in 2013, I
remain concerned that there continues to be impunity for human rights violations,
including sexual violence and rape. I urge the Government to pursue its efforts to
combat impunity by ensuring that those responsible for serious human rights
violations are brought to justice and by scaling up the fight against gender-based
violence. I appeal to the Burundian authorities to apply a strict zero-tolerance policy
regarding human rights abuses committed by the security forces. I call upon them to
make every effort to further professionalize the security forces and instil discipline
in them, particularly the national police. I also urge partners to continue to support
security sector reform in order to improve overall accountability and performance.
72. I call upon the Government to ensure that efforts to promote reconciliation and
healing take root, including through the establishment of the much-anticipated truth
and reconciliation commission. National and local efforts to promote conflict
prevention and resolution and foster social cohesion are also required to prevent the
erosion of Burundi’s hard-won gains.

16/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

73. I am encouraged by the commitment of the Government to addressing the
complex issue of land tenure, which is essential for lasting peace and stability. At
the same time, I am concerned that the perception of unevenness created by some of
the decisions of the Commission nationale des terres et autres biens could foster
communal tensions with broader economic and public order ramifications,
particularly when political competition intensifies during the electoral period. In
their effort to promote justice, I call upon the Burundian authorities to handle land
grievances and disputes in a non-partisan manner and to also address land tenure in
the broader context of socioeconomic development, bearing in mind the need to
foster reconciliation and national cohesion.
74. The international community has made a significant investment in Burundi. It
must continue to play a constructive role through enhanced coordination,
particularly for the preparations for the elections and support for security sector
reform. More broadly, the significant progress Burundi has made in furthering peace
and stability must be reinforced by socioeconomic development. I call upon the
Government to take additional measures to improve living standards, access to
health care and other social services, as well as to reduce unemployment. I
encourage the Peacebuilding Commission to continue its efforts to sustain
international support and mobilize resources for Burundi. I urge development
partners to fill the funding gap for the implementation of Burundi’s second poverty
reduction strategy, including, and as appropriate, through targeted budget support.
Further support to the United Nations country team through the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework process is also critical.
75. I have considered the findings of the strategic review and the limited progress
made towards meeting the benchmarks contained in the annex to the present report,
as well as the conviction of the United Nations country team that it is unable to
absorb BNUB tasks at present. I have also given serious consideration to the views
expressed by the Government, as indicated in paragraphs 53 to 63 above. I am
convinced that a United Nations political presence in Burundi remains necessary to
further accompany the country in consolidating peace by facilitating dialogue,
monitoring and reporting human rights, and establishing transitional justice
mechanisms until after the presidential elections in 2015. I appreciate the wish of
the Government of Burundi, as conveyed by President Nkurunziza, to assert greater
national ownership over its peace consolidation process. However, the
Government’s request that BNUB draw down within six months as of 16 February
2014 poses a difficult dilemma, given the continuing need for a United Nations
political presence whose functions cannot be entirely covered by the United Nations
country team. I therefore recommend that the BNUB mandate be extended for a
further period of 12 months. Should the Government persist in its position that such
an extension is not acceptable, however, the Security Council may wish to consider
the other options outlined in paragraph 59 above.
76. I wish to thank President Nkurunziza and his Government for their continued
cooperation with the United Nations. I am also grateful to Burundi’s development
partners for their critical assistance to the country’s peacebuilding process. Finally, I
would like to express my sincere gratitude to all United Nations personnel who,
under the leadership of my Special Representative, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, have
continued to show commitment and dedication to the consolidation of peace in
Burundi.

14-20526

17/29

S/2014/36

Annex
Benchmarks for the United Nations Office in Burundi
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1959 (2010) and
2027 (2011)
I. Democratic process
Benchmark: Continuing progress in the consolidation of democracy and the resolution of
political differences through dialogue
Baseline through 2011: A spirit of dialogue and power-sharing underpinned the 2000 Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi (hereinafter “Arusha accords”) and was
enshrined in the Constitution of Burundi of 2005 and in the composition of the Government in
2005. Observers declared that the 2010 elections had been conducted in conformity with
international norms, but they were boycotted by a number of opposition parties, whose leaders
subsequently went into exile. The boycott continued to affect political life in Burundi in 2011, and
tensions deepened between the Government and the Alliance démocratique pour le changementIkibiri (ADC-Ikibiri) grouping of extraparliamentary opposition parties. Although both sides had
confirmed their readiness to collaborate, political dialogue throughout 2011 remained stalled, and
no formal meetings were held between the Government and the extraparliamentary opposition
parties.
Developments in 2012:a 2012 was marked by an absence of dialogue and little progress in the
preparations for the 2015 elections. The law on the status of the political opposition was passed
without the consultation of all the parties. The Government established a new Independent
National Electoral Commission, with objections registered from opposition parties concerning its
composition. Throughout 2012, various opposition party meetings were prohibited by authorities.
Indicators of progress

2013 assessments

1.1. Increasingly democratic, accountable,
representative and effective State institutions

• The boycott of the 2010 elections by several
political parties continued to affect
Parliament, which is composed of only three
parties (Conseil national pour la défense de la
démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la
démocratie (CNDD-FDD), Union pour le
progrès national (UPRONA) and Front pour
la démocratie au Burundi-Nyakuri
(FRODEBU-Nyakuri)), largely dominated by
CNDD-FDD
• The number of question-and-answer sessions
held with members of the Government in
Parliament decreased to 11 (2012: 24;
2011: 35)

__________________
a The section summarizes the 2012 assessments of the benchmarks, as presented in the annex of

the previous report (S/2013/36).

18/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

1.2. Continuing dialogue between political
parties and the Government

• As in 2012, six official interactions took
place between parties in power and the
extraparliamentary opposition
• The workshop on electoral lessons learned
held in Bujumbura in March, the workshop
on the revision of the electoral code held in
Kayanza in May, and the assessment
workshop held in Bujumbura in November
on the implementation of the electoral road
map deepened and strengthened political
dialogue between political parties and actors
• Only a select number of political parties were
invited to the Permanent Forum for Dialogue
among the Political Parties
• As in 2012, various political party meetings
were prohibited or obstructed by the
Government throughout 2013. The parties
affected were mainly members of the
opposition coalition ADC-Ikibiri,
Mouvement pour la solidarité et le
développement (MSD) and supporters of
Agathon Rwasa

1.3. Improved legal framework for electoral
process management

The Government organized, with the support
of the United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB), a workshop in May 2013 on the
revision of the 2009 electoral code. The
workshop proposed a series of amendments,
most of which were accepted by the
Government. The new code has yet to be
passed by the National Assembly

1.4. Increasing institutional capacity to move
towards the 2015 elections with appropriate
international financial and technical support

The Independent National Electoral
Commission organized ad hoc meetings with
political parties and civil society. In November,
the Commission agreed to hold regular
meetings with opposition parties and civil
society organizations

1.5. Increasing national ownership over the
electoral process

• A needs assessment mission was organized
by the United Nations, in close collaboration
with the Government, particularly the
Independent National Electoral Commission,
to determine the required framework and
levels for international support to the
elections in 2015
• The Government and the United Nations
signed a project document in November to
create, among other things, an electoral
basket fund

14-20526

19/29

S/2014/36

1.6. Political consensus among all stakeholders
on movement towards the 2015 elections

• In October 2013, the Council of Ministers
adopted a draft law containing wide-ranging
amendments to the Constitution without
prior, broad-based and inclusive
consultations. The draft amendments change
decision-making parameters and the structure
of the Government. Following domestic
criticism and increased tensions, a
consultative workshop on the constitutional
review was organized by the National
Assembly in December
• The Government and the International
Foundation for Electoral Systems organized
a workshop in November on creating a
political environment conducive to the
holding of free and open elections in 2015.
A draft code of conduct for the elections was
discussed without reaching a consensus over
a final version
• On several occasions, the extraparliamentary
opposition indicated that it will not boycott
the elections in 2015

1.7. Increasing percentage of the population
believe in the credibility of the elections

Data not available in 2013

II. Security and stability
Benchmark: A strengthening and sustainable security structure enabling Burundi to respond
effectively to domestic and international security concerns while respecting global norms and
rights
Baseline through 2011: A significant number of small arms remained in circulation (100,000
households according to the Small Arms Survey in 2007), notwithstanding the first civilian
disarmament campaign in 2009 and efforts made through the earlier disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme. The integration of former combatants into the Burundian National
Defence Forces and the Burundian National Police, the rightsizing of both forces and their respect
for ethnic proportionality greatly contributed to overall stability and security. However, human
rights abuses by security forces in 2010 and 2011 highlighted the need for continued
professionalization and enhanced civilian oversight.
Developments in 2012: No significant reduction in the circulation of small arms was noted yet
progress was made regarding the registration of the weapons of the national defence forces. The
first draft of a national security strategy was prepared but not finalized. There were only minor
reductions in the rightsizing of the security and national defence forces, and the National Security
Council, which was created in 2012, was hampered by the absence of a clear strategy. Human
rights violations by members of the national police continued to be a source of concern.

20/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

Indicators of progress

2013 assessments

2.1. Progress made in civilian disarmament, and
in the management and control of small arms
and light weapons

• In 2013, 95 per cent of the weapons of the
national police were registered and marked
and 100 per cent of the weapons of the
national defence forces were registered (in
comparison with 60 per cent and 100 per cent
in 2012, respectively)
• The second national voluntary disarmament
campaign was officially launched in
November 2013
• BNUB supported a workshop on the role of
women leaders in the second disarmament
campaign

2.2. Progress made in the rightsizing of the
security and national defence forces

• The national defence forces were reduced by
889 and the national police by 438 personnel,
bringing total numbers to 27,000 (target
25,000) and 15,388 (target 15,000),
respectively
• At the same time, the national defence forces
added 981 recruits and the national police
1,070 recruits for assignments in specialized
services

2.3. Increasing civilian oversight over the
security and national defence forces in
compliance with the current constitution, laws
and regulations

• Civilian oversight over security and national
defence forces remained weak

2.4. Increasing professionalization of the
security and national defence forces

• The strategic plan of the national police was
completed in 2013 while the defence review
of the national defence forces was not
finalized

• The National Security Council met five times
in 2013. BNUB continued to provide
technical support to the permanent secretariat
of the National Security Council

• The Government conducted a security sector
reform review, with support from BNUB and
bilateral partners
• The national security strategy was adopted by
the Government in June 2013. BNUB
provided training on human rights,
democratic governance and judicial processes
to about 2,000 members of the national
defence forces, the national police and the
National Intelligence Service in 2013
• The Ministry of Defence, with the support of
BNUB, conducted a workshop on human
rights

14-20526

21/29

S/2014/36

2.5. Increasing confidence of the population in
the service delivery of the security and national
defence forces

Data not available in 2013

III. Transitional justice
Benchmark: Continuing progress in transitional justice to advance victims’ rights, the fight
against impunity and national reconciliation
Baseline through 2011: Transitional justice is the major remaining feature of the Arusha accords
for which implementation lagged. Following broad national consultations in 2009 and 2010 and
extensive work undertaken by a Government technical committee, a new draft law on the
establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission was presented to Parliament in October
2011.
Developments in 2012: A revised draft law on the truth and reconciliation commission was
submitted to Parliament in December. The law was not adopted. No progress was achieved
regarding all other indicators on transnational justice in 2012.

22/29

Indicators of progress

2013 assessments

3.1. Establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission in line with the 2009 national
consultations, the work of the technical
committee of 2011, international standards and
applicable legal instruments

• No progress was registered regarding the
establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission as the draft law was not adopted
in 2013

3.2. Establishment of a special tribunal in line
with the 2009 national consultations, the work of
the technical committee of 2011, international
standards and applicable legal instruments

No progress made in 2013

3.3. Existence of a follow-up mechanism for the
implementation of recommendations of a truth
and reconciliation commission

No progress made in 2013

3.4. Increasing ability of the political leadership
to bring about reconciliation between the victims
and perpetrators of past crimes

No progress made in 2013

3.5. Increasing level of satisfaction with the
transitional justice process

Not applicable in 2013

3.6. Increasing percentage of the population
believing that reconciliation has been achieved

Data not available in 2013

• In preparation for the adoption of the draft
law on a truth and reconciliation commission,
BNUB organized workshops to build the
capacity of key stakeholders and to provide a
platform for discussions on transitional
justice

14-20526

S/2014/36

IV. Governance and institution-building
Benchmark: Increasing State authority through legitimate, democratic, accountable and
effective institutions
Baseline through 2011: Following the adoption of the 2005 Constitution, key new institutions
envisaged have successively been established, including the National Communications Council
(2007), the National Security Council (2008), the Permanent Forum for Dialogue among the
Political Parties (2010) and the Independent National Commission on Human Rights (2011). In
2011, with assistance from the United Nations and other partners, Burundi developed a number of
important strategies reflecting national governance priorities, including the national strategy on
good governance and the fight against corruption. The establishment of the Anti-Corruption
Brigade (2006), the Anti-Corruption Court (2006), the Office of the Ombudsman (2011) and the
Burundi Revenue Authority (2011) were important institutional developments to enhance the
efficiency and accountability of the Government. While corruption remained a serious concern, the
beginnings of sustained improvement were evident.
Developments in 2012: 2012 saw little progress in the implementation of the national strategy on
good governance and the fight against corruption. The amount of revenue collected by the Burundi
Revenue Authority increased, and Burundi significantly improved its ranking in the World Bank’s
“ease of doing business index”. The implementation of the national programme for the reform of
the administration, adopted in April 2012, proved challenging.
Indicators of progress

2013 assessments

4.1. Increasing proportion of seats held by
women in Parliament and in elected and
appointed bodies at all levels

As in 2012, 32 per cent of National Assembly
members, 46 per cent of Senate members,
35 per cent of ministers, 5.8 per cent of
provincial governors and 32.5 per cent of
communal administrators were female

4.2. Decreasing corruption in the public and
private sectors

• According to Transparency International’s
East African Bribery Index 2013, Burundi
moved from being the second least corrupt
country in East Africa to the second most
corrupt (index slightly decreased from
18.8 per cent in 2012 to 18.6 per cent in
2013)
• In Transparency International’s Corruption
Perceptions Index, Burundi improved its
ranking from 165th in 2012 to 157th out of
175 countries
• The Anti-Corruption Brigade transmitted
247 complaints of corruption in 2013 to the
Procureur général (156 in 2012)
• The Anti-Corruption Court registered
205 cases in 2013 (285 in 2012). The Court
delivered sentences for 169 cases in 2013
(218 in 2012)

14-20526

23/29

S/2014/36

4.3. Increasingly transparent, accountable and
efficient national institutions

The Office of the Ombudsman received
131 complaints in 2013 (223 in 2012) and dealt
with 140 cases (123 in 2012)

4.4. Progress made in the quality of public
administration

The tax revenue collected by the Burundi
Revenue Authority in 2013 was 599.2 billion
Burundi francs (6.2 per cent increase compared
with 2012)

V. Rule of law
Benchmark: An increasingly independent, accessible and credible justice system upholding
human rights
Baseline through 2011: In 2011, the Ministry of Justice sectorial policy for the period 2011-2015
was developed, reaffirming the Government’s commitment to strengthening the independence of
the judiciary, enhancing good governance in the justice sector, making justice available to all and
improving criminal justice. However, the document did not address reforms concerning the status
of magistrates.
Developments in 2012: Implementation of the Ministry of Justice sectorial policy for the period
2011-2015 commenced in 2012. A national preparatory commission was set up to organize the
National Conference on Justice (Etats généraux de la justice) while workshops were carried out
throughout the country to collect the views of stakeholders on areas in need of reform. Following
the implementation of a presidential pardon and release on parole, the total prison population
decreased by 29.7 per cent in 2012. A draft code on judicial ethics was prepared but not adopted,
and magistrates were not recruited through a competitive examination as required by law.
Indicators of progress

2013 assessments

5.1. Decreasing ratio of pretrial detainees to the
overall prison population

The overall prison population increased by
15.78 per cent

5.2. Increasing proportion of law enforcement
officials trained in rules of conduct concerning
proportional use of force, arrest, interrogation,
detention or punishment

65 military officers were trained as trainers on
human rights and humanitarian law. Of those,
16 qualified as certified trainers and
subsequently trained almost 2,000 members of
the national defence forces and security forces

5.3. Increasingly simple and systematic access
to the results of commissions of inquiry for
those authorized

There was no commission of inquiry in 2013

5.4. Increasing number of criminals brought to
justice

Data not available in 2013

5.5. Improving the management of prisons, to
better comply with human rights standards

• Prison occupancy rate slightly increased from
183 per cent in 2012 (258 per cent in 2011)
to 188 per cent in 2013
• 52 prison staff were trained in prison
management

24/29

14-20526

S/2014/36

5.6. Progress made in the adoption and
implementation of legislation on magistrates, in
the professionalization of magistrates, as well as
in the organization and effectiveness of the
Supreme Council of Magistrates

• The draft code on judicial ethics was not
adopted but instead transformed into a guide
on judicial ethics

5.7. Progress made in the independence of the
judiciary

• As in 2012, magistrates were still not
recruited through a competitive examination
as foreseen by law (the Government is citing
budgetary constraints as the main reason)

• 196 more magistrates were trained on judicial
ethics in 2013. As of 2013, all magistrates
currently serving had been trained on judicial
ethics

• The National Conference on Justice was held
in August 2013, yet the recommendations
guaranteeing the independence of the
judiciary were not adopted
5.8. Increasing percentage of the population
expressing confidence in the judicial system

Data not available in 2013

VI. Human rights
Benchmark: A deepening culture of protection and the promotion of human rights in Burundi
Baseline through 2011: The aftermath of the 2010 elections saw a marked increase in serious
human rights violations, in many cases reportedly perpetrated by members of the security or
national defence forces. In 2010, BNUB/the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights documented 40 cases of extrajudicial, arbitrary or summary executions and/or politically
motivated killings; and 30 cases of torture (61 and 36 cases, respectively, in 2011). The
establishment of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights in 2011 was an
important step but concerns over case follow-up remained.
Developments in 2012: The human rights situation in 2012 was characterized by a significant
decrease in the number of extrajudicial executions documented by BNUB (30 compared with 61 in
2011), of which only four were likely to have been politically motivated (about 20 in 2011).
However, perpetrators in only 6 of the 30 cases were arrested and tried in a court of law, all
resulting in convictions. The Independent National Commission on Human Rights opened three
regional offices and investigated 480 cases, compared with only 107 in 2011.

14-20526

Indicators of progress

2013 assessments

6.1. Increasing proportion of human rights
violations — including cases of disappearances
and extrajudicial killings — investigated by the
judiciary, and perpetrators arrested, judged and/
or serving sentences

• Of the 35 documented cases of extrajudicial
executions in 2013, 27 are under
investigation by the judiciary and 3 resulted
in convictions

25/29

S/2014/36

• Of the 20 documented cases of torture in
2013, 14 are under investigation by the
national police and the judiciary
(6 investigated in 2012)
6.2. Increasing frequency and timeliness of
reports submitted to the relevant bodies

One human rights report was submitted by the
Government while two others were pending
submission

6.3. Decreasing instances of torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
perpetrated by an agent of the State or any other
person acting under Government authority or
with its complicity

• BNUB documented 35 cases of extrajudicial
executions (30 in 2012)
• BNUB documented 20 cases of torture (16 in
2012)
• BNUB documented 105 cases of ill-treatment
(57 in 2012)

6.4. Increasing effectiveness of the Independent
National Commission on Human Rights,
including through the establishment of a
monitoring network on human rights, by civil
society organizations, which contributes to the
activities of the Commission

• The Independent National Commission on
Human Rights received 102 cases,
investigated 84 and concluded 18 between
January and July 2013 (between January and
November 2012, the Commission
investigated 480 cases and concluded 117)
• The Independent National Commission on
Human Rights was officially accredited “A”
status by the International Coordinating
Committee of National Human Institutions
for the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights in May 2013

6.5. Rolling adoption of priority international
and regional human rights instruments and
increasing conformity of national human rights
instruments with relevant international and
regional instruments

In October 2013, Burundi acceded to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment

6.6. Strengthening of structures dealing with the
protection of vulnerable groups

• The law on the fight against sexual and
gender-based violence was adopted in June
2013
• Magistrates of the Humura Centre were
trained on the treatment of cases involving
sexual and gender-based violence

6.7. Progress made in ensuring freedom of the
media and civil society

26/29

• No cases of refoulement were reported in
2013
Five cases of violations of freedom of the press
were documented by BNUB in 2013 (none
were documented in 2012)

14-20526

S/2014/36

VII. Regional integration
Benchmark: Deepening regional integration for Burundi with full participation in regional
political, commercial and other negotiations and improved interaction of Burundian
authorities with regional cooperation mechanisms
Baseline through 2011: After its accession to the East African Community in 2009, Burundi
intensified its efforts to improve economic and political ties with regional partners in 2011.
Regional integration is one of the eight pillars of the country’s 2025 vision.
Developments in 2012: In 2012, Burundi increased its trade with East African Community
member countries and actively participated in four important East African Community meetings.
The drafting of a national strategy on regional integration was commenced but not completed.
Indicators of progress

2013 assessments

7.1. Increasing trade between Burundi and its
regional partners

Data not available in 2013

7.2. Increasing political and commercial
• Burundi participated in seven high-level
negotiations and interactions with member States
meetings of the East African Community, one
of regional economic communities
of the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes Countries, two of the Economic
Community of Central African States and
three of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region
• In the second half of 2013, several EAC
summits were organized to which Burundi
and Tanzania were not invited
7.3. Increasing capacity of the Government of
Burundi to take forward the regional integration
process

• The Ministry of External Affairs and
International Cooperation, with BNUB
support, organized several workshops,
including on the reduction of non-tariff
barriers; border security; defence, peace and
security cooperation legal frameworks; and
expediting the harmonization of Burundian
laws with East African Community
legislation
• A study to assist the Service national de
législation with the revision and drafting of a
code governing companies and a code
governing trade was supported by BNUB

7.4. Increasing perception of benefits from
regional integration on the part of the population

14-20526

Data not available in 2013

27/29

S/2014/36

VIII. Social and economic development
Benchmark: Improving living standards of the population, delivery of basic services to the
most vulnerable and conditions for economic recovery
Baseline through 2011: Despite the Government’s efforts, Burundi suffered from widespread
poverty, land scarcity combined with high population density, food insecurity, and high youth
unemployment. Although Burundi’s Human Development Index has constantly increased since
2000, the country still ranked 185th of 187 countries in 2011.
Developments in 2012: Burundi’s socioeconomic challenges remained unchanged. Its Human
Development Index increased from 0.316 in 2011 to 0.355 in 2012, moving the country from
185th place in 2011 to 172nd place (out of 186 countries) in 2012.
Indicators of progress

2013 assessments

8.1. Decreasing proportion of the population
living on less than $1.25 per day

• The poverty rate was 67 per cent in 2006
(no new data available for 2013)
• Burundi ranks last on the 2013 Global
Hunger Index (same as in 2012)

8.2. Improving enrolment and completion ratios
in primary education

• In 2010/11, primary school enrolment was
96 per cent (no new data available for 2013)

8.3. Decreasing number of internally displaced
persons

78,860 conflict-affected internally displaced
persons remain in Burundi and have been
settled in 120 sites throughout the country,
awaiting durable solutions

8.4. Increasing proportion of children aged
12-23 months immunized against contagious
diseases

In 2010, 83 per cent of children were
completely vaccinated (no new data available
for 2013)

8.5. Increasing proportion of the population
with access to potable water and electricity

In 2008, access to electricity was 4.8 per cent
(no new data available for 2013)

8.6. Improving youth employment rate

• Youth unemployment is estimated to be very
high (no concrete data available)
• The Government, with the support of the
International Fund for Agricultural
Development, launched a new job creation
programme in June 2013 designed to create
about 20,000 jobs for youth in the period
from 2013-2016

8.7. Increasing number of youth and women
with access to basic social services

28/29

Data not available in 2013

14-20526

S/2014/36

14-20526

8.8. Improving legislative and regulatory
environment favouring business and investment

Burundi was ranked 140th of 189 countries in
the World Bank’s 2014 “ease of doing business
index” (159th of 185 countries in 2013)

8.9. Improving socioeconomic situation of
refugees, repatriated persons and internally
displaced persons

• 1,000 shelters were built for returnees

8.10. Increasing percentage of population feeling
that the standard of living is rising

Data not available in 2013

• Access to land and land disputes remain
serious obstacles to reintegration processes

29/29
