S/PV.8676

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8676th meeting

Tuesday, 3 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Craft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ntsoane
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-fourth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2019/865)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2470
(2019) (S/2019/903)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-39055 (E)
*1939055*

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of December, I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency Ms. Karen
Pierce, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for
her service in the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I am sure I speak for
all members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Pierce and her team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-fourth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2019/865)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2470 (2019) (S/2019/903)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq; Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations; and
Monsignor Bashar Matti Warda, Archbishop of Erbil.

03/12/2019

of paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107
(2013), and document S/2019/903, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2470 (2019).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: In recent months, I have
consistently referred to urgent, unfinished domestic
business in Iraq. Today, perhaps inevitably, I will brief
the Security Council on protests and civil unrest. These
protests, which were initially driven by young people
in particular, have given voice to their frustration with
poor economic, social and political prospects, and
to their hopes for better times, free from corruption,
partisan interests and foreign interference. Hundreds
of thousands of Iraqis from all walks of life have
taken to the streets out of the love for their homeland,
emphasizing their Iraqi identity. All they are asking
for is a country that can reach its full potential for the
benefit of all its citizens.
However, they are paying an unimaginable price
for their voices to be heard. Since early October, more
than 400 people have been killed and more than 19,000
have been injured. As we commemorate the fallen and
pay our respects, their ideals and demands remain
more alive than ever. One of the protesters told me in
the clearest of terms that he would rather not live at all
than live without dignity and freedom. That is what the
protests are all about. Last week, I visited a hospital in
Baghdad and met with a 16-year-old boy who had been
heavily injured by shrapnel. His mother said that the
lack of all prospects makes our teenagers desperate and
that it makes them think and act at least twice their age.
Her son is only 16 years old, but 16 years is a very long
time if one is waiting for political leaders to live up to
their promises.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

These young people have no recollection of how
horrific life was for many Iraqis in the time of Saddam
Hussein. However, they are very much aware of the life
that was promised after Saddam Hussein, and through
the power of connectivity, they know perfectly well that
a better future is possible. I have often said that the
current situation cannot be judged without putting it in
the context of Iraq’s past, and that is true. What we are
witnessing is an accumulation of frustration over the
lack of progress for so many years.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/865, which contains the twenty-fourth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation

After years, even decades, of sectarian strife and
conflict, a renewed sense of patriotism has taken
hold, symbolized by the 16-year-old boy I met in the

Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert is joining today’s meeting
via video-teleconference from Baghdad.

2/25

19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

hospital, as well as his countless brothers and sisters
demonstrating in Iraq. Some well-known Iraqis refer
to it as the battle of a nation. Let me underline that any
successful nation needs to warmly embrace the potential
of its young people. That is all the more important in
Iraq, with its remarkably young population.
Events spun out of control on the very first night
of the demonstrations, with authorities immediately
resorting to excessive force. The high loss of life, the
many injuries and the violence, combined with a long
period of undelivered promises, all resulted in a huge
crisis of confidence. Although the Government has
announced various reform packages addressing issues
such as housing, unemployment, financial support and
education, those are often perceived as unrealistic or
too little, too late.
Additionally, the Government’s investigation into
the violence of early October is seen as incomplete,
although it was a positive step. Who is smashing
media outlets, gunning down peaceful protesters and
abducting civil activists? Who are those masked men
and unidentified snipers? I note that a number of arrest
warrants have been issued, but I would like to emphasize
that perpetrators must be brought to full account. There
can be no justification for the many killings and heavy
injuries among peaceful protesters. Yet that is precisely
what we have been documenting since 1 October. The
rules of engagement were reviewed by the Government
to minimize the use of lethal force, and indeed, more
restraint was observed at the start of the second wave of
demonstrations, in Baghdad in particular.
Yet the harsh reality is that the use of live fire has
not been abandoned; that non-lethal devices, such as
tear gas canisters, continue to be used improperly,
causing horrific injuries or death; and that unlawful
arrests and detentions continue to take place, as do
abductions, threats and intimidation. The recent events
in Nasiriyah and Najaf are a case in point. I therefore
wish to reiterate the importance of guaranteeing
fundamental rights — above all the right to life, but
also the right to peaceful assembly and freedom of
expression. Additionally, I wish to again stress the
critical importance of full accountability and justice
at all levels. Also, important to note is the shutdown
of media outlets, internet and social media, which
adds to the public perception that the authorities have
something to hide. Addressing hate speech does not
mean limiting or prohibiting freedom of speech.

S/PV. 8676

Another grave concern is the encroachment of
power dynamics that is trying to hijack the peaceful
protests. Acts of violence that are politically motivated,
gang-driven or arising from external loyalties risk
placing Iraq on a dangerous trajectory, sowing chaos
and confusion, including the further loss of life and
the destruction of public and private property. That
gravely undermines the rightful demands of the Iraqi
people. It complicates the work of the security forces,
and it provides a cynical excuse for political inaction or,
worse, an excuse for all kinds of conspiracies to justify
violent crackdowns on peaceful demonstrations.
To be perfectly clear, the vast majority of protesters
are evidently peaceful — everyday men and women
seeking a better life. Let me emphasize that it is the
primary responsibility of the State to protect its
people. In other words, any and all forms of violence
are intolerable and must not distract from the rightful
demands for reform. That would compromise the State
even further and only harm an already gravely eroded
public trust, further narrowing the Government’s ability
to reform. That ability, sadly, grows weaker every time
a peaceful protester is killed or injured.
The weight of Iraq’s past and the immensity of
current issues would surely be challenging to any
Government’s ability to act and to act fast. However,
the shortcomings are long-standing. The following are
a few examples.
First, the call for electoral reform reverberates
all over Iraq. Iraqis are calling for independent and
impartial electoral management and changes in
the electoral system to bring voters closer to their
candidates and make their elected representatives
duly accountable.
Secondly, with respect to pervasive corruption, we
have heard plenty of words and gestures, but have seen
fewer concrete outcomes. The political class will need
to lead by example, for instance by publicly disclosing
their assets and abolishing their so-called economic
offices. I cannot overstate that anti-corruption efforts
will be key to unlocking immense social, economic and
political potential. Without meaningful progress, we
risk treading water on nearly every other front. A related
key demand of the demonstrators is an environment
conducive to employment and growth. While that is
one of the best remedies against unrest and conflict,
we have seen precious little in terms of implementation.

19-390553/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

Some three weeks ago, following consultations
with a wide range of Iraqis, including protesters
and authorities, we proposed a number of steps
as a way forward and further initiatives to foster
dialogue are ongoing or on their way. But if that
dialogue — that peaceful attempt — is to succeed, the
protesters’ conditions are clear — there must be an end
to the bloodshed, abductions and unlawful arrests. Also,
it must be understood that without full accountability
and justice, it would be nearly impossible to convince
the people that political leaders are sincerely willing
to engage in substantial reform. While I acknowledge
that a collective protest movement does not necessarily
recognize central leadership, some structure and
coordination on the part of the peaceful protesters will
prove to be of great importance as well.
The Prime Minister’s resignation was accepted by
Parliament last Sunday. Today, the Speaker is expected
to ask the President to designate a new Prime Minister.
The President will have 15 days to do so. In turn, the
Prime Minister-designate will have 30 days to form a
Government. While talks about the Prime Ministerdesignate are ongoing among political leaders, I
would like to emphasize the urgency of the current
circumstances. Political leaders do not have the luxury
of time and must rise to the moment. Moreover, they
will have to come clean in public and advance real
solutions, instead of leaving it to a Prime Minister with
little or no support. I have always emphasized, and I
will continue to do so, that a Government cannot go it
alone. It is the collective responsibility of the political
class as a whole.
With permission, I will now briefly turn to
Baghdad-Erbil relations, which is another critical
file. As I have said in earlier briefings, relations are
surely on an upswing, and that is good news. But I
must repeat that, to date, this has not materialized in
the form of tangible breakthroughs on the ground. In
Sinjar, sadly, we continue to face major restrictions to
our humanitarian action. Erbil and Baghdad are dutybound to establish a single Administration and stable
security structures. Their ongoing failure to agree can
no longer be explained or tolerated.
Another concern is the situation in Duhok
governorate. Over 16,000 Syrian refugees have arrived
so far, and more continue to arrive on a daily basis.
Nine years into the Syrian conflict, we did not expect to
open new refugee camps in Iraq. Let us not forget that
4/25

03/12/2019

they are joining the quarter of a million Syrians already
being hosted in the Kurdish region.
While the protests dominate our attention, we
should not forget the legacy of yesterday’s fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. As we speak,
a new disaster is in the making. On many occasions, I
have stated that the situation in camps such as Al-Hol
is not sustainable. Transnational threats demand
collective action, but instead we are seeing a frankly
shocking lack of international long-term thinking.
I would now like to turn to the issue of missing
third-country Kuwaiti nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. Despite
the domestic crisis, I am pleased to report that, on
27 October, Iraq handed over approximately 200,000
books belonging to the National Library of Kuwait and
Kuwait University. I would also like to commend the
difficult work carried out by Kuwaiti forensic experts in
the ongoing identification process of the human remains
that were found earlier this year in the Samawah desert.
I truly hope that those efforts can soon be completed in
order to deliver some closure to relatives.
I would like to say a final word on the ongoing
demonstrations in Iraq. The country is as at a
crossroads. In my meeting with Grand Ayatollah Ali
Al-Sistani, he expressed concern that the relevant
actors might not be serious enough to implement any
meaningful reform. He added that the situation could
not continue as it was before the demonstrations,
which is very true. Meanwhile, the protesters appear
determined to persevere as long as their demands
remain unheeded. The situation cannot and will not
be resolved by buying time with band-aid solutions
and coercive measures — such an approach will only
further fuel public anger and distrust. Pursuing partisan
interests, muddling through or brutally cracking down
on peaceful protesters are not strategies at all. Nothing
is more damaging than a climate of anger and fear.
We must not let history repeat itself. Out of any
crisis, new and great opportunities can emerge. Iraq is
definitely not a lost cause — far from it. It has immense
potential. The challenge is to seize this opportunity and
to build a sovereign, stable, inclusive and prosperous
Iraq. Now is the time to act. The great hopes of so many
Iraqis call for bold and forward thinking.
The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

I now give the floor to Mr. Mardini.
Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council today.
We also thank Kuwait for its efforts to ensure that the
issue of missing persons is a topic of importance in
the Council, as well as in drafting the first resolution
on missing persons in armed conflict, adopted in June
(resolution 2474 (2019)).

S/PV. 8676

completed in July 2017. The project took stock of the
situation, involved experts and forensic specialists
and proposed recommendations for future work. The
review project report and its recommendations were
adopted by the Tripartite Commission in December
2018 and have since been used to guide desk- and fieldbased work deployed to make progress in the search
and recovery of further remains of missing persons.

The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) has chaired the Tripartite Commission since its
founding in 1991. Following the end of the Gulf War,
Iraq, Kuwait and coalition members Saudi Arabia,
France, the United Kingdom and the United States
created the Commission to search for missing persons.
Today the Commission and its Technical Subcommittee,
with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
serving as an observer and the ICRC as the Chair,
aim to trace persons still unaccounted for and provide
answers for families.

Witness information, analysis of satellite imagery
and several previous exploration missions led us to
Samawah in Al-Muthanna governorate. That is where
the breakthrough happened and where human remains
were exhumed in March. In August the Iraqi authorities
handed over 46 boxes and two bags containing those
remains, which are currently being processed by
the Kuwaiti authorities at their national forensic
laboratories. It is a time-consuming process that is
expected to last into next year. If a match is found, the
remains will be returned to their families.

Just over a year ago the ICRC provided the Council
with an update on the workings of the Tripartite
Commission and the Technical Subcommittee (see
S/PV.8324). We reported that, since the founding of the
Tripartite Commission, we had helped repatriate more
than 75,000 citizens, civilian internees and prisoners of
war. Since 2003, once the search for burial sites began
in Iraq, and later in Kuwait, the remains of 275 persons
in Iraq and 98 persons in Kuwait have been recovered.
A total of 1,080 cases of missing persons remain open
to date within the framework of the mechanism. Of
those cases 371 were reported missing by Kuwait, 700
by Iraq and nine by Saudi Arabia.

This year, with the support of the ICRC, the human
rights directorate of the Iraqi Ministry of Defence
carried out further extensive exploration and excavation
missions across the southern deserts of Iraq. Based
on new and previously available witness information,
comparisons with archival records and analyses of
satellite imagery, several exploration and excavation
missions were carried out in the governorates of
Karbala, Dhi Qar and Al-Anbar, in addition to those in
Al-Muthanna. Unfortunately, no human remains were
found in the former three locations.

Today I am pleased to confirm that, for the first
time in 14 years, Kuwaiti remains were recovered.
Those remains were recovered in Al-Muthanna, Iraq,
in March. The members of the mechanism, with the
support of the ICRC, have been conducting excavations
since 2003 in both Iraq and Kuwait. Prior to this year,
the latest successful exhumation of human remains
took place in 2011, which were Iraqi remains found in
Kuwait. No remains or burials sites were found for eight
years, and it has been 14 years since the most recent
recovery of Kuwaiti remains.

There is a lesson to be learned in this breakthrough.
The wounds of the missing are deep and long-lasting.
When persons go missing, their absence affects the
family, the community and the society as a whole. To
solve these cases takes time, patience and cooperation
among Governments, humanitarian organizations
and the families of the missing. But, most important,
work on missing persons requires perseverance and
determination. It can take years of work to uncover
answers and address the cases of the missing. Each one
of those individuals is important. We have to stay the
course on each one, no matter the time or commitment
it might take.

We had a breakthrough early this year with new
information leading to the identification of two mass
graves of alleged Kuwaiti citizens. That breakthrough
came about in part due to the recommendations and
findings from the ICRC’s review project that was

The Tripartite Mechanism hopes to continue
identifying further remains in future. The members of
the Mechanism agreed to update existing protocols for
the transfer of human remains between Iraq and Kuwait
to bring them in line with the respective domestic legal

19-390555/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

frameworks and best practices. Field missions are being
organized by Iraq regularly to explore and excavate
sites of interest. Other members of the Mechanism,
namely, the United Kingdom, France and the United
States, have made significant efforts to provide relevant
information in the hope that further research will help
identify more grave sites in Iraq and Kuwait.
As Chair of the Tripartite Commission, the ICRC is
committed to upholding the right of families to receive
answers about the fate of their missing loved ones. To
that end, we shall spare no effort in searching for and
recovering human remains wherever conflict or other
situations of violence might have left an open wound.
We hope that Member States will join us on this mission
by upholding their obligation under international law to
prevent people from going missing in the first place and
by clarifying the fates of those who have.
The President: I thank Mr. Mardini for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Archbishop Warda.
Archbishop Warda: The current protests in Iraq
demonstrate the rejection by the majority of the Iraqi
people of the post-2003 structure and Government
of the country. It is a rejection of a sectarian-based
Constitution, which has divided Iraq and prevented
it from becoming a unified and functioning country.
Instead of bringing hope and prosperity, the current
Government structure has brought continued corruption
and despair, especially for Iraq’s youth. It is very
significant that young Iraqis have been the leaders in
the protests. Those young people have made it clear that
they want Iraq to be independent of foreign interference,
and to be a place where all can live together as equal
citizens in a country of legitimate pluralism and respect
for all.
It is important to understand that Christians have
not only sided with the protesters openly, but also that
the Christians and other minorities, including Yazidis,
have been welcomed into the protest movement by Iraqi
Muslims. In a real sense, the protests have demonstrated
the true richness of the historical Iraq. This opening
of reconciliation among all Iraqis demonstrates real
hope for positive changes in which a new Government
in Iraq, if there is a new Government, will be much
more positive towards a genuinely multi-religious Iraq,
with full citizenship for all and an end to the sectarian
disease that has so violently harmed and degraded
us all.
6/25

03/12/2019

In contrast, the non-violence of the protesters must
not be overlooked by the international community.
Those courageous protestors have been committed to
non-violence from the very beginning of the movement,
even though there have been daily instances of extreme
violence directed towards the protesters from militia
forces, which have continually attempted to provoke
confrontation. Over 400 innocent protesters have now
been murdered, and many thousands seriously injured.
Yet the protesters still remain non-violent.
What is at stake? At stake is whether Iraq will
finally emerge from the trauma of Saddam and the
past 16 years to become a legitimate, independent
and functioning country, or whether it will become
a permanently lawless region, open to proxy wars
between other countries and movements, and a servant
to the sectarian demands of those outside Iraq.
If, God willing, the protest movement is successful
in creating a new Government, with a new civil
constitution, respecting the diversity of its religions,
ethnicities and cultures — one based not on Sharia
but on the fundamental concepts of freedom for all
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, written by this Organization where we meet
today — then a time of hope can still exist for the longsuffering Iraqi people.
Despite everything, the Iraqi people love their
country, and they want it back. If the protest movement
is not successful, if the international community stands
by and allows the murder of innocents to continue,
Iraq will likely soon fall into civil war, the result of
which will send millions of young Iraqis, including
most Christians and Yazidis, into the diaspora. In
the crisis and the genocide of 2014, over 4 million
Iraqis — Muslims, Yazidis and Christians — fled to
the Kurdistan region seeking refuge from the evil of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, but remained within
the country. In another major conflict, we are likely to
see the people flee from Iraq for good. We are indeed
perhaps confronting the last chance for our country.
What can and should the international community
do to help? The international community must not be
satisfied with false changes in leadership that do not
represent real change. It is clear that the ruling power
groups do not intend to give up control, and that they will
make every effort to fundamentally keep the existing
power structures in place. The international community
must clearly understand that the protesters will not
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

accept this, and the international community must not
take part in supporting any type of false change. That
is not to say that certain groups do not have legitimate
concerns regarding their proper representation in
any new Government. However, such concerns must
be addressed in a way that reflects the reality of the
current broken nature of Iraq’s Government, and its
fundamental need for change and replacement.
The first step must be the initiation of early
elections. The protesters insist on this, and the
international community must fully support it. Unlike
the very limited participation of past elections, these
elections must involve the country’s youth — those
who have stood up so courageously against corruption
during the protests over the past weeks.
In the period before and during the elections, the
press, both Iraqi and international, must be completely
free to report on and discuss all the issues that need
to be addressed by the elections. For that to happen,
the current blocking of news reporting, the Internet and
social media must end immediately.
Finally, elections must be fully monitored by the
United Nations and observed by all major parties in
Iraq so that the elections are legitimate, free and fair.
Only in that way can a new Government set a course for
the future of an Iraq that is free of corruption and where
there is full citizenship and opportunity for all.
The young Christians of Iraq have participated in
the protests every day. They have been there because the
protests have given them hope for a future — a future
in which they belong as equal contributors and Iraqi
citizens. Along with the millions of other marginalized
Iraqis, they look now to the international community
for action and support. Iraq, a country so often harmed,
now looks to all those in the international community
for help. We hold all in the international community
accountable for that. We believe we have a future.
We ask the international community not to turn away
from us.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States
of America.
It is noteworthy that the political mission we
are here to discuss today — the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) — enjoys
widespread support. I therefore want to thank the
Special Representative for her briefing but even more

S/PV. 8676

so for her leadership. Our appreciation is with all of
UNAMI and the entire United Nations country team
for their work supporting Iraq’s security, stability and
prosperity. I also thank the Permanent Observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to
the United Nations, Mr. Mardini, for his briefing. The
United States strongly supports the efforts of UNAMI,
the Tripartite Commission and the ICRC to address the
unresolved issue of Kuwaiti and third-country missing
persons, property and archives from the first Gulf War.
We are also very glad that Archbishop Warda is
with us today. His presence is a poignant reminder of
the strength that Iraq draws from its diverse religious
traditions, which are central to Iraq’s identity as the
cradle of civilization. The United States recognizes the
continued need to defend religious freedom in Iraq, and
we join Archbishop Warda in voicing support for the
right of all people to freely practice their faith.
It is clear that Iraq now stands at a crossroads.
In recent weeks, the world has witnessed Iraqis from
all walks of life — Sunni, Shia, Turkmen, Christian
and Yazidi — chant in unison, “We are all one Iraq”.
Those chants reveal a hope for a nation that is governed
without sectarian intention, corruption or foreign
influence, and that delivers on its basic responsibilities
to all of its people, including electricity, water, health
care and education.
The United States hears the cries of hope and
firmly supports the people of Iraq as they strive to
build a country of prosperity for every citizen. That
will mean embracing electoral reform, promoting good
governance, addressing corruption and expanding
economic opportunity, but, most important, it will
require Iraq’s leaders to be responsive and accountable
to all citizens. As the Special Representative said
earlier, it is the primary responsibility of the State to
protect its people.
At this critical moment, UNAMI has an indispensable
role to play. It has been tasked by the Council with
promoting inclusive political dialogue, assisting with
constitutional and electoral reform efforts, protecting
human rights and promoting judicial accountability.
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert and her
team have already coordinated dialogue among diverse
political, religious and community leaders. Those
conversations, held in response to legitimate public
demands echoing across Iraq, demonstrate UNAMI’s

19-390557/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

03/12/2019

potential to shepherd the country peacefully through
the critical weeks and months ahead.

sovereignty, independence and prosperity. May we do
all we can to assist them along the way.

We encourage Iraq’s current and future leaders to
carefully consider UNAMI’s suggested road map for
addressing the legitimate grievances of citizens. From
the very start, the United States has made clear that
Iraqis have the right to the freedoms of expression
and peaceful assembly, in accordance with Iraq’s own
constitutional values. We are deeply alarmed by the use
of lethal force against peaceful demonstrators by Iraqi
authorities and armed groups not under State control.
We condemn that violence and we urge others to do the
same. We mourn those who have lost their lives.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

At this moment, all sides must use maximum
restraint. Acts of violence, the destruction of property
and looting only exasperate tensions and should be
avoided at all costs. Attempts to restrict free expression,
the press and Internet access should be abandoned.
Outside the country, Iraq’s neighbours must not meddle
in its affairs. The Iraqi people have loudly rejected
such behaviour by Iran. The United States remains a
steadfast partner for Iraq to ensure that the sovereignty
and independence of its institutions are protected from
those who would undermine them.

We thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to the United
Nations; and Archbishop Warda for their briefings.
We wish Mr. Mardini every success in his future role
as Director-General of the ICRC. The State of Kuwait
reiterates its appreciation and support for the work of
the briefers in carrying out their respective mandates.

In accordance with our theme for the month, I
want to conclude today by looking at where UNAMI
has been in the past year and where it should go in the
coming year. One important success of the past year
came six months ago when the Council embarked on
a historic first-ever visit to Iraq, co-sponsored by the
United States and Kuwait and facilitated by UNAMI.
The visit demonstrated the widespread goodwill in Iraq
earned by the Mission and stands as a testament to the
progress that UNAMI has made in establishing itself
as a trustworthy and honest broker in Iraq since it was
created by the Council in 2003. But in the coming year,
progress will mean building on that goodwill.
We hope that, as current events in Iraq unfold,
UNAMI will work with Iraq on further developing
electoral and constitutional reform, mediating dialogue
and promoting accountability. Those would be successes
that would genuinely contribute to international
peace and security. In the same way that the Council
continues to seek meaningful progress, we hope that
the Iraqi people and their Government will do the same.
Indeed, they have come too far to reverse course now.
The United States is confident that the Iraqi people will
chart a course that ultimately leads Iraq to stability,
8/25

I shall now give the floor to other Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate your country, Madam President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
wish you every success. We also commend Ambassador
Karen Pierce and the United Kingdom delegation on its
presidency of the Council last month.

As a neighbouring country, Kuwait is following
developments in Iraq very closely after the protests that
began several weeks ago in a number of governorates. We
regret the casualties that have occurred among civilians
and security forces, and we extend our condolences to
the families of the victims. In that context, we call for
non-violence, restraint and calm. We should not provide
those seeking to harm Iraq and the Iraqi people with the
opportunity to sow strife, instability and insecurity by
using live ammunition and attacking innocent protesters
and public and private property. We hope that Iraq will
be able to overcome those exceptional circumstances
and normalize the situation.
The recent past has shown the unity of the Iraqi
people, regardless of their political, ethnic and religious
affiliations, by eliminating the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and overcoming the darkest and most
challenging chapters in its history. We wish the entire
Iraqi people lasting stability and prosperity. At the
same time, we welcome the steps taken by the Iraqi
Government to meet the demands of the Iraqi people
and to defuse the situation, including the establishment
of a committee to investigate the use of force against
protesters and holding accountable those responsible
for violations against them.
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

The next stage in Iraq will be important to the
country’s recovery, and we are aware of the considerable
challenges it will face. It is important to address them
through a constructive and peaceful dialogue, which
requires the support and assistance of the international
community and the United Nations, while respecting the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
avoiding any form of interference in its internal affairs.
The State of Kuwait is aware of the difficult phase
facing Iraq. We will spare no effort in supporting Iraq
and its people in accordance with their needs and those
of the Iraqi Government as they strive to address their
internal challenges. We welcome the vital role played
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq to
enhance those efforts, in line with its mandate, including
its proposal, in consultation with the President, the
Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Parliament, to
set up a reform road map that is in accordance with
the legal and constitutional framework and takes into
consideration the basic demands of the Iraqi people.
The question of missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals, which has been an item on the Security
Council agenda for three decades, is an important and
sensitive issue for the Kuwaitis and the families of the
victims, who have been eagerly waiting any information
on the fate of their loved ones for the past 29 years. This
is a humanitarian issue, and we hope it will be resolved
as soon as possible.
We call on the members of the Council to continue
their support and their serious endeavours to find a
solution that can end the suffering of the families of the
missing persons, determine their fate and locate their
remains. In that connection, we highlight the efforts of
the United Kingdom, France and the United States to
contribute to the work of the Tripartite Commission,
including by providing maps and archives from 1990
and 1991, which we hope will yield further positive
results, since we have now located the remains of a
number of missing Kuwaitis that are being analysed
to determine their identities. We also appreciate the
Government of Iraq’s constructive contribution as
part of the Tripartite Commission and its Technical
Subcommittee, under the leadership of the ICRC. We
commend the ICRC for its role in determining the fate
of the remaining missing Kuwaitis and third-country
nationals in the past few years. This cooperation has
enabled us to determine the fate of 236 of 605 missing
persons. We hope it will continue and be stepped up
in its next phase in order to make substantive progress

S/PV. 8676

in implementing the plans and programmes of action
agreed by the member States of the Commission.
With regard to the issue of Kuwaiti property, I
commend the efforts of the Iraqi authorities and all
the parties that have helped to facilitate the return of
Kuwaiti property, including most recently 200,000
books, as Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert mentioned in her
briefing. This is a positive step and part of Iraq’s efforts
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We hope that Iraq will continue working to ensure the
return of all Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives. What has been returned is only a small part
of what is missing. The national archives that the
Secretary-General mentions in his report (S/2019/865)
have been missing since 1991 and are valuable to the
State of Kuwait for historical reasons. We previously
provided many lists of the archives that have not yet
been returned, most notably those of the Amiri Diwan,
the Office of the Crown Prince, the Office of the Prime
Minister and the Office of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, all of which were looted during the Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait. They are priceless and some of
them date back to the nineteenth century.
In conclusion, while we commend Iraq’s efforts
to fulfil all of its remaining international obligations
to the State of Kuwait, as stated in the relevant
Council resolutions, we hope that those outstanding
commitments will be honoured. Kuwait was one of the
first to support Iraq in overcoming the obstacles to its
stability and security and in fulfilling its remaining
commitments since the liberation of the State of Kuwait
in 1991. We are certain that Iraq’s implementation of
its remaining commitments, under the supervision of
the United Nations, will strengthen the relationship
between our two countries on a basis of respect for the
relevant Council resolutions.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. You have the United Kingdom’s
full support. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and His
Grace the Archbishop of Erbil for their briefings.
Today we very clearly heard how significant
the challenges facing Iraq are. The United Kingdom
supports the Iraqi people’s right to peaceful protest as
enshrined in their Constitution, and as Britain’s Foreign
Secretary Dominic Raab has made clear, we are deeply

19-390559/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

saddened and shocked by the loss of life since the
protests started at the beginning of October. We call on
the security forces to respond proportionately, and we
are deeply concerned about the use of live ammunition
and the lethal use of tear gas and baton rounds. We
call on the Government of Iraq to ensure that credible
investigations into the violence are carried out and
that those responsible are held to account. We are also
concerned about the attacks on the Iranian consulates
in Najaf and Karbala. Diplomatic premises should not
be a target of violence.
We welcome the work that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has done to
facilitate dialogue between the protesters, Government
officials and the Council of Representatives. As we
look ahead to 2020, the United Kingdom calls for an
inclusive and transparent reform process that responds
to the challenges that Iraq is facing and to the legitimate
demands of the protesters. In particular, we encourage
the Government of Iraq to work with the United Nations
on credible electoral reform that ensures that the views
of the Iraqi people are heard and their representatives
held accountable. I was struck by what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said about
a better future. We agree with her that stopping hate
speech does not mean stopping freedom of expression.
We are also encouraged by the steadily improving
relations between the Government of Iraq and the
Kurdistan Regional Government, including the recent
ministerial engagements to discuss the draft 2020
federal budget law, but we note what the Special
Representative had to say about those relations. We
urge for continued cooperation and progress in this
area in order to resolve outstanding issues in line with
Iraq’s Constitution.
It is clear that Da’esh continues to pose a threat to
the peace and security of Iraq. The United Kingdom,
along with other members of the Global Coalition
against Da’esh, is committed to supporting Iraq in
addressing that threat. As we discussed a week ago
(see S/PV.8675), the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
continues to make progress. In that regard, we welcome
the logistical support that United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has been able to provide to
UNITAD. We must not forget the 1.4 million people
who have been the recipients of humanitarian assistance
so far in 2019. They should be treated with generosity
10/25

03/12/2019

and respect. The reports of forced returns of vulnerable
internally displaced persons are deeply troubling.
We welcome the significant progress in the
implementation of resolution 2107 (2013). We hope
that the return on 8 August of the remains of some
of the missing Kuwaitis will provide closure to their
families once they have been fully identified. In that
connection, I thank the representative of Kuwait for
the additional information that he has provided. This
is a very important issue. Continued senior engagement
on both sides is key and serves as a reminder of how
important both Kuwait and Iraq consider this file.
I think that we in the Council will be united in our
concern about the number of fatalities and casualties
there have been since the beginning of the protests
and in our desire to see credible investigations to hold
to account those responsible for the excessive use of
force. I think we will also be united in hoping to see
Iraq, supported by UNAMI, take forward significant
reforms to address the popular concerns and deliver
stability and prosperity for their people.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We congratulate you, Madam President, on
your accession to the presidency of the Security Council,
and thank the United Kingdom for its presidency last
month. We also want to thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, Archbishop Bashar Matti Warda and
Mr. Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations, for
their briefings.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
for maintaining the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Iraq and ensuring its internal
stability and security. We are closely following the
developing situation in this Arab country. We understand
that the underlying reasons for the current protests that
have engulfed it are socioeconomic in nature. Clearly,
the layers of problems that have been accumulating for
years cannot be dealt with overnight. That is why it is
important for the international community to support
Baghdad in establishing comprehensive measures to
restore its economy and improve the situation in the
social arena. Our hope is that the leading parliamentary
factions will be able to select a new consensus candidate
for Prime Minister within the timelines set by Iraq’s
Constitution and prevent the emergence of a power
vacuum in the country that could seriously exacerbate
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

its domestic political crisis. It would help to overcome
internal disagreements and restore stability to Iraq,
which is of key significance to the whole of the Middle
East. In the context of the national dialogue, is it
important to continue dialogue in the efforts to restore
mutual understanding between Baghdad and Erbil. We
are positive that improving relations between them will
help Iraq to improve its security.
We are troubled by the fact that the terrorist
threat in Iraq remains high. The situation has been
compounded by the flood of terrorists leaving Syria
in the wake of the military defeat of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) there. We believe that
the only way to effectively counter this challenge is
by coordinating counter-terrorism efforts as fully
as possible. It is also essential to ensure that all the
stakeholders involved in combating terrorism in Iraq
respect the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate
their actions with Baghdad.
Having listened attentively to the statement
delivered by His Grace the Archbishop, we would like
to underscore the importance of maintaining the ethnic
and religious diversity that has characterized the region
for millenniums both in Iraq and in the Middle East
as a whole. However, that hard-won balance of the
peoples of the region has been disrupted by the heinous
crimes of pseudo-Muslim terrorist groups. As a result,
Christians and other religious minorities who were to a
large extent a stabilizing factor have been forced into
exile. Immediate measures must be taken to halt the
mass exodus of Christians and other minorities from
the countries of the Middle East and to maintain the
unique balance in their coexistence. In that connection,
we feel compelled to remind the Council of the recent
tragedy in Qamishli, Syria, in which ISIL terrorists
murdered Hovsep Bedoyan, an Armenian Catholic
priest, and his father. Kirill, Patriarch of Moscow and
all Rus’, has condemned the crime and expressed his
condolences. We also continue to focus on determining
the fate of two Christian metropolitans of Aleppo,
Yohanna Ibrahim and Paul.
We are concerned about the potential negative
influence that the artificial fomenting of events
around Iran could have on the domestic political
situation in Iraq. The attempts to drag Iraq into a
regional confrontation are destabilizing its internal
environment. Iraq has the right to build and develop
normal relations with its neighbours, and no one has
the right to undermine those relations. Once again we

S/PV. 8676

stress the importance of launching mechanisms for
dialogue in the region instead of imposing sanctions
and making threats. In that connection we would like
to point out that the Secretary-General has a mandate
to develop security- and confidence-building measures
in the region, pursuant to resolution 598 (1987). We are
open to cooperation on such a basis with all regional
and international partners in the framework of the
concept we have proposed for collective security in the
Persian Gulf region.
In conclusion, we would like to note the efforts
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
We believe that its efforts should facilitate national
reconciliation processes and the achievement of longterm stabilization in the country. For our part, through
our contacts with all Iraqi political forces we are urging
them to unite their efforts in order to settle all the issues
on Iraq’s domestic agenda through a national dialogue
and by arriving at mutually acceptable agreements
that take account of the interests of all of this Arab
republic’s ethnic and religious groups.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank and commend the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom for the important contributions
she made to the work of the Security Council last
month. I wish also to congratulate you, Madam
President, and the delegation of the United States on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of December and wish to convey to you the
full support of Peru. I wish also to express my gratitude
for the enlightening briefings delivered by the Special
Representative, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert;
Mr. Robert Mardini; and Monsignor Bashar Matti
Warda, Archbishop of Erbil.
Peru has noted with concern the social instability
and protests in Iraq and the fact that they are not
being successfully brought under control or redirected
towards efforts to promote the necessary political
dialogue and ease tensions. We deplore the fact that,
on the contrary, the people’s right to peacefully express
themselves is being denied and countered through the
excessive use of force and through attacks against
several cities in which lethal force was used, leading to
a number of deaths and injuries and fostering a vicious
circle of violence and mistrust.
Peru agrees with the Iraqi authorities that it is
necessary to urgently address the legitimate requests
to tackle corruption, promote employment and ensure

19-3905511/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

better services for the people. However, we believe that
such endeavours must go hand in hand with measures
aimed at ensuring moderation and respect for human
rights as well as at bringing those responsible to justice,
which would contribute to fostering unity, stability
and reconciliation in the country. Such measures must
also go hand in hand with a deep-seated structural
reform process, including in the area of security, so
as to allow for the 2020 provincial elections to be held
peacefully and in a transparent manner. To that end, the
international community must lend its firm support.
In that context, we deem positive the fact that in
recent weeks, the Government has allocated resources
and adopted emergency measures aimed at protecting
the most vulnerable segments of the population and
promoting positive contributions by Iraqi young people
in order to prevent them from being recruited by
extremist groups, which could view them as a sounding
board for their messages of hatred and destruction.
As set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/903), we must not play down the terrorist threat
posed by Da’esh and its influence in new arenas. The
same can be said of other armed groups, which continue
to pose a latent threat to national and regional security.
We would also underline the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government to foster a peaceful and cooperative
environment and also point to the efforts made within
the country, in particular the rapprochement with the
Erbil authorities as a prerequisite for the achievement
of lasting peace.
We also commend the fact that women are playing
an increasingly prominent role in the political life of the
country, with the appointment of Ms. Suha Ali Bek as
Minister of Education. As we have already indicated,
the participation of women, as well as that of young
people and minorities, can only be good news when it
comes to strengthening Iraqi democracy.
We would not wish to conclude without stressing
the need to find a timely solution to the situation of
internally displaced persons and refugees and of those
of the more than 30,000 Iraqis who are allegedly
affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
on the basis of their orderly, voluntary, safe and
dignified return.
I conclude by commending the work being carried
out by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
in that context, as well as the Special Representative,
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and her team for their
12/25

03/12/2019

tireless efforts and dedication to the implementation
of the Mission’s mandate, including in a context of
pressing humanitarian needs in a highly volatile and
complex situation.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish every
success to the United States as it discharges its
mandate as President of the Security Council for this
month. We also congratulate the United Kingdom on
the outstanding manner in which it steered the work
of the Council during the month of November. We also
thank the briefers for their presentations and for their
commendable efforts to promote stability, sustainable
development and peace in Iraq.
We would first express our concern at the volatile
situation and escalation of violence in south and central
Iraq since early October, which has claimed hundreds
of lives and injured thousands of people. We regret that
this situation has arisen barely a year after the current
Government was installed.
After years of conflict and a vigorous fight against
terrorism, the Iraqi people yearn to lead normal lives in
a functional and inclusive society, where young people
have opportunities for employment and sustainable
development and where impunity and corruption do not
prevail. Accordingly, we support their legitimate right
to peaceful protest, but we condemn the use of violence
by some demonstrators, as well as the destruction of
public and private property. Similarly, we call on the
authorities to respect the rights to freedom of expression
and protest and to refrain from using lethal weapons
and force against demonstrators. We strongly condemn
the acts of violence that have taken place, the excessive
use of force and the deliberate killing of demonstrators,
who did not represent a threat to the lives of others. We
also call for the integrity and protection of journalists
to be guaranteed, for their rights to be respected in the
performance of their duties and for the various media,
which are responsible for informing the nation and the
rest of the world of developments, to be permitted to do
their work.
We welcome the fact that, prior to the announcement
of Prime Minister Al-Mahdi’s resignation, steps were
taken to address the demands of protesters, including
the creation of employment and housing opportunities
and the establishment of a high commission of inquiry
to identify and bring to justice perpetrators of violence
during demonstrations, which we see as the initial
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

step towards accountability. Furthermore, we support
the Government’s proposal for structural reform that
includes, among other things, economic and legislative
measures, the appointment of new ministers, including
more women and young people, and the establishment
of a central court to combat corruption. We hope that
the appointment of the first woman Cabinet member
as Minister of Education will be the first step towards
the inclusion of more women in decision-making and
leadership positions in the country.
With regard to the unresolved issues with Kuwait,
we commend the efforts made by members of the
Tripartite Mechanism to move forward on the search
for prisoners and missing persons reported by Kuwait
and the return of human remains, assets and national
archives. We hope that the parties will continue to
strengthen their cooperation until the matter is resolved
and to provide the families of missing persons with as
much information as possible on the whereabouts of
their loved ones.
In conclusion, we underscore the need to respect
the sovereignty and integrity of Iraq. The primary tool
to resolve the current situation is dialogue, exclusively
between the Government, other political actors and all
segments of Iraqi society, a process we believe should
be supported by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq.
Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): Let me first
congratulate the United States for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for December and
pledge my delegation’s support during its presidency. In
addition, we would like to thank the United Kingdom
for successfully presiding the Security Council
in November.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, the Permanent Observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross to the United
Nations, Mr. Robert Mardini, and the Archbishop of
Erbil, Monsignor Bashar Warda, for their briefings.
I would like to address the following two points in
my intervention this morning, namely, the political and
security situations.
First, on the political situation, South Africa
supports the mandate of UNAMI as the Mission
promotes the strengthening of the Government of Iraq

S/PV. 8676

and subsequent electoral processes. We welcome the
appointment of Iraq’s first female minister, Ms. Suha
Ali Bek, as a positive step towards the inclusion of more
women in Government and higher decision-making
structures. Furthermore, we applaud the positive
progress in reaching an agreement between the Iraqi
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
on dividing oil revenues.
We note with concern the large-scale public protests
of past months, which have spread and escalated across
Baghdad. We hope that the Government of Iraq can take
concrete action to address the concerns of its citizens,
launch investigations into the violence and loss of life
resulting from the protests and ensure accountability
for any human rights violations. South Africa
welcomes the reforms proposed by the Government to
improve governance structures and the implementation
of service delivery. We also support the drive for an
inclusive Government that will bring together all diverse
elements of Iraqi society in governance structures.
We believe national reconciliation and unity in Iraq
are vital to avoiding future challenges resulting from
the fracturing of Government policies and actions.
South Africa encourages further cooperation between
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan autonomous
region in order to strengthen and maintain the prevailing
peace throughout Iraq. We also encourage Iraq to
continue engaging with its neighbours with a view
to maintaining peace and stability in the region and
diversifying its regional economic partnerships. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts by the Iraqi leadership
to promote a balanced regional policy, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s report (A/2019/903).
Secondly, on the security situation, we believe that
peace and security are fundamental for Iraq to develop
its infrastructure, grow its economy and provide basic
services to all of its citizens. In that regard, South
Africa supports the full consolidation of Iraqi army
control over Iraqi territories and the efforts of the
Government to eradicate the threat posed by Da’esh.
The issue of the return of internally displaced persons
to their areas of origin should also be given priority to
ensure that their return is safe, dignified and voluntary.
South Africa would further like to propose involving
the Peacebuilding Commission to support the efforts
of the Government to promote inclusivity, specifically
in
institution-building
and
post-reconstruction
development in Iraq.

19-3905513/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

In conclusion, we are encouraged by the sustained
joint efforts of the Governments of Kuwait and Iraq
to locate the missing Kuwaiti and other nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property. We are also encouraged by
other positive developments, including Iraq’s handing
over of books belonging to the Kuwaiti National
Library and Kuwait University to the Government of
Kuwait. We hope that both countries can work together
with the relevant United Nations institutions to resolve
any outstanding issues.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. Please be assured of my delegation’s full
support, Madam President. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Karen Pierce, Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, and her team for their
excellent work presiding over the Council in the month
of November.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Mr. Robert Mardini and Archbishop Bashar Matti
Warda for their important briefings. Indonesia would
like to underscore the following points.
First, with regard to the recent political turmoil
across Iraq, we fully support Iraq’s journey towards
democracy and prosperity for its people and are deeply
concerned by the demonstrations that have turned
violent. The path to democracy is never easy, but
peaceful assembly, demonstrations and peaceful protest
are central to it. We therefore call on all the parties to
act with maximum restraint and resolve the people’s
demands through peaceful and inclusive dialogue. We
support the people’s right to peaceful assembly, in line
with Iraq’s Constitution, and call on the Government,
particularly the security forces, to respect fundamental
human rights. We further urge the Government to
continue the measures it is taking to meet the public’s
demands and to investigate the violence that has caused
deaths and injuries in the demonstrations.
Secondly, with regard to post-conflict recovery and
national reconciliation, we reiterate our firm support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
In that connection, we stress that elements such as
combating corruption, strengthening the environment
for investment, respecting the rule of law, reforming
the security sector and creating an environment that
enables women and young people to participate in
14/25

03/12/2019

nation-building are crucial to post-conflict recovery
and reconciliation. Protecting the rights of minorities,
regardless of their religion, ethnicity or cultural
background, is equally important. We would also like
to encourage the inclusion of more women in senior
decision-making positions in Iraq, and in that regard we
welcome Ms. Suha Ali Bek’s appointment as Minister
of Education, which is an important step towards
responding to the calls of the international community.
We also applaud the Government’s effort to establish
stronger relations with its neighbouring countries,
as consolidated efforts are crucial to promoting
security and stability in the region and strengthening
economic relations.
Thirdly, with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their
remains, as well as the return of Kuwaiti property,
we are very encouraged by the persistent efforts
of the Governments of Iraq and of Kuwait and the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Tripartite Commission. Collectively, those efforts have
yielded significant progress. We are pleased to learn,
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
said, that approximately 200,000 books belonging
to the Government of Kuwait have been handed over
by the Iraqi Ministry for Foreign Affairs. We would
also like to echo the Secretary-General, whose report
(S/2019/865) encourages the Iraqi Government to
build on those successful efforts and to take all steps
necessary to promote further progress. Indonesia will
continue to monitor progress on this file, particularly
with regard to the missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals or their remains. It is our responsibility to
help their families receive closure.
In conclusion, we once again thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert and her team at the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for their diligent support
to the efforts of the Iraqi people and the Government to
achieve a stable and prosperous country.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to congratulate the United States on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to assure it of our support. We also
congratulate the United Kingdom on its successful
presidency in November and appreciate all of the work
it accomplished. We thank Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert and Mr. Robert Mardini, Permanent
Observer of the International Committee of the Red
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

Cross, for their briefings. We also listened attentively
to the statement by Archbishop Bashar Matti Warda
of Erbil.
The current situation in Iraq has drawn international
attention. Maintaining stability and restoring order
there are top priorities. The Iraqi Government has taken
a number of measures to respond to the demands of
the Iraqi people, with positive results. We believe that
Iraq has the ability and wisdom to find an appropriate
solution to the current crisis and defuse the situation as
soon as possible. During its visit to the country in June,
the Security Council reiterated its firm support for
Iraq’s efforts to achieve economic recovery, peace and
stability, national reconciliation and reconstruction.
The Council should continue to demonstrate support
for Iraq in a spirit of mutual respect and cooperation
on an equal footing, with a view to benefiting all
concerned and achieving a win-win outcome. Iraq has
been developing friendly relations with neighbouring
countries and working to reduce regional tensions, and
China appreciates those efforts. At the same time, Iraq
is still at a critical stage in consolidating the outcomes
of its counter-terrorism efforts, achieving peace
and stability and advancing national reconstruction.
All parties should fully respect Iraq’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and
continue to support its efforts.
First, we should firmly support the inclusive
political dialogue and national reconciliation process in
Iraq. In recent years, with the support of the international
community, Iraq has worked hard to ensure national
security and stability, establish the Kurdistan Regional
Government, promote communication and dialogue
and steadily advance national reconciliation and
reconstruction. In the current circumstances it is more
important than ever for the international community to
maintain its support for Iraq’s efforts to achieve inclusive
reconciliation and harmonious coexistence and support
all the parties in Iraq in engaging in peaceful and
meaningful dialogue, with the fundamental interests
and needs of the Iraqi people in mind. China welcomes
the improved relations between the central Government
of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government, and
looks forward to seeing them reach an agreement on oilrevenue distribution and security arrangements as soon
as possible. We welcome the constructive role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in that regard.

S/PV. 8676

Secondly, we should continue to support Iraq
in consolidating the results of its counter-terrorism
efforts and safeguarding national security. Iraq has
made huge sacrifices in the international fight against
terrorism, which nonetheless remains a threat to its
security and stability. Considering Iraq’s national
situation and the progress of its national reconstruction,
steady efforts should be made to resolve the issue of
internally displaced persons in Iraq and to provide it
with robust support in addressing the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families. The international
community should fully respect Iraq’s sovereignty
and jurisdiction and support it in bringing terrorists to
justice in accordance with its relevant domestic laws.
The United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant should engage in
close consultations with the Government and carry out
its work in accordance with its mandate.
Thirdly, we should actively promote Iraq’s
economic recovery and expedite its reconstruction.
The Iraqi Government has adopted an integrated
approach in order to actively attract foreign investment,
improve the business environment and promote youth
employment — examples of some of the many goals
it has set in response to public demands concerning
development and people’s livelihoods — and these
efforts deserve international recognition. In strict
accordance with its mandate, UNAMI should support the
Iraqi Government in its efforts to promote stability and
development and respect Iraq’s leadership in handling
its internal affairs. The international community
should fulfil its commitments effectively, continue to
provide support and aid to Iraq and assist it in finding a
development pathway suited to its national conditions.
China firmly supports Iraq in its efforts to safeguard
national sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as
its nationally owned endeavour to handle its internal
affairs and challenges, and opposes any external
interference in its internal affairs. China is ready to
work with the international community in support of
Iraq’s efforts to maintain peace and stability and combat
terrorism. We will continue our active participation in
the reconstruction of Iraq’s energy infrastructure and
other sectors, and will assist in Iraq’s economic and
social development to the best of our abilities in order
to help it achieve stability and development.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your

19-3905515/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

presidency of the Security Council this month, and to
assure you of our support. I also warmly congratulate
Ambassador Karen Pierce on the United Kingdom’s
excellent presidency last month. And I thank Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Mr. Robert Mardini and Archbishop
Warda for their very informative briefings.
Iraq, a country that has suffered so much, is going
through a period that is critical to its democratic future.
Since 1 October, the Iraqi people have been making
legitimate demands — demands for a life in dignity
and freedom, as Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert has just
pointed out — in the context of demonstrations that
have remained essentially peaceful. The systematic
crackdown on demonstrators and the excessive and
disproportionate use of force against them, which
has led to the deaths of more than 400 Iraqis, is
unacceptable. France strongly condemns them. We
extend our condolences to the families of the victims
and our support to the injured. The circumstances of
such repression must be fully brought to light, and
those responsible must be brought to justice. We call
on the Iraqi authorities to guarantee the freedom of
expression, assembly and demonstration, as provided
for in the country’s Constitution. Threats against
health workers, the intimidation of journalists and
human rights defenders and the arbitrary arrests of
demonstrators must stop. All parties must refrain from
using violence.
Given that crisis, which is unprecedented since
the military victory against Da’esh, inaction is not an
option. Without a swift and credible response, further
violence and deterioration of the economic and social
situation could plunge Iraq into chaos. Such a tipping
point would bring about consequences not only for
Iraq but also for the stability of the Middle East and
international security. Da’esh cannot but benefit from
the destabilization of Iraq. We are aware of the scale
of the challenges facing the country: the threat of a
Da’esh resurgence; the consequences of the war in
Syria, further aggravated by the Turkish offensive in
the north-east of the country; the worrisome situation
of refugees and displaced persons; a social fabric
weakened by years of conflict; and an economy in need
of rebuilding.
Real progress has been made in recent years. It
must be preserved, especially with regard to the strides
made in the fight against Da’esh. We recalled that
point at the meeting of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh held at France’s initiative in Washington, D.C.,
16/25

03/12/2019

on 14 November. Iraqis know that they are not alone
against Da’esh and that they can count on the support
of the international community.
At the same time, however, it is important to
provide a credible response to the aspirations expressed
by Iraqis in recent weeks. That hinges on genuine and
democratic dialogue, which, as Archbishop Warda
mentioned, is the only way to safeguard Iraq’s stability
over the long term. To create the conditions for such
a dialogue, Iraq must quickly form a Government
capable of adopting the necessary emergency measures.
I would mention in particular the electoral law reform,
the effective reintegration of paramilitary groups under
the authority of the Prime Minister and the adoption of
robust anti-corruption measures.
France fully supports the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert in that regard. I would like to commend
here her firm commitment to overcoming the crisis in
a concerted manner. Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian met with her yesterday and
expressed his support.
We also support the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in particular
its efforts to promote reconciliation among the various
components of Iraqi society, stabilization, especially in
disputed territories, and the political process. UNAMI’s
efforts to support the dialogue between Baghdad and
Erbil and its commitment to contribute to the resolution
of the issue of the missing persons of the Gulf War are
also crucial. We recall the importance of the work
being carried out in consultation with all segments of
civil society, in particular with regard to strengthening
women’s participation in public life. UNAMI’s action
will also be instrumental in helping Iraq adopt needed
economic and social reforms.
On the path to democratic dialogue and the reform
necessary to avoid the twin pitfalls of communitarianism
and corruption, Iraq must be able to count on the
resolute support of the international community, and
the Council must remain mobilized alongside Iraq
in the years ahead. For its part, France will remain a
steadfast partner to support Iraq’s imperatives. Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs Le Drian visited Iraq
in October to recall the importance of the strategic
partnership between our two countries and express
France’s support in the fight against Da’esh and beyond.
We intend to remain partners in the stabilization and
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

reconstruction of the country and lend our support to
Iraqis at this crucial time for the future of the country.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and reassure you of our full support.
I would also like to thank the British delegation for
the efficiency with which it conducted its presidency
last month.
I would furthermore like to thank Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her briefing this morning and
for the outstanding work that she carried out last
week. I would also like to thank the observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Archbishop of Erbil.
Iraq faces unique challenges today. The country,
emerging from the conflict, has embarked on the
long road towards reconciliation and reconstruction.
The institutions working towards that goal, however,
are fragile. The process takes time. In the meantime,
the authorities must respond, in the short term and
in a difficult context, to the aspirations of their
people — aspirations for a better life and better
opportunities for all.
The freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly
are fundamental rights that must be respected. They
are crucial to the progress of democracy. Belgium
is deeply concerned by the fact that some of the
demonstrations resulted in acts of violence, including
the use of live ammunition by the security forces,
leading to numerous deaths and injuries. Also troubling
is the presence reported of elements who could derail
peaceful demonstrations. Those developments put
Iraq on a dangerous trajectory. How can we overcome
that situation?
First, we call on all actors, especially the security
forces, to follow the President’s instructions to act
with the utmost restraint at all times. Secondly, every
abuse must be investigated, and the perpetrators must
be held to account. Thirdly, all parties should engage
in constructive dialogue. Fourthly, we encourage
the authorities to expedite their efforts to meet the
demands of the demonstrators, namely, combating
corruption, starting economic recovery, creating
jobs, providing basic services to the population and
bringing about tangible improvements in people’s
lives. Electoral reform has also been a central demand

S/PV. 8676

of many peaceful demonstrators, and we encourage
the Iraqi authorities to implement legislative solutions
that respond to public calls for credible, free and fair
elections. Lastly, we support the important role that the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has played
in recent weeks. In order to ensure the country’s longterm stability, we encourage the continuation of efforts
in the following areas.
First, as Archbishop Warda mentioned, reconciliation
is of paramount importance. Looking at the painful past,
acknowledging and understanding it, and especially
transcending it together, is the best way to ensure
that it does not happen again. Such reconciliation
must continue and allow families to return to their
communities. The importance of such reconciliation
cannot be underestimated, especially to avoid creating
new space for Da’esh to take advantage of.
Secondly, the Government has already taken
important and courageous initiatives on security sector
reform. We must keep them going. Moreover, although
the Islamic State is militarily defeated, the causes that
allowed Da’esh to arise remain. Everything possible
must be done to avoid its resurgence.
Lastly, we encourage Iraq to continue its policy
of constructive engagement with its neighbours. The
fundamental principles of respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity should guide the actions of
all actors. We call for a joint commitment from the
region and the international community to that end.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would
like to extend my warm congratulations to you, Madam
President, and your team on the convening of this first
public meeting in December, devoted to the situation in
Iraq, which marks the beginning of the United States
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like
to express my thanks to Ambassador Karen Pierce and
her entire team for their flawless conduct of the work of
the Council in November, as well as for the relevance of
the issues placed on the agenda during the presidency
of the United Kingdom.
Finally, I wish to congratulate Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral; Monsignor Bashar Matti Warda, Archbishop
of Erbil; and Mr. Robert Mardini, Permanent Observer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross to
the United Nations, for their excellent briefings. I
also congratulate Mr. Mardini on his important new
assignment and wish him every success.

19-3905517/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

Côte d’Ivoire notes with grave concern that, for
several months now, Iraq has been shaken by a political
crisis marked by violent clashes between the lawenforcement authorities and peaceful protesters. The
crisis does not show any signs of letting up, despite the
recently announced resignation of Prime Minister Adil
Abd Al-Mahdi. The clashes, which have led to a serious
deterioration in the security situation, have resulted in
the deaths of several hundred people and more than a
thousand wounded, in addition to extensive material
damage. My country regrets this spiral of violence, which
seriously undermines Iraq’s democratic and political
gains and leaves the country vulnerable to a great risk
of instability. That is why we must implore the rigorous
implementation of the principle of accountability by
identifying those who have perpetrated criminal acts.
It is equally important that the unity, independence and
sovereignty of the country be fully respected, as must
the principle of non-interference in its internal affairs.
Given the gravity of the situation and echoing the
call of the Secretary-General, my country urges the
Iraqi authorities to refrain from disproportionate use
of force and calls on all parties to exercise restraint.
It is indeed vital that the Iraqi parties work together
with the support of the international community for
the immediate cessation of violence, with a view to
peacefully resolving their differences and meeting the
deepest aspirations of the population. In this regard,
my delegation supports the recommendations issued
on 11 November following consultations between the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Iraqi authorities and the protesters, which call for short-,
medium- and long-term measures to bring about an end
to the crisis. Côte d’Ivoire would therefore call on the
Government of Iraq to undertake the necessary reforms
and urgent measures to avoid the risk of tensions
erupting across the country, which, let us recall,
continues to face challenges related to the presence of
the terrorist group Da’esh on its territory.
Recent developments in the region have seen
military operations on the Turkish-Syrian border that
have resulted in the escape of several Da’esh fighters
from their detention centres, magnifying the fear
of a resurgence of the acts of the terrorist movement
in Iraq. In this regard, our meeting on 26 November
concerning the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
highlighted the constructive cooperation between the
18/25

03/12/2019

United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
UNITAD and the Iraqi Government in the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (see S/PV.8675).
My country commends the progress made in this regard
and stresses the urgent need to uphold the principle of
accountability for the crimes committed by Da’esh,
pursuant the provisions of resolution 2379 (2017) to
guarantee victims the right to justice in the framework
of a fair trial.
In view of the multifaceted challenges facing Iraq, it
is more necessary than ever before that the international
community support the country’s reconstruction and
development efforts in order to help build the observably
precarious peace, as is also the case with subregional
and international peace and security. Furthermore,
with regard to the alarming humanitarian situation
that persists in certain regions of Iraq, Côte d’Ivoire
also urges the international community to continue its
efforts to mobilize the resources needed to finance the
United Nations humanitarian response plan for 2019 in
an amount of $611.7 million.
With regard to the Kurdistan region, Côte d’Ivoire
calls for continued cooperation between the Federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government.
The dialogue must be maintained in order to find
mutually satisfactory solutions to outstanding issues,
particularly with regard to the sharing of oil resources
and the Kurdistan debt.
At the regional level, my delegation welcomes the
continued cooperation between the Governments of
Iraq and Kuwait so as to provide a definitive solution
to the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals, as well as to
matters relating to the restitution of seized assets.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its full
support for UNAMI and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in their continued commitment
to peace, stability and sustainable development in Iraq.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December. We
are very pleased to offer you, Madam, our full support,
and I wish you good luck. Allow me also to congratulate
Ambassador Karen Pierce on her able leadership and
thank the United Kingdom team for their commitment.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert;
the Archbishop of Erbil, Monsignor Bashar Matti
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

Warda; and the Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Robert Mardini, for
their comprehensive briefings.
It is with deep concern that Poland is following
the current developments in Iraq, where the people
have exercised their fundamental right to express their
concerns. We are alarmed by the high number of deaths
and injuries during the demonstrations and by the
continued use of ammunition against protesters, which
has led to further loss of life. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence, including the reported attacks by
armed entities against demonstrators, which undermine
the expression of legitimate demands. We call on all
actors to exercise maximum restraint and urge the
Iraqi authorities and security forces to protect the
lives of demonstrators, respect the rights to freedom
of expression and assembly, and swiftly conduct
independent and credible investigations in order to
ensure accountability for all acts of violence.
Developments over the past two months are a stark
reminder that the legitimate aspirations of Iraqi citizens
for an efficient and accountable Administration, better
job opportunities and the delivery of basic public
services remain unfulfilled. It is therefore paramount,
in our view, to step up efforts to address those
legitimate concerns through peaceful and inclusive
dialogue that would yield tangible benefits for all Iraqis.
Providing good governance, creating job opportunities,
improving living conditions for the population, fighting
corruption and promoting economic development
should be given the highest priority. We take note of
the measures undertaken by the Iraqi authorities to
meet the demands of the protesters, including efforts
to find legislative solutions that address public calls
for credible, free and fair elections, and we encourage
the political class of Iraq to come together to ensure
the swift implementation of much-needed reforms.
We also welcome the appointment of the first female
member of the Iraqi Government, Ms. Suha Khalil, as
Education Minister.
A key factor in ensuring long-term stability in Iraq
is promoting national reconciliation and social cohesion.
We encourage the Iraqi authorities to continue to work
towards addressing this important issue, including
through ensuring accountability for human rights
violations and providing protection for vulnerable
groups, including religious and ethnic minorities.

S/PV. 8676

Advancing the stabilization and reconstruction
of areas recaptured from Da’esh is also of critical
importance. Rebuilding damaged infrastructure and
restoring effective administration, security and public
services are indispensable for creating the conditions
for the voluntary, dignified and safe return of internally
displaced persons, as well as their local reintegration
and resettlement.
What Iraq needs now more than ever is calm and
stability in order to overcome challenges and pave the
way for sustainable peace, development and prosperity.
I would like to commend the efforts of the Iraqi
leadership aimed at promoting a balanced regional
policy and a constructive engagement with all its
neighbours. In that context, we welcome the significant
progress achieved to date on the issue of Kuwaiti
missing persons and property.
In conclusion, we reiterate our steadfast support
for Iraq’s unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
and express our appreciation for the tremendous
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in particular, have been doing in assisting the
Iraqi authorities.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, I join others
in congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming
the Council presidency for December, and thanking
you for holding today’s meeting in the sunlight.
I should like first to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Robert Mardini and Archbishop Bashar Matti Warda,
for their insightful briefings.
As many speakers before me have underlined, Iraq
is today at a crossroads, and it is deeply troubling to note
that protests that began with peaceful demonstrations
have now led to the killing of more than 400 people
and thousands more being injured as a result of violent
clashes between protestors and security forces. I wish
to repeat in this context what we have said many
times: the right to peaceful protest as enshrined in the
Iraqi Constitution must be guaranteed. We therefore
call on all sides to exercise restraint and to refrain
from violence.
As a friend of Iraq, Germany is deeply saddened
to see that so many lives have been lost. We deplore
the excessive use of force by security forces
against protesters. The principles of necessity and

19-3905519/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

proportionality must be respected, and all incidents in
which the actions of security forces have resulted in
death or injury should be promptly and transparently
investigated. We are also deeply concerned by reports
indicating unlawful arrests, killings and kidnappings,
and we want to emphasize that any attempts to threaten
and prevent people from exercising their fundamental
rights to peaceful assembly and to freedom of expression
are inexcusable.
The same holds true for reports of the targeting and
abduction of medical personnel in the context of the
protests. If such acts have indeed occurred, then they
are clear violations of international humanitarian law
and numerous resolutions of the Security Council.
The last item on a long list of concerns that we see
and express as a friend is that we note with concern
reports about calls for the temporary closure of several
television and radio stations. Together with repeated
attacks on journalists by unidentified perpetrators, this
represents a worrying deterioration in the freedom of
the press in Iraq in the context of the ongoing protests.
In our view, a free press forms the basis of an open,
public debate and exchange of views, which is also a
precondition for lasting stability and development.
Turning to the most recent events, I wish to say that
we respect Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi’s decision
to offer his resignation as a step towards overcoming
the current crisis. As a new Government is formed, it
is vital that key reforms are swiftly implemented in
order for State institutions to regain public trust and
to address a climate of anger and disillusionment. This
new Government must, while following constitutional
processes, be formed rapidly. Time is of the essence, as
we have heard today time and again.
We must not forget the hundreds of thousands of
peacefully protesting Iraqis who continue to raise
serious and legitimate demands: the end of corruption,
the stimulation of economic growth and employment,
the provision of reliable public services, prudent and
impartial governance, credible elections, and a broader
reform of the political system, including amendments
to the electoral law and the Constitution. Germany
welcomes in particular the initial steps taken in the fight
against corruption. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General said in her briefing, anti-corruption
measures will be key, and we urge all relevant parties
to continue their efforts. The fight against corruption
20/25

03/12/2019

is crucial to building viable and responsive State
institutions and to reviving public trust.
Germany stands ready to support Iraq in its work
to address necessary reforms. We are already engaged
in key sectors to enhance infrastructure, for example in
the area of electricity supply, and to tackle issues like
youth unemployment and administrative reform. Since
2014, we have contributed €2.2 billion to assist the
country in its development. Stabilization, recovery and
reconstruction can only succeed if all actors, including
the Government of Iraq, intensify their efforts and
expand their financial support.
We welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq to engage
with a wide range of Iraqi stakeholders to discuss the
different aspects of the reforms needed and the draft
of a road map proposing concrete steps as a start for
reforms based on these discussions. We join the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in her call for
immediate action, and we call on all Iraqi parties to
engage in constructive dialogue.
Most of the protesters are young people demanding
a better future and the overcoming of unemployment,
the unequal provision of basic services and corruption.
We urge State authorities not only to allow them to
express their grievances in a peaceful way but to seize
this opportunity to engage with the next generation in
order to create a brighter future for the country.
Before concluding, I wish to refer briefly to three
other important questions.
First is the issue of relations between Baghdad
and Erbil, as mentioned by many other speakers. We
strongly encourage both sides to continue their intensive
dialogue in order to further improve relations between
the Federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, and to find sustainable solutions for
outstanding unresolved issues, especially with regard
to oil-revenue sharing and security arrangements.
Secondly, I wish to refer very briefly to our
discussion last Tuesday on accountability (see
S/PV.8675). We would like to reiterate our full support
for the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Special Adviser
Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and his team. Accountability
is a prerequisite for reconciliation and for the return of
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8676

the remaining almost 1.5 million internally displaced
persons in Iraq.

operations of the institutions responsible for resolving
the issues facing the population.

Thirdly, and finally, we welcome the efforts by
Iraq, Kuwait, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Tripartite Commission and hope that
further progress will be achieved on the important file
of missing Kuwaiti nationals and property.

We cannot allow Iraq to boil over once again.
All parties must fight to safeguard the significant
gains that they have made in recent years, such as the
territorial victory over the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the subsequent successful outcome
of the national and regional electoral processes in the
country. Those achievements are extremely important
and serve as a foundation for the future development of
the country.

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Madam President, I would
like to thank you and your delegation for having
organized this important meeting during the United
States presidency of the Security Council this month.
We wish you, Madam, the greatest of success. We also
congratulate the delegation of the United Kingdom
for the excellent way it conducted the business of the
Council during its presidency in November.
We welcome the excellent briefings by Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq; Mr. Robert Martini,
Permanent Observer of the International Committee of
the Red Cross to the United Nations; and Monsignor
Bashar Matti Warda, Archbishop of Erbil. The
information they have just provided us help us better
grasp the prevailing situation in Iraq.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
concerned about the recent events in Iraq. On
1 December, the Iraqi Parliament met in extraordinary
session and accepted the resignation of outgoing
Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi as a result of the
tense protests in Baghdad’s Tahrir Square since early
October that resulted in more than 400 deaths, no less
than 6,000 injured, including several members of the
security forces, as well as extensive material damage.
We offer our condolences to the Iraqi Government and
all the families afflicted by the tragic loss of life. We
regret that the protests have taken on such proportions.
We therefore call on all parties to refrain from taking
unnecessary actions such as those that aggravated
the situation. Citizens have the right to demonstrate
peacefully. The security forces must shoulder the
responsibility of protecting all people and their property.
We are sensitive to the concerns of those demanding
effective governance that is able to respond to the needs
of citizens and to function in manner that instils trust.
It is therefore time for all political parties in Iraq to
set aside their personal differences, prioritize the
national interests and avoid impediments to the normal

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea notes with
satisfaction the recent broad consultations held between
the executive branch and the political leadership,
which this year helped to overcome the months-long
stalemate that prevented the complete formation of
the Government, thereby underscoring the importance
of peaceful and inclusive dialogue among the parties
to move forward in the reconciliation process and in
building the Iraqi State.
We agree with the report of the Secretary-General that
“[t]he Government’s agreement on an initial
package of measures and its commitment to
dialogue are steps in the right direction, but
swift implementation is essential to meeting the
legitimate and long-standing demands of the Iraqi
people” (S/2019/903, para. 90).
We welcome the high-level bilateral meetings between
the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, which are in the process of negotiations
to resolve, inter alia, outstanding issues involving
oil, revenue-sharing and security arrangements. We
encourage them to continue working to reach mutually
beneficial agreements.
We commend the Iraqi security forces for their
persistent efforts to eradicate once and for all the ISIL
cells that continue to carry out frequent asymmetric
attacks against the population. The development of
political events in Iraq demonstrates that the country’s
institutions are functioning normally and that
democratic principles are being upheld. The next step
must therefore involve the appointment of a new Prime
Minister to fill that important vacancy.
Before concluding, I would like to express our
satisfaction with the efforts by the Government of
Iraq with regard to issues concerning its neighbour
Kuwait. We appreciate the recent handover of books,

19-3905521/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

and we hope that the parties will continue to work in
that direction.
While my country condemns any initiative that
would undermine the process under way in Iraq,
Equatorial Guinea pays tribute to Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert and the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq for their outstanding work in supporting the
Iraqi people and authorities in their arduous and
complicated task of rebuilding the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate the Permanent Representative of
the United States on her country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
I wish her every success. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom for her efforts at
the helm of the Council in November.
I am grateful to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) for her briefing on the situation in Iraq for the
period from July to October. I welcome the briefing by
Mr. Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations. I
am also grateful for the presence of Archbishop Warda
and for his briefing, with a few reservations on some of
its paragraphs.
Following the casualties incurred in the course of the
peaceful protests that occurred in my country, I extend
my condolences to the families of the martyrs — may
they rest in peace — and wish those who were injured
a speedy recovery.
It has been more than a month since popular
demonstrations began in Baghdad and cities in
the southern part of the country. The Iraqi people
eloquently expressed their opinion of the political and
electoral system in the country, the performance of the
Government and the needed reforms in the political,
legal and public sectors. Those brilliant demonstrations
were marred by the presence of illegal groups that
attacked demonstrators and security forces, leading to a
number of casualties. Those groups have nothing to do
with the protests. They have used the demonstrations as
cover and the demonstrators as human shields to block
roads, commit acts of looting and arson and attack
security forces with Molotov cocktails, hand grenades,
22/25

03/12/2019

firearms and knives. They have also disrupted the
operation of schools and ports. In that regard, I take
this opportunity to clarify some substantive points.
The Iraqi Government fully recognizes the right to
demonstrate as a right guaranteed by the Constitution
of Iraq, as set out in the statement made by the
Prime Minister on 4 November. The Government is
committed to providing the Iraqi people with the
opportunity to express themselves and their demands
without undermining public order or destroying public
or private property.
We will spare no effort to meet all the legitimate
demands of the demonstrators, especially those calling
for vital economic and political reforms through the
relevant constitutional mechanisms. In that connection,
the Government of Iraq is conducting investigations,
with follow up at the highest levels, to identify the
illegal groups that infiltrated the protests. Those groups
are rioting against both demonstrators and security
forces. They have also attacked public facilities,
the Central Bank, publishing and press houses, and
recently set ablaze a number of stores on Al-Rasheed
Street, Al-Khulani Square and the vicinity, claiming
300 martyrs and injuring more than 1,500 individuals
among the demonstrators and security forces.
In that connection, the Secretary-General’s
report on the situation in Iraq (S/2019/903) addresses
the recent developments and demonstrations in Iraq,
referring to a number of violations related to the use
of violence against demonstrators. We stress that the
Iraqi Government has dealt with those demonstrators
in accordance with the Constitution by protecting
them and deterring any attack against them. Strict
instructions against the use of live ammunition and
lethal weapons remain in place. The security forces
are not engaging with the demonstrators or attacking
them. They have instead adopted a defensive posture
even though the illegal groups that have infiltrated
the demonstrators have stormed the checkpoints on
Al-Sinak and Al-Jumhuriya bridges and attacked the
public and Government facilities.
The Prime Minister has ordered the establishment
of special committees to conduct duly transparent
investigations, bring persons at fault to account and
refer these cases to competent judicial authorities to
carry out the investigations in those violations and
identify those who have targeted the demonstrators.
The Government has also decided to cover the expenses
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

of the treatment of all injured people, both among the
security forces and the peaceful demonstrators.
I would like to quote a statement made by Prime
Minister Adil Abdul Mahdi regarding the temporary
ban of Internet services,
“The digital world is a contemporary reality and
a right for all. However, when defending the rights
of the public, the authorities are obliged to restrict
that right when they see it being used to promote
hatred and violence and disrupt public life.”
Internet services have now been restored. The Iraqi
Government has also rejected all attempts to put the
security of Iraq at risk or harm the Iraqi people, including
kidnappings and attacks against demonstrators carried
out by illegal groups. The Government will take the
necessary measures to place all weapons under the
authority of the State, in line with previous relevant
efforts. In response to demonstrators’ demands
and the call by the Supreme Religious Authority in
Najaf — which has issued a number of statements
in support of the demands of the demonstrators and
the Government in fulfilling its responsibility to
protect the demonstrators’ lives, and has called on the
Government and the Parliament to take the necessary
measures to fast-track the reform process while
condemning external interference that seeks to derail
the demonstrations and achieve goals that do not serve
the interests of Iraq and its people — the Government
of Iraq has launched wide-ranging reform packages in
consultation with relevant parties, including the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). Those
actions are in keeping with the relevant Government
decisions, namely, those numbered 340,341, 363 and
364, which include enacting laws that promote social
justice and support the anti-corruption efforts of the
Supreme Judicial Council.
For example, the Government has adopted a law
to eliminate the financial privileges granted to Iraqi
officials, as well as a new retirement law that would
provide 300,000 job opportunities. The Government
has also presented a new electoral draft law, in addition
to a draft law on the establishment of the Independent
High Electoral Commission to the Parliament. The
first reading of those two draft laws took place in
Parliament on 19 November. The Iraqi Parliament has
also established the Constitutional Review Committee
that in turn has called on all relevant parties in Iraq,
including academia, journalists, activists and civil

S/PV. 8676

society, to contribute to constitutional amendments
in order to meet society’s needs and the demands of
the demonstrators. That was done in cooperation with
United Nations experts.
In that context, I stress the guiding role played
by UNAMI, in line with its mandate, by holding and
strengthening dialogues with the President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of Parliament to discuss the
necessary measures to be taken to meet the demands
of the protesters. We u rge U NA MI to comply with
the mechanisms of its mandate, in line with
resolution 2470 (2019).
In accordance with the sermon of the High Religious
Authority in Najaf on Friday, 29 November, and in line
with the demands of the protesters, Prime Minister Adil
Abdul Mahdi submitted his resignation to Parliament on
the same day in order to give it the opportunity to form
a new Cabinet. Parliament accepted the resignation on
1 December and we are waiting for the President of the
Republic to choose a new candidate from the largest
parliamentary bloc to form a new Cabinet.
The Iraqi Government has responded to the
demonstrators in a number of ways. In addition to
the aforementioned laws, a number of decisions have
been taken to support employment by providing grants
to implement small projects, hiring post-graduates in
Iraqi Ministries and accepting volunteers to join the
Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of the Interior,
as well as facilitating the distribution of land and the
allocation of loans to build new houses in the most
impoverished governorates.
We have also implemented a new social protection
system, a new social security system and a health
insurance system. At the administrative level, the
Cabinet has established the new Federal Service
Council, which will ensure transparency in the hiring
of all Iraqi public servants.
The Government continues to implement its
reforms to kick-start the economy by increasing non-oil
revenues, encouraging domestic investment and
drafting the new law on the reconstruction Council,
while reviewing and facilitating the current investment
laws and removing obstacles to attract foreign
investment, in cooperation with all friendly States such
as the United States, Russia and China, the European
Union and others.

19-3905523/25

S/PV.8676

The situation concerning Iraq

Most recently, the Government has been able
to achieve the successful repatriation of nearly
80 per cent of internally displaced persons, thanks to its
tremendous efforts to ensure that the requirements of
voluntary return are in place at three important levels:
the provision of services; security, judicial and criminal
scrutiny; and meeting community peace requirements,
concerning which the Government has signed an
agreement with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) to implement projects valued at
$33 million to restore stability in the affected areas.
My government is keen to accelerate the submission
of the draft budget for 2020 by giving priority to
increasing non-oil revenues in order to enhance the
proportion of the investment budget to provide a
suitable economic environment for job creation and
to support the new reform packages in response to the
demands of the demonstrators.
My government is also keen to strengthen and
intensify efforts to address the legacy of Islamic State
terrorist gangs and to create an action plan to deal with
children recruited by the terrorist organization, foreign
terrorist fighters, the wives and widows of terrorists
and their children, and the survivors and rape victims
of terrorists, as well as to strengthen efforts to stabilize
the liberated areas and address security concerns
related to human rights upon the return of terrorist
elements and their families to Iraq. We commend the
efforts of States that have taken responsibility for their
nationals and their transfer to their countries, and urge
others to receive their nationals, women and children
who have served their sentences, and children under the
legal age of criminal liability.
The Government of Iraq affirms that the stability
and prosperity of Iraq are a common regional interest.
Based on this vision, we affirm Iraq’s commitment to
the important principle of its foreign policy, stipulated
in the Iraqi Constitution, that its territory should not
be the starting point for any threat to the security and
safety of neighbouring countries. Iraq is keen not to
engage in any form in conflicts or ongoing conflicts in
the region, given the magnitude of its responsibility and
its belief in the importance of formulating a policy based
on creating a state of balance that contributes to the
maintenance of regional security and prevents conflicts
from developing into direct military confrontations.
To that end, and in order to maintain international
peace and security, Iraq affirms the need for concerted
24/25

03/12/2019

efforts and enhanced consultation to avoid escalation
and tensions in the region, and we call on all States to
spare Iraq regional tensions and their adverse effects
on the security of the region. The Government of my
country is also keen to develop Iraq’s relations with
its neighbours, underscoring the democratic Iraq’s
adoption of firm positions in its foreign policy that seek
to build regional peace.
Cooperation with our sister State of Kuwait
occupies a privileged position among Iraq’s priorities
and through cooperation with the United Nations,
where we affirm the readiness of my Government to
abide by the relevant Security Council resolutions
and to make the utmost efforts to meet them. In this
regard, I am pleased to brief members of the Security
Council on recent developments related to this file,
particularly with regard to the content of paragraph 4
of the resolution 2107 (2013), including extradition of
the remains of 47 missing Kuwaitis who were found in
mass graves that date back to the time of the previous
political system; Iraqi finalization of return of all
Kuwaiti property, the last batch of which was returned
to the Kuwaiti authorities on 27 October 2019; and the
continuation of outstanding payments owed by Iraq
to Kuwait through the United Nations Compensation
Commission, which amount to $3.5 billion. It is hoped
that it will be fully paid in 2020.
Bilateral relations between the two brotherly
countries have also witnessed positive milestones,
including the regular convening of the Joint
Commission — most recently in May — which has
contributed to significant progress on topics of joint
cooperation. In that context, we extend our sincere
appreciation for the efforts of the sisterly State of Kuwait
and its Permanent Representative and Permanent
Delegation in advocating Arab questions wisely and
responsibly through its membership of the Security
Council, which clearly benefited the consolidation of
international peace and security.
The current political dynamics on the Iraqi street
are an expression of the evolution in the nature of a
collective and individual political culture that respects
the peaceful transfer of power through constitutional
mechanisms. Iraq is still at the beginning of its
democratic journey, which will mature over time
and through broad popular participation in political
life, with the consolidation of the role of institutions
and rule of law. The current demonstrations highlight
the positive, enabling atmosphere that motivates the
19-39055

03/12/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

political system to review and reform the laws and
public regulations in the country, and the Government
to complete its efforts, in cooperation with Parliament,
to find better solutions to speed up reforms.
The recent political developments in my country,
Iraq, are evidence of an increasing political maturity
encouraged by the Government by respecting the
rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution,
including the freedom of demonstration and the
expression of opinion. The young people participating
in the demonstrations have grown up in a democratic
environment encouraging these rights, in contrast
to the situation under the former regime, which was
dominated by fear resulting from the brutal suppression
of freedoms. The future of the political process will
therefore witness positive developments that will
complement the efforts that have laid the foundations
of a new, democratic, stable and secure Iraq that

S/PV. 8676

respects international law and enshrines cooperation
and openness as the two guiding principles for its
external relations.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my country’s
commitment to building a prosperous Iraq, in
coordination and cooperation with the international
community, with a view to eliminating the ravages of
terrorism, expediting the reconstruction processes and
meeting the legitimate demands of the protesters so
as to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and
implement the Government programme decisions, in
accordance with national laws in effect.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

19-3905525/25
