TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR
tll
MEETING: 28 JANUARY

NEW

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Puge
1
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1527) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Statement by the President . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . * . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

3

.,..,,.........,,............................

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Ceylon, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, the People’s
‘Republic of the Congo, the Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/961 6 and Add.1) . . . .

3

S4PV.1527

FIFTEEN

HUND

in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Nsanze TERENCE (Burundi).

28 Janmq

197’0, at 3 pm.

fact that we are presiding over the Council, have asked me
to transmit to all the members of the Council their best
wishes for success in its most difficult and noble task,
which is to guarantee peace in the world. The J-Iead of State
of Burundi and his Government, far from restricting their
interest to mere wishes, have undertaken to play an active
part in the Security Council in order to triumph over the
cause of war and to ensure peace on earth.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 527)

4. At the time when some members have left us and others
have come to the Council, it would be wrong to allow the
names of the first to be forgotten. I wish, therefore, to
discharge a most pleasant duty of gratitude to the representatives of Algeria, Senegal, Pakistan, Hungary and
Paraguay for the important part played by them in .the
discharge of the difficult tasks of the Council during their
term of office. It goes without saying that their activities
have left their mark on the Council and will continue to
influence it in the future.

Adoption of the agenda.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Ceylon, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, the Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
the Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9616 and
Add.1).

5. I should like to present to the new non-permanent
members of the Council our warmest congratulations on
the very important responsibility entrusted to them. The
warm wishes that I address to them and the hope I express
that they will play an important part in the fight for the
peace and security of nations is accompanied by our sincere
promise and firm assurance of close, and loyal co-operation
with the representatives of Sierra Leone, Syria, Poland and
Nicaragua.

Statement by the President
6. Finally, it is with spontaneous enthusiasm that I should
like to address Mr. Vernon Johnson IvIwaanga, my immediate predecessor, the representative of a country and a
State for which the people and Government of Burundi
have the highest esteem. Indeed, Mr. Ambassador, the
masterfulness and the remarkable manner in which you
discharged your tasks as President of the Council for the
month of December faithfully reflected the great talents
and qualities with which you are endowed. Your dynamism, your faith in the cause of Africa make of you a true
symbol of the youthful vitality of Africa, a source of
satisfaction, inspiration and hope for our continent in this,
its phase of regeneration.

The PRESIDENT (interpretation jkom French): The
beginning of the participation of the Republic of Burundi
in the work of the Security Council, the ending of the
terms of five members, who have been succeeded by five
other members, the advent of a new decade in which the
world places great hope, among other things for economic
salvation and the preservation of peace, and the fact that a
quarter of a century has passed since the founding of the
United Nations-this imposing set of circumstances obliges
the President of the Security Council to make a preliminary
statement at the first meeting of this year.
2. In addition to the reasons I have just adduced, there is
the presence among us of the Secretary-General after a
most successful tour of Africa. It is my first duty to express
to all the members of the Security Council my delegation’s
pleasure in co-operating with them in an atmosphere of
frankness and mutual respect.

7. Mr. Secretary-General, your return after a fruitful trip
to our youthful continent offers me an unprecedented
opportunity to pay tribute and to express our gratitude to
you. Many factors, personal and international, had several
times made it necessary to postpone your journey. Your
firm resolve to undertake this project clearly proves the
great interest which you show in the cause of Africa. Since
you have yourself witnessed the enthusiasm which sur-

3. The President of the Republic of Burundi, Mr. Michel
Micombero, and his Government, taking advantage of the
1

rounded your august person during this whole journey, is it
not superfluous for me to stress the tremendous sympathy
felt for you by the peoples of Africa? We have come to the
end of a decade in which you were closely linked to the
events that shook Africa from Algeria to the Congo, from
our accession to independence to the creation of the
Organization of African Unity. You have made most
praiseworthy efforts to help us to restore the right of our
continent to preside over its own destiny, and we know
that you will never desist as long as the forces of
racism, colonialism and division, forever active and harbouring old illusions, still cling to a few strongholds.

memoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of our Organization offers the most propitious opportunity for assessing
the efficiency of the Security Council.
11. It is obvious however that a preliminary task must be
undertaken before the Council can again play its role as the
true defender of peace and thereby strengthen the rights
and powers entrusted to it by the Charter, especially under
Articles 24 and 26, and, if need be, under Chapter VII. To
achieve that objective the prior duty of the Council should
be to replace the sometimes concealed failure to see the
chronic shortcomings it has evinced by a formal pledge to
do away once and for all with those shortcomings in the
most effective and irrevocable manner. If the growth of this
Council has at times been invoked to explain the fluctuations and contradictions of the adolescence of the Organization, the latter has now come to a point where no
tolerance or indulgence will be shown by a bitter and
disenchanted world for the pretexts behind which the
Council might wish to hide.

8. The direct dialogue which you undertook with many
African leaders will have been not only beneficial for the
present, but also a prelude to the solution of problems
which we are still facing in the final liberation of a
continent reborn. The success of your journey justifies the
fervent wish which we express that in the near future you
will be able to undertake a second journey to other
countries in order to hear the voice of all of Africa. The
concomitant nature of the end of tragic events in a country
member of the Organization of African Unity and of your
visit enable us without hesitation to call you a pilgrim and a
messenger of reconciliation and peace. This happy concomitance is a reason for consolation, it proves you right
and is a genuine reward for your political courage, your
independence of judgement, and confirms the aptness of
your judgements and your views, The full-fledged defeat
inflicted in the past on the artisans of the disintegration of
the continent in its very heartland, Congo (Kinshasa), has
been repeated today and inflicted on the authors of the
second attempt to disintegrate Africa on its flank, and you
may be legitimately and deservedly proud of your powerful
assistance.

12. At its age our Organization is faced by many temptations-the temptation to sink in routine activities, to make
insufficient efforts, to persist in its refusal to recover. It is
obvious that such a choice would lead to an underesthnation of the authority of the United Nations and to a final
capitulation in the face of inherent requirements. However,
the sublime ideal of universal peace which the Council has
the weighty task of guarding throughout our planet makes
it imperative for all the members to make another choice:
to confront reality and, therefore, to adopt a more dynamic
attitude which would enable the Council to face its
tremendous responsibilities.
13. It is urgent and imperative to make the latter choice,
the reinvigoration of the Council, because that cornerstone
of the United Nations is beginning to show signs of
lassitude, of premature senility, to such an extent that the
whole edifice is showing the effects from it. That, unfortunately, can be seen in the influence of certain countries
compelling others to follow in their wake, in the reprehensible attitude of some other Powers which refuse to support
or approve measures prescribed by the Security Council,
under the simple pretext of the supposed refusal of the
rebel Governments concerned to heed those appeals.

9. As a faithful echo of Africa and a privileged interpreter
of the peoples of Africa, I should like to pay a sincere
tribute to Your Excellency and to all your assistants who,
from near or par, have contributed so greatly in honouring
our continent and ensuring the successof your visit. May
your eminent role enable you to crown your brilliant career
by a fina blow dealt to this double anachronism which is a
danger to Africa-the dehumanization of man by his equal
and the colonial exploitation of man by man.
10. The imperatives of peace require that we rehabilitate
the Security Council, the keystone of the United Nations.
At a time when this world Organization is reaching
maturity, it is at a crossroads. At the age of twenty-five
man is usually able to judge his own value objectively, to
build his future, to recover his rights if they have been
denied him. The Security Council, thanks to the combined
wisdom and experience of its members, is even much more
entitled and obliged to go through that process of healthy
self-criticism, which would unmask the mistakes of the past
and prescribe remedies for the causes of its failures. A
quarter of a century has elapsed, marked by hesitation,
timidity and failure to act in -the face of certain threats to
peace. The relative successesand the shortcomings of our
Council should lead us to recover the rights taken away
from it by those Members of the United Nations who seem
to have come to terms with it only in order to repudiate its
resolutions and to challenge its authority. The com-

14. Therefore, the constant denial of the rights of the
United Nations by the Governments of Lisbon, Salisbury
and Pretoria is but a consecration of the intrinsic paradox
that now exists in this Organization. The often-adopted
defeatist attitude only strengthens those dictatorial r6gimes
which constantly challenge the supreme authority of the
United Nations and exert pressure over some countries.
And a strange scenario is being played out where tyrannical,
colonialist, inhuman Ggimes, universally condemned, dictate their will to the giants of the United Nations, who are
fully capable of ensuring compliance with decisions of the
Council.
15. Therefore, very often, specious legal pretexts suffice
to ensure the continuation of the usurped powers of
Lisbon, Pretoria and Salisbury in their respective fields.
There is no need to prove that that leads to rigid legalism,
then to complete injustice, what was called in Roman law
2

surnmum jus, summa injuria: the excessive enforcenient of

22. These are the fundamental imperatives which require a
rapid rebirth of the prestige of the Security Council, its
credit, its rights, its powers, which are due to its role as a
body guaranteeing world peace. This rehabilitation is not a
possibility but an imperative necessity to safeguard peace at
any cost rather than sacrificing it or subjugating it to
economic or ideological alliances.

the law leads to injustice.
16. The objectives of the United Nations make it incumbent upon all members of the Security Council, mainly the
great Powers which have primary responsibility, to take a
stand against the de facto measures taken by Governments
that have revolted against the United Nations, to free
themselves once and for all from the highly prejudicial
influence of those Governments, which impose their will
because the fundamental and inalienable rights of peoples
are made subordinate to cammerc’al transactions.

23. This is the declaration of faith which all the peaceloving peoples and nations want to see professed by the
Security Council.
Adoption of tbe agenda

17. The new era into which this Organization is entering
makes it imperative for Member States to act less in keeping
with their immediate national interests and more for
universal solidarity in the cause of international peace and
security.

Th,eagenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the President of
the Security Council from the representatives
of
Afghanistarn, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia, Ceylon, Chad,
the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Eyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, iMadagascar, Malaysia, Nlali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Mepal, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, the People’s
Republic of the Congo, the Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
the United Arab Republic, the United Republic uf
Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and 2ambia
(S/9616 and Add.11

18. I must remind the Council that the United Nations is
approaching the age at which the League of Nations
succumbed to the weight of its impotence. The Security
Council, which is the equivalent of the Council of the
League of Nations, could not wish to be responsible for
leading our Organization towards the fate of its predecessor.
19. In today’s world, where the problems of peace among
nations and understanding among races arise every day,
where needs and interests as well as the ambitions of States
and racial collectivities collide, the Security Council must
be determined to face realities. Until now the efforts and
appeals have been limited to the search for means to
prevent or stop armed warfare. However, if we disregard an
ever-decreasing number of hotbeds of conflicts and tension,
armed warfare is evermore rare in the nuclear age when
actual or supposed antagonists hold each other in mutual
respect.

24. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Security Council is meeting today at the request of
fifty-four States Members (S/9616 and Add.]/,
to which
have now been added two more Members. The Security
Council will therefore now consider the question of
Namibia as submitted to it by the States I have just
mentioned.

20. There is another kind of warfare, more calamitous
because it is covert and comes into the open only
sporadically, causing destruction by its implacable virulence. A line is being drawn between the members of one
single human family. It is called racial psychosis, complexes
of superiority on the one hand, of resignation on the other.
This double complex is encouraged and pursued and
imposed upon the so-called coloured peoples, its victims.
Racial antagonisms are responsible for this division of
mankind into two camps. Harmony, equality and fraternization of peoples and men cannot be achieved. This is an
obvious fact. Another order has to be set up in the interest
of peace. It is up to the Security Council, especially, and
the United Nations in general, during this decade, to
eradicate this obstructionist mentality which has gPen birth
to obsolete and artificial doctrines which claim a sacred
right of racial supremacy for some and claim that there is
congenital inferiority among other races.

25. Before I call on the speakers on my list, perhaps the
Council will permit me the pleasure of asking a favour of it.
Apart from my obligation to address all speakers as
representatives of their countries, the eminence of the posts
they occupy, the respect and admiration I feel for them,
and the human aspects that should imbue our relations,
tempt me, however, to address all members as persons in
their own right. Therefore, I trust that any whose names I
do not pronounce properly will correct me after the
meetings at which this may have occurred.
26. In a letter dated 27 January 1970 [S/9619], the
representative of Turkey, as President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, has asked to be allowe’d to
participate in the debate of the Security Council on the
question before it. If I hear no objection, I shall consider
that the Council has decided to accede to that request and
to invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia to participate without the right to vote in the
debates of the Security Council in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the practice of the
Council.

21. To ensure total and authentic peace and security,
which is the primary responsibility of the Security Council,
the latter must fulfil its strict obligation to free mankind
from this psychological warfare pitilessly waged against it
by the advocates of racial inequality.

It was so decided.

3

revision which I shall read out orally. It is a revision of the
first part of paragraph 6. It should read in the revised form:

At the imitation
oj’ the President, MP: N. Cuhdc
( FliF’kcY), iDreside?~r of the Ukted Nations Cotuwil for
Narnibiu, 2oolc u p&m at thu ,%curity Council table.

“Requests the Secretary-General to set up an ad hoc
committee of experts, to be appointed in consultation
with the members of the Security Council . . .“.

27, Mr. JAKOlJSON (Finland): At our last meeting in
1969 I did not have the opportunity
of addressing the
Outgoing members of the Council, and I should therefore
like to begin my statement today by paying tribute to
Algeria, Hungary, Pakistan, Paraguay and Senegal, five
countries which, during their terms as members, made an
irnpor&nt and constructive contribution to the work of the
Council. To t.he representatives and the delegations of the
five outgoing members I wish to extend, on behalf of my
delegation, our most sincere ,thaniis for the friendly
(x~~-~IRxII~LxI.WC had with them during the past year. I also
wish to congratulate Ambnssad.or .J$Tvaangaof Zambia who
presided over our meetings in December with great effectivcness and charm.

I think
shortly.’

that the text of the draft will be distributed

32. Before I comment on the text of the draft resolution I
should like to outline the views of my Government on the
question of Namibia in more general terms.

33. It may be recalled that my delegation welcomed the
decision taken by the Secur$ty Council on the question of
Namibia in March 1969 (resolution 264 (196911. The
General Assembly had clearly exhausted the means at its
disposal. The Government of South Africa had refused to
co-operate with the United Nations Council for Namibia.
We believe it was right that the Security Council should
take up the search for effective means by which the United
Nations could discharge its responsibility towards Namibia
and its people. The resolution adopted by the Security
Council at that time in our view meant more than a mlere
restatement of what the General Assembly had alreatdy
decided. It meant that for the first time the authority of
the Security Council had been fully engaged in the task of
translating that decision into reality.

28. The representatives of the five newly elected members
of the Council, Burundi, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone
and Syria, have today for the first time taken their seats at
this table. I am happy to be the first, after the President, to
~elco~nc
them. We in the Finni& delegation look forward
to working with the delegations OT those five countries in
the coming year.
29. To you personally, Mr. President, I wish to extend the
Your distinguished
record as a ccpresentative of your country at. the United
Nations and your great knowledge of international affairs
are well known to all 01 us in the United Nations and we
have complete confidence in your impartiality and competence as the President of the Security Council.
vcr:y best wishes of’ my delegation.

34. Finland did not, however, support the subsequent
resolution 1269 (1969)] adopted by the Security Council
in August last year. It seemed to my delegation that that
resolution was leading the Council towards a dead end,
towards a confrontation not between the United Nations
and South Africa but within the Security Council itself.

30. It is appropriate that the Security Council should
resume consid.eration of the question of Namibia under the
leadership of the representative of an African State. It is
equally appropriate, I think, that the debate on this
question should be opened this time by the representative
of a State which is far from the continent of Africa. For the
question of Namibia should not be treated as a purely or
even primarily African issue. The United Nations as a whole
is deeply and irrevocably committed to helping the people
of Namibia to attain freedom and independence. This
Organization has assumed direct responsibility
for the
Territory of Namibia until its independence. Failure to
discharge that responsibility cannot but undermine the
authority of the United Nations, to the detriment of the
interests of every one of its Member States. It is natural,
therefore, for a country like Finland, which regards the
strengthening of the United Nations as a primary objective
of its foreign policy, to engage actively in the search for
effective means by which we may advance towards our
common goal, We have worked closely with the African and
Asian members of the Security Council, and as a result of
our consultations I have the honour to introduce to the
Council a draft resolution the provisional text of which has
just been circulated to the members of the Council. It is
sponsored by -the delegations of Burundi, Nepal, Sierra
Leone and Zambia as we11as Finland.

35. The crucial question concerns, of course, the use of
coercive measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nation’s, The division of opinion on that question in
the Council. seems to be irreconcilable, at least for the
present. Obviously issues of fundamental importance to
every Member are involved. In the view of my Govelrnment-and this view has been stated in detail in anot.her
context-it
is of paramount importance to preserve and
strengthen the authority and effectiveness of the Security
Council as the supreme organ of international co-operation
for the maintenance of international peace and security. A
pronouncement by the ‘Council on the existence of a threat
to international peace and security must therefore carry
conviction in the context of the prevailing international
situation. It must carry conviction not only within the
Council itself, but also among the nations which will be
called upon to make the efforts and sacrifices that may be
necessary to remove the threat.
36. We believe, accordingly, that before invoking the
provisions of Chapter VII the Security Council should make
sure that its decisions can in fact be carried out and that its
will can be made to prevail. Otherwise, we run the risk of
failure which can only weaken the authority of the Council

31. I said that the text was a provisional one. Before I
proceed I should point out that the sponsors have made one

1 Subsequently circulated as document S/9620.

4

and the credibility of its decisions, and thus impair
international security in general.

will nevertheless also be prepared to co-operate with the
expert committee.

37. In the absence of the possibility of action under
Chapter VII of the Charter, the Security Council has a duty
to examine every other means by which it can advance the
cause of the people of Namibia. Obviously there is no single
decision or single act that could solve the problem. But
there are, in our view, possibilities of practical action which
have not so far been explored.

44. It should be clear from the text of the draft resolution
that the expert committee is not intended to become
another United Nations organ or to replace or detract from
any existing body. It is an ad hoc committee, and it has
been given a very limited time, until 1 June 1970, to submit
its recommendations to the Security Council. The setting
up of such a committee would thus not tend to delay or
Postpone the question of Namibia. It is designed, on the
contrary, to move consideration of that question forward
from dead centre, where it is now. The draft resolution
explicitly states that the Security Council should resume
consideration of the question of Namibia as soon as the
recommendations of the expert committee have been made
available.

38. The purpose of the draft resolution which I am
introducing on behalf of its sponsors is to make it possible
for the Security Council to explore those possibilities. It
seeks to define the area of agreement between the great
majority of Members and purposely avoids those issues
which tend to divide the Council.
39. I do not think it necessary to comment on the draft
resolution paragraph by paragraph; most of its provisions
speak for themselves. I shall limit myself to dealing with
what I regard as the key points.

45. The draft resolution now before the Security Council
is obviously limited in scope and purpose. It should be
regarded as an interim resolution, the purpose of which is
to help the Council make more substantive decisions in the
months to come. It is, in our view, a useful and practical
step in the process of United Nations action for the purpose
of discharging its responsibility towards the people of
Namibia. It is in that spirit that I hope the Security Council
will consider our proposals and, I trust, adopt them.

40. Our point of departure is that since South Africa’s
Mandate over South West Africa has been terminated
[General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI)], the continued
presence of the South African authorities in Namibia is
illegal and that consequently all acts taken by the Government of South Africa on behalf of or concerning Namibia
after the termination of the Mandate are illegal and invalid.
That fact must clearly have a number of implications for
any Government dealing in one way or another with the
Government of South Africa. Accordingly, the draft resolution calls upon all States, particularly those which have
economic and other interests in Namibia, to refrain in any
dealings with respect to Namibia from recognizing any right
of the Govermnent of South Africa to act on behalf of the
Territory of Namibia.

46. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): I should like to take this
opportunity of thanking you, Mr. President, for calling on
me at this stage, and to welcome you to the presidency of
this important organ of the United Nations. We are
particularly glad to see you occupying that position of
prominence, because you represent a country with which
we have always enjoyed the best of relations. Apart from
anything else, we have age in common, and we have always
enjoyed views which are identical throughout our period of
association.

41. The practical application of the injunction stated in
that paragraph of the draft resolution has not yet been
sufficiently investigated, and we propose that that should
be studied by a committee of experts to be appointed by
the Secretary-General in consultation with the members of
the Security Council.

47. Mr. President, I wish to thank you for the very kind
remarks that you made about my presidency of the
Security Council during the month of December. If I was
able to achieve anything at all, it was indeed with the
co-operation of all the members of the Security Council.
48. I should also like to take this opportunity of welcoming the new members of the Security Council: Ambassador
Kulaga of Poland, Ambassador Sevilla Sacasaof Nicaragua,
Ambassador Tomeh of Syria and Ambassador Nicol of
Sierra Leone. They are all eminent men who possessvery
great qualities and we have no doubt that they will prove to
be worthy representatives of their countries. On behalf of
my delegation may I expressthe hope that we shall enjoy a
very healthy and fruitful relationship?

42. I do not wish to anticipate the work of that
committee by trying to spell out in detail the various
possibilities the experts might wish to look into. It is
enough to state that the committee would have a broad
enough mandate to be able to examine all proposals and
ideas for such effective and appropriate steps as may be
taken by the Security Council to enable the United Nations
to discharge its special responsibility towards the people of
Namibia.

49. We meet today for the first debate of the seventies to
consider one of the most thorny problems facing the
United Nations: the illegal occupation of Namibia by South
Africa. We all recognize the fact that the refusal of the
Government of South Africa to comply with Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions Concerning
Namibia seriously undermines the authority of the United
Nations, We have adopted numerous resolutions which
South Africa has defied with impunity and which we have

43. The draft resolution further requests, in paragraph 7,
all States as well as the specialized agencies to give the
expert committee all the information and other assistance
that it may require in pursuance of the resolution. It is, of
course, for the expert committee itself to decide which
Governments to approach. It is a hope of the sponsors of
the draft resolution that those Powers which have not
supported the resolution on the termination of the Mandate
5

they asked the Court to rule that South West Africa was
still subject to the Mandate, that the United Nations was
entitled to supervise the administration of the Mandate and
that the South African administration-especially
the administration of apartheid-was contrary to the well-being
and social progress of the black majority. We know that the
International Court of Justice had that complaint before it
for well over five years, ruling first that it had the capacity
and authority to decide on the complaint,’ and we know
that the Court held fmally in 1966 that it should not after
all rule on the merits of the complaint4 Yet Mr. Muller
claims that the Internationa: Court of Justice ruled in
favour of his country. Where, one may ask, does this
judicial fiction come from which Mr. Muller claims vindicates his country’s position on Namibia?

not been able to enforce-not through any fault of our own
but because we unfortunately depend on other people in
order to obtain any kind of results, no matter how limited
and insignificant they may be.
50. The Security Council adopted resolution 269 (1969)
on 12 August 1969, calling upon the Government of South
Africa to withdraw its administration completely from the
Territory of Namibia “immediately
and in any case before
4 October 1969”-to use the phraseology of the resolution.
There was also a provision that if the Government of South
Africa failed to comply with that decision the Security
Council would “meet immediately
to determine upon
effective measures in accordance with the appropriate
provisions of the relevant chapters of the United Nations
Charter”. We all know that the Government of South
Africa has, with the usual scornful contempt, categorically
refused to withdraw from the Territory of Namibia. That
refusal was sent in the form of a volume of distortions and
fallacies to the Secretary-General, justifying South Africa’s
illegal presence in Namibia. Before I deal with some of the
provisions of resolution 269 (1969), allow me to refer to
that long letter which the South African Foreign Minister,
Mr. Muller, sent to the Secretary-General [S/9463, annex I,
of 3 October 19691.

54. It was essential for me to point out those historical
facts, which are too often taken far granted. The function
of history is to help us find formulas for the problems that
have a bearing on the present and the future. We decided to
review the historical background before we adapted resolutions 264 (1969) and 269 (1969). The experience of my
delegation is that every time the Cauncil convenes to
discuss the question of Namibia and the criminal policies
being perpetrated in that Territory, it seems to meet in an
atmosphere of frustration and guilt, and some members
would rather we did not discuss the question at all. That
must not be, because we clearly have a mandate from the
people of the world ta help reduce world tension and
alleviate human suffering. It is a well-known fact that the
situation in Namibia is a threat to international peace and
security. It is our considered opinion that the Security
Council must avoid succumbing to a sense of fatalism, for
to do so would essentially mean not only leaving the
oppressed people of southern Africa to nazi types of
government but also encouraging dangerous dynamics that
would plunge mankind and the values it defends into an
unredeemable catastrophe. We must reject fatalism and
approach this problem with determination.

51. We recognize that although South Africa claims that
South West Africa was a Mandated Territorjr which it was
to administer as an “integral portion” of its own Territory,
there was also a special Mandate Agreement for South West
Africa’ and it provided that the Territory must be
administered so as to “promote to the utmost the material
and moral well-being and the social progress” of its
inhabitants. Mr. Muller asserts in his reply that Namibia is
an integral portion of South Africa and shamelessly states
that his Government’s policy of Bantustanization
of
Namibia signifies “an approach to the principle of selfdetermination”
and that it is an approach “fully recognized
as proper also in terms of the Charter of the United
Nations”. That is the wildest of wild distortions. The
Odendaal plan and the Balkanization of Namibia into the
so-calIed homelands are no different from the Bantustans in
South Africa. The plan has given all the fertile and
somewhat industrialized areas of the Territory to the white
minorities. The “police zone” which was assigned to the
white population includes all the cities, harbours and
coastline and substantially all exploitable mineral deposits.
The so-called homelands, except for Rehoboth Gebiet and
Narnaland, are located in the desert or semi-desert areas.
The economic result is that these homelands cannot
support the growing population of the black majority.

55. Albert Camus once said: “Perhaps we cannot prevent
this world from being a world in which children are
tortured. But we can reduce the number of tortured
children. And if you do not help us, who else in the world
can help us do this? “. The draft resolution which my
delegation has joined in sponsoring and which has been very
ably and eloquently presented by Ambassador Max
Jakobson of Finland seeks to engage this Council more
seriously in the search for a solution. It may disappoint
many friends of Namibia but it has been drafted after the
most serious and careful consideration and takes into
account the vital interests of the people of Namibia as a
whole. It may be considered lacking in militancy; it may
not be the most revolutionary; but in the absence of any
effective and constructive alternatives it may help us break
the present deadlock. We believe that it is critically
important for us to keep the question of Namibia in the
public eye. We believe further that the formation of a

52. The black majority is being forced to return to work
on the rich land, which unfortunately belongs to the white
minority, as a landless and rightless proletariat, because the
so-called homelands are too small and too poor to be
economically viable.
53. There is one further point we should like to clarify for
the purposes of the record. When Ethiopia and Liberia took
the case of Namibia to the International Court of Justice

3 South West AQica Cases (Ethiopia v. South Africa; Liberia Y.
South Africa), Preliminary Objections, Judgment of 21 December
1962: I.C.J. Reports 1962, p. 319.
4 South West Africa, Second Phase, Judgment, 1,C.J. Reports
1966, p. 6

2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Supplement No. 12A, annex A.

6

committee of experts under the auspices of the Security
Council would not serve a useless purpose.

59. South Africa has of late, especially to its supporters in
the United Kingdom, stressed itsstrategic importance in the
defence of the West. It has used the concept of the
“vacuum in the Indian Ocean” created by Britain’s “withdrawal from east of Suez” and the fear of the power of t&e
Soviet Union in that area. It has either completely ignore’d
or vehemently denied the fact that the weapons being
supplied are being used, and will be increasingly used, for
the political oppression of the majority of the people of all
races who genuinely desire democratic government and
peace in freedom and justice.

56. In regard to the committee of experts we would, for
instance, like it seriously to examine, among many other
things, the following possibilities: (a) applying fully or
partially the relevant provisions of Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter against South Africa; (b) setting up
a special United Nations fund to which all taxes of foreign
economic concerns in Namibia would be paid; (c) emphasizing United Nations presence through the introduction of
special visa regulations by Member States concerning travel
to Namibia; (d) having United Nations passports issued to
Namibians recognized by all States; (e) making recommendations to Member States that passports or travel documents of their nationals should not be valid for Namibia
without a United Nation& visa; (fl Member nations reviewing and amending all those treaties entered into between
themselves and South Africa which have territorial implications for what was formerly South West Africa; (g) resuscitating the co-operation of national labour unions and
confederations in the boycott of South African goods and
services; (h) any other possibilities which may or may not
have been considered by the Security Council.

60. On the political front, it has been argued that the
so-called “new outward-looking policy” adopted by the
Vorster regime removes the danger that South Africa may
pose a threat to independent Africa. Indeed South Africa
has made reference to some African countries which have
been engaged in courting its ftiendship. Thus South Africa
has tried to carry out a campaign of unprecedented
magnitude, both in effort and money, in Africa and the
Western world in order to win friends to support its
objectives, the purpose of which is to keep the political,
economic and military power completely in the hands of
the white minority. The so-called outward-looking policy,
therefore, is designed not to ameliorate the situation in
southern Africa but rather to obtain the acquiescence of
African States to the diabolical policies of apartheid.
Fortunately, many of us saw through the smokescreen, and
when we came forward with the Lusaka Manifesto on
Southern Africa’ the bubble burst. Pretoria reverted to its
aggressive posture. Let me take this opportunity of stating
the position of my Government on this matter.

57. It must surely be clear to all of us that in the final
analysis, as has been amply demonstrated over the years,
the people of Namibia hold the key to their freedom. In
view of the obstinacy of South Africa, they will have to
take up arms and fight for their independence, because the
white oppressors have rejected all possibilities for a peaceful
and negotiated settlement.

61. First, the aims of the building up of South Africa’s
military capacity at the present moment cannot be divorced
in any way from the major objective of the Vorster regime:
to keep political and economic power firmly and permanently in the hands of the white minority. Internally, the
Bantustan policy has the effect of dividing the people of
Namibia and of South Africa, weakening their national
spirit and rendering them completely impotent in pursuing
their national objectives as one people under one government. The Bantustan policy has had the effect of shepherding the black majority into what are called Bantu homelands and concentrating them there. That will obviously
make it easy for the South African security forces to deal
with them ruthlessly without risking the lives of any white
people in those areas. It will also make possible the use of
military equipment supplied by the West within South
Africa provided it is not against the white people. My
Government cannot countenance this situation.

58. Resolutions have been adopted by both the Security
Council and the General Assembly concerning Namibia, but
these have been violated by South Africa because of the
support it receives from the major Western Powers. We have
condemned those Western Powers in the past and we do so
again. We have clearly pointed out that external factors
have greatly contributed to the strengthening of South
Africa’s hold on Namibia. We are aware of campaigns which
are current in Europe and here in the United States for the
lifting of the ban on the sale of arms to South Africa
imposed by the United Nations. In recent tieeks press
reports have indicated increasing pressure in the United
Kingdom and in Europe in general on various Governments
to lift their ban despite the United Nations resolutions
calling for an embargo. Government and b,usiness circles in
NATO countries have been haunted by agents of South
African interests seeking support in furtherance of their
oppressive and aggressive policies. For example, some
British businessmen and Conservative Party leaders in
particular have argued that the United Kingdom has lost
economically as a result of the arms embargo and that the
Conservatives, if returned to power, would reverse that
policy. Other Governments which have participated in the
sale of arms to South Africa despite the appeals of the
Security Council have adopted the profit motive as the
reason for their present stand. France, Italy, West Germany
and Japan, for example, have refused to impose a ban on
the sale of arms to South Africa. They have continued to
supply certain military equipment and spare parts to the
South African Army, Navy and Air Force.

62. Secondly, it has been argued that the equipment that
has been supplied by the Western countries is for selfdefence and is intended to help South Africa in guarding
Western interests around the Cape. Quite obviously, South
Africa and its friends in the West have deliberately
exaggerated the threat in the Indian Ocean as an excuse to
build up its military capability, with Western support,
either materially or in the form of technical skill. In our
view, what threatens Western interests is not the so-called
5 Offictil

Records of the General Assembly,

Session,Annexes, agendaitem 106, document A/1154.
7

Twenty-fourth

67. Compare this sitdation with the stand of certain
European Governments which advocated the expulsion of
Greece from the Council of Europe. The reason behind this
campaign lay in Greece’s internal policies; yet South Africa
and Portugal will not be confronted when they have
committed even worse acts of oppression against the people
of Namibia, South Africa, Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau). Is oppression objectionable only when the victims
are of European stock?

vacuum in the Indian Ocean but the policies pursued by
Western nations in continuing to arm what is almost a band
of desperadoes who have terrorized the masses in southern
Africa and threatened to enlarge the area of conflict. It is
the view of my Government that continuing to sell arms to
the minority regime in Pretoria, which has shown all the
manifestations of a ruthless clique determined to maintain
its position of power and control by whatever means, in the
name of Western interests, is like hiring murderers to act as
defenders. It is clear to us that South Africa will not use the
Buccaneer bombers, the Mirages, the Shackletons, the
Impalas and all the missiles and various deadly weapons
supplied to it by the West or manufactured with Western
technical skill in defence of Western interests. It will
definitely use them against black Namibians, black South
Africans and all the independent African countries which
are determined to make the whole of Africa truly independent.

68. It would appear that we are approaching a situation in
which the Western world must, in its own interest, choose
between South Africa on the one hand and the rest of
Africa on the other. Has it already decided that what
matters for the future is its interests in the 472,000 square
miles, or less, that comprise South Africa, and not those in
the 11.5 million square miles in the rest of Africa? We are
sick and tired of being considered second in everything. The
concept of the “silent majority” also exists in Africa. The
Africans are the “silent majority” in that continent and
they are determined to decide the destiny of that continent
in accordance with their interests.

63. Therefore we cannot sit by idly and watch the West
and South Africa, which has not hidden its intentions,
make these preparations for our annihilation. It has not
only threatened to attack us; it has in fact encouraged its
friends to do so. Already weapons supplied by the United
Kingdom, France and the United States have been used
against. us and against the oppressed people of Namibia.
Therefore we cannot believe that what is being supplied to
South Africa will not be used against our economic and
political interests.

69. The struggle for the restoration of the rights of the
people of Namibia has been waged for many years. Here at
the United Nations our efforts culminated in the resolution
adopted by the Security Council [269,(1969)/ last August
which set a deadline for the withdrawal of South Africa.
Our efforts today are designed to move us a step forward
towards the implementation
of that momentous and
irrevocable decision. We have time and again indicated that
we would prefer negotiations to armed struggle, in the
interests of all the parties. But if our efforts here fail,
thanks to the obstruction of some of the members, what
else is there to expect? It was the late President John F.
Kennedy who once said: “Those who prevent peaceful
revolution make violent revolution inevitable”.

64. It is because of these serious considerations that we
have appealed to our friends in Latin America and to
Australia and New Zealand to be wary of South Africa’s cry
for the formation of a South Atlantic/Indian
defence pact.
If such an absurd idea were to be pursued, we should
consider it a conspiracy against #the people of Namibia, of
South Africa and of the other oppressed countries as well as
against independent Africa. The security of the Cape route
could, if necessary, better be served by all the people of
southern Africa than by a minority which is sitting on top
of a volcano. Indeed, this is true also of the security of the
economic interests of the West in southern Africa.

70. Those who are bent on frustrating our decisions,
because of their ties with the oppressors, must realize that
they are playing the role of grave-diggers in southern
Africa-the tragedy will be even greater for their kith and
kin. We would appeal to them not to be guided by greed.
They should put man before economic gain, and even when
the baser side of man, euphemistically known as the
paramount national economic interest, grips their attention
they should remember that such interest, apart from being
universal, is better safeguarded in a world where there is
peace and stability.

65. The so-called outward-looking policy of South Africa
is not intended to create, real friendship and understanding
in Africa. We regard it as an illusory exhibition and an
exercise in hoodwinking the West about the readiness of the
minority groups in control in southern Africa to co-operate
with independent Africa. This policy, which appears liberal
abroad but reactionary and oppressive at home, does not
impress us at all. It is our firm conviction and belief that
white South Africans must make friends with Africans in
South Africa itself first and show respect for them as
equals. Only that will convince us of the sincerity of
Pretoria’s intentions.

71. In conclusion, it is my hope and expectation that
political and diplomatic distress will teach man, if anything
can, that realities are less dangerous than fancies, that
fact-finding is more effective than fault-finding. It is for this
reason that we express the hope that the draft resolution so
ably presented by Mr. Jakobson will be unanimously
adopted by the Council to enable us to move forward in
our search for a solution to this dangerous problem.

66. Over the past few years we have seen the Western
countries, and the Western major Powers in particular,
adopt an increasingly negative attitude towards issues
concerning southern Africa here at the United Nations. It
appears that the economic and military support that the
West is giving the Vorster regime strengthens the basis of
the political support for apartheid which the South African
regime greatly desires.

72. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Mr. President,
may I first join you in expressing my particular appreciation to our colleague, Mr. Mwaanga, for the outstanding
fashion in which he conducted our proceedings last
month? During the year in which he has served the
8

Council, we have come to count on his always effective
participation, and we were therefore only confirmed in our
judgement by his distinguished leadership during his presi.
dency .

to recognize South Africa’s ‘claim that it has the right to act
on behalf of the people of that Territory.
80. It would be our sincere hope that the experts’ study
called for in this draft resolution will provide a complete
and impartial analysis of all the implications of South
Africa’s presence in Namibia and will also permit us to form
an intelligent judgement as to what other peaceful and
practical steps it might be possible for the United Nations
to take to discharge more effectively its obligations towards
the people of Namibia.

73. Permit me also, Mr. President, to welcome you most
particularly and warmly to this Council table and to its
presidency. We count equally, not only this month but this
year and next, on your distinguished participation, cooperation and leadership.
74. Finally, I should like to express my particular satisfaction in welcoming the other new members of the
Council. All of them are distinguished and experienced
diplomats and, I am happy to add, personal friends with
whom it will give me very great pleasure to servethe United
Nations and the cause of world peace throughout this
twenty-ftith anniversary year.

81. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua) (Werpretation
Spanish): I wish to thank the President of ‘the
Security Council, the representative of the Republic of
Burundi, for welcoming me with a kindness worthy of his
diplomatic and gentlemanly qualities, which are deeply
appreciated by his colleagues and friends. In return, I
extend to Ambassador Terence my sincere congratulations
on his election as President of this distinguished international forum.

porn

75. On the initiative of almost half the membership of the
United Nations, we are convened again to deal with an
important problem, Namibia, for which this Organization
carries’major responsibility. I am sure that we all find it a
matter for grave regret that so little progress has been made
since we discussed the issue last August in persuading the
Government of South Africa to recognize the responsibility
of the international community for Namibia,

82. I also wish to thank the Ambassadors of Finland,,
Zambia and the United States of America for their
welcome. Their courtesy is equalled by our high regard for
them and their nations.
83. I am deeply grateful for the honour which the General
Assembly has accorded the Republic of Nicaragua by
electing it a non-permanent member of the Security,
Council, to occupy the seat vacated upon the expiry of its
term of membership by the Republic of Paraguay-a noble’
nation which belongs to the community of Latin American
nations, as do the equally noble Republic of Colombia,.a
non-permanent member of this Council, Nicaragua and the
other sister Republics of the Western Hemisphereland I
extend my cordial greetings to all of you, distinguished
Ambassadors, whose very special responsibPities I, with the
sentiments of a son of Nicaragua, shall share in this Council.

76, We have now before us a draft resolution, which has
just been presented and explained by the representative of
Finland with his customary clarity; and he has also
informed us of an amendment to the written text which has
been circulated.
77. The draft resolution in its present form ‘seems to us
accurately to represent and to reaffirm the basic attitude of
the United Nations to this problem. In addition, the
sponsors have concluded that further expert study would
be helpful to the United Nations in permitting all of us to
discharge our responsibilities. This appears to us to be a
reasonable request and we support it.

84. By a happy chance, Nicaragua is joining the Security
Council at a time when the United Nations is preparing to
celebrate its twenty-fifth anniversary, recalling the historic
events of San Francisco and the successesachieved by our
Organization in favour of international peace and security.

78. My Government is keenly interested in the fate of the
people and Territory of Namibia and will be prepared to do
whatever it can to contribute to the Committee’s work. Not
only the substance of the draft resolution before us, but the
manner of its development, deserves a word of comment. I
wish to commend warmly you, Mr. President, and the other
sponsors of the draft resolution for proceeding in this
meeting on the basis of broad consultations which permitted you to introduce a draft which appears to carry a
wide measure of agreement within the Council. In our view,
this is a wise and effective way of proceeding in a problem
of this kind, which will require the best efforts of all of us.

85. Today, on becoming a member of this Council as
representative of Nicaragua, I hope I may recall our friendly
meeting at San Francisco twenty-five years ago, as the
delegates of fifty nations, to draft a Charter for the legal
and political Organization conceived for the maintenance of
peace by the leaders of the Powers which had triumphed in
the war.
86. To the sense of honour I feel at having participated in
that memorable conference and signed the Charter of the
United Nations is added the satisfaction of having attended
all the sessions of the General Assembly held since that
time. This truly fortunate circumstance has enabled me to
observe at close range the work and effort devoted by many
statesmen of the world to the great cause of international
peace and security.

79. I am sure that none of us is under any illusion that
with this draft resolution we shall have solved a problem of
such magnitude and difficulty, or that we can escape
further responsibility for it. In particular, I believe that we
all continue to have an obligation to do our best to
persuade South Africa to acknowledge United Nations
responsibility for Namibia. For our part, we shall continue
to point out to South Africa that we consider its presence
in Namibia illegal. We do not recognize and do not intend

87. I remember how firmly we at San Francisco emphasized that the structure of the Charter should allow for
9

the functioning of regional organizations capable of contributing to the maintenance of peace and to the peaceful
settlement of disputes that might arise among Member
States, so long as such organizations and their activities
remained consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.

91. Our Organization, the successor to the League of
Nations, is guided in its actions by past experience. Having
arisen out of war, it must win the battles of peace, for if
those battles were lost, we should inevitably revert to
warfare. If war broke out in our present atomic age, there
would be no victorious nations, as there were in 1945; there
would be only victims sacrificed on the altar of misunderstanding.

88. Every people in the world was aware of the diverse
opinions held at the time concerning the sensitive problem
of the powers to be vested in the Security Council as an
institution whose fundamental mission was to maintain
international peace and security through its effective action
and its prestige. All of us who served as delegates to the
Conference knew that we were legislating not only for the
nations we represented, but also for nations absent from
that Conference and for peoples which, with the passing
years, would gain independence and join this Organization,
proclaiming their devotion to peace. We also knew that the
decisions of the Security Council would have to be
unreservedly accepted and complied with and that the
representatives of States members of the Security Council
would be acting on behalf of the Organization itself and in
the interests of international peace and security.

92. We should not be disturbed by the fact that differences arise among nations. It is natural that differences
do arise and sometimes create problems. What is serious is
not the existence of problems but the failure to find
solutions for them.
93, In the search for effective solutions based on fairness
and justice, the Security Council must continue its allimportant work with the knowledge that the eyes of a
hopeful world are fixed on this table.
94. If power without justice is tyranny, while justice
without power is a mockery, in the wise words of Pascal, let
us make every effort to combine power with justice, so that
power will always be just and justice will never cease to be
powerful.

89. Since the Security Council acts in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter, it may be understood that its extraordinary powers under the Charter
constitute obligations rather than rights and that therefore
the Security Council does not have absolute sovereignty. It
does enjoy sovereign rights in the investigation of any
dispute or any other situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute, in order to
determine whether the continuance of such a dispute or
situation might endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security.

9.5. I am most gratified to be here among you, the
distinguished ambassadors of nations which I esteem most
highly, and, as head of the Nicaraguan delegation, I pledge
you our friendly and unfailing co-operation in the delicate
tasks that lie before us.
96. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I have
no more speakers on my list. Therefore, as a result of
consultations, I should like to suggest that the next meeting
be held tomorrow, 29 January, at 3.30 p.m.

90. When we signed the Charter in 1945, no one could be
so optimistic as to expect that the legal and political
Organization we had just established would function in a
world free from all tensions. Having established the United
Nations precisely in order to find appropriate solutions for
international problems, we must show that it is capable of
keeping the world under the rule of law and justice.

It was so decided.

The meeting rose at 6 pm

10
Litho in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

82000-May

1970-2,100
