VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Emphasizes, in the framework of the Forwardlooking Strategies, the importance of the total integration
of women in the development process, having in mind the
specific and urgent needs of the developing countries;
7. Calls upon ali Member States to establish specific
targets at each leve! in order to increase the percentage of
women in professional and decision-making positions in
their countries;
8. Cal/s upon the Secretary-General and the heads of
the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies
to establish new five-year targets at each level for the percentage of women in Professional and decision-making
positions, in accordance with the criteria established by
the General Assembly, in particular that of equitable geographical distribution, in order that a definite upward
trend in the implementation of Assembly resolution
33/143 of 20 December 1978 be registered in the number
of Professional and decision-making positions held by
women by 1990, and to set additional targets every five
years;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments, organizations of the United Nations system, including the regional commissions and the specialized
agencies, and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to report periodically, through the Commission on the Status ofWomen, to the Economic and Social
Council on activities undertaken at ali levels to implement
the Forward-looking Strategies;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on measures
taken to implement the present resolution;
11. Decides to consider these questions further at its
forty-second session under the item entitled "Forwardlooking strategies for the advancement of women to the
year 2000".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/112.

Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981,
in which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination
of Ali Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based
on Religion or Belief,
Recalling its resolution 37/187 of 18 December 1982
and subsequent resolutions, in which it made and reiterated requests to the Commission on Human Rights to
consider what measures might be necessary to implement
the Declaration,
Encouraged by the efforts being made by the Commission on Human Rights and by the Sub-Commission on
Prevention ofDiscrimination and Protection ofMinorities
and their respective Special Rapporteurs to study relevant
developments affecting the implementation of the Declaration,
Emphasizing that non-governmental organizations and
religious bodies and groups at every level have an important role to play in the promotion of tolerance and the protection of freedom of religion or belief and inviting them to
consider, in particular, what further role they could envisage playing regarding the dissemination of the text of the
Declaration in national and local languages,
A ware that intolerance and discrimination on the
grounds of religion or belief continue to exist in many
parts of the world,

173

Believing that further efforts are therefore required to
promote and protect the right to freedom ofthought, conscience, religion and belief,
l. Reaffirms that freedom ofthought, conscience, religion and belief is a right guaranteed to ali without discrimination;
2. Urges States, therefore, in accordance with their respective constitutional systems and with such internationally accepted instruments as the {!niversal Declaratio~ ~f
Human Rights2 and the Intemat1onal Covenant on C1v1l
and Political Rights, 22 to provide, where they have not already done so, adequate constitutional and legal guarantees offreedom ofthought, conscience, religion and belief;
3. Notes with appreciation that work has airead y begun
in the Commission on Human Rights on the preparation
of a compendium of the national legislation and regulations of States on the question of freedom of religion or belief;
4. Pledges its determination to encourage understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of
religion or belief and recalls that a Seminar on this theme
was held at Geneva from 3 to 14 December 198463 within
the framework of the programme of advisory services in
the field of human rights;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to urge
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to accord high priority at its
thirty-ninth session to consideration ofthe study prepared
by its Special Rapporteur, in accordance with the terms of
Sub-Commission resolution 1983/31 of 6 September
1983, 64 on the current dimensions of the problems of intolerance and of discrimination on the grounds of religion or
belief, and to report on this matter to the Commission al
its forty-fourth session;
6. Takes note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1986/20 of l O March 19863 1 and Economic and Social Council decision 1986/134 of 23 May 1986, pursuant
to which a Special Rapporteur has been appointed for one
year to examine incidents and governmental actions in ali
parts of the world that are inconsistent with the provisions
of the Declaration on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and to recommend remedia! measures, as appropriate;
1. Urges ali States to take ali appropriate measures to
combat intolerance and to encourage understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief and, in this context, to examine where necessary the supervision and training of their civil servants,
educators and other public officials to ensure that, in the
course of their official duties, they respect different religions and beliefs and do not discriminate against persons
professing other religions or beliefs;
8. Invites the United Nations University and other
academic and research institutions to undertake programmes and studies on the encouragement of understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief;
9. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to give
high priority to the dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the Elimination of Ali Forms of lntolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in ali the
official languages ofthe United Nations, and to take ali appropriate measures to make the text available for use by

6 3 Sec ST/HR/SER.A/lb.
64 See E/CN.4/1984/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/43 and

chap. , :XI. se,·t. -\

Corr.1 and 2.

174

General Assembly-Forty-ftrst Session

United Nations information centres, as well as by other interested bodies;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue its consideration of measures to implement the
Declaration and to report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its forty-second
session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Elimination of ali
forms of religious intolerance" and to consider the report
of the Commission on Human Rights under that item.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/113.

Human rights and use of scientiflc and technological developments

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth
of the human person, to maintain international peace and
security and to develop friendly relations among peoples
and international co-operation in promoting and encouraging universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recallingthe relevant provisions ofthe Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights22 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 22
Recalling also the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States65 and the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order,66
Recalling further the Declaration on the Strengthening
of Intemational Security, 67 the Declaration on the Use of
Scientific and Technological Progress in the Interests of
Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind68 and the Declaration on the Right of Peoples to Peace, 69 as well as other
relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that, in its resolution 38/75 of
15 December 1983, the General Assembly resolutely, unconditionally and for ali time condemned nuclear war as
being contrary to human conscience and reason, as the
most monstrous crime against peoples andas a violation of
the foremost human right - the right to life,
Recalling its resolutions 37/189 A of 18 December
1982, 38/113 of 16 December 1983, 39/134 of 14 December 1984 and 40/111 of 13 December 1985,
Taking note with appreciation ofCommission on Human
Rights resolutions 1982/7 of 19 February 1982,27 1983/43
of9 March 1983, 28 1984/28 of 12 March 1984,29 1986/10
of 10 March 198631 and 1986/29 of 11 March 1986,31
Convinced that ali rights and freedoms, as well as ali
material goods and spiritual wealth that both man and nations possess, have a common foundation -the right to
life,
1. Reaffirms that all peoples and ali individuals have
an inherent right to life and that the safeguarding of this
cardinal right is an essential condition for the enjoyment

3281

65 Resolution
(XXIX).
66 Resolutions 3201 (S-VJ) and 3202 (S-V 1).
67 Resolution
(XXV).
68 Resolt1tion 3384 (XXX).

2734

6° P ·,,,lution

39/11, annex.

ofthe en tire range of economic, social and cultural, as well
as civil and political, rights;
2. Stresses once again the urgent need for the international community to make every effort to strengthen
peace, remove the growing threat of war, particularly nuclear war, halt the arms race and achieve general and complete disarmament under effective intemational control
and prevent violations of the principies of the Charter of
the United Nations regarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and the self-determination of
peoples, thus contributing to ensuring the right to life;
3. Stresses further the foremost importance of the implementation of practical measures of disarmament for
releasing substantial additional resources, which should
be utilized for social and economic development, particularly for the benefit of the developing countries;
4. Calls upon all States, appropriate United Nations
bodies, specialized agencies and intergovemmental and
non-governmental organizations concerned to take the
necessary measures to ensure that the results of scientific
and technological progress are used exclusively in the interests of international peace, for the benefit of mankind
and for promoting and encouraging universal respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Again calls upon ali States that have not yet done so
to take effective measures with a view to prohibiting, in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, any propaganda for war, in particular the
formulation, propounding and dissemination of and
propaganda for doctrines and concepts aimed at unleashing nuclear war;
6. Looksforward to further efforts by the Commission
on Human Rights to ensure the inherent right of all peoples and ali individuals to life;
1. Decides to consider this question at its forty-second
session under the ítem entitled "Human rights and scientific and technological developments".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/114.

Implications of scientific and technological developments for human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December 1978, in
which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
urge the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection ofMinorities to undertake, as a matter
of priority, a study of the question of the protection of
those detained on the grounds of mental ill-health, with a
view to formulating guidelines,
Recalling also its resolution 40/ 110 of 13 December
1985, in which it again urged the Commission on Human
Rights and the Sub-Commission to expedite their consideration of this question, so that the Commission could
submit its views and recommendations, including a draft
body of guidelines, principies and guarantees, to the General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council,
Endorsing Commission on Human Rights resolution
1986/12 of 10 March 1986,31
Expressing deep concern at the repeated evidence of the
misuse of psychiatry to detain persons on non-medical
grounds, as reflected in the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission,10
10 E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/17
